In summary, we present the elastic theory of low- dimensional (one- and two-dimensional) continua and its applications in bio- and nano-structures. The elastic the- ory of Kirchhoff rod, Helfrich rod, bending-soften rod, fluid membrane, and solid shell is revisited. We construct the free energy density of the continua on the basis of the symmetry argument. The fundamental equations can be derived from the bottom-up and the top-down stand- points. Although they have different forms obtained from these two viewpoints, several examples reveal that they are, in fact, equivalent to each other. We investigate the kink stability of short DNA rings, the elasticity of lipid membranes, and the adhesions between a vesicle and a substrate or another vesicle. A cell membrane is simpli- fied as a composite shell of lipid bilayer and membrane skeleton. The membrane skeleton is shown to enhance highly the mechanical stability of cell membranes. We propose a revised Lenosky lattice model based on the lo- cal density approximation and derive its continuum form up to the second order terms of curvatures and strains, which is the same as the free energy of 2D solid shells. The intrinsic roughening of graphene and several typi- cal mechanical properties of carbon nanotubes are ad- dressed by using this continuum form. We can aban- don the controversial thickness and Young’s modulus of graphene and SWNTs if we adopt this continuum form to describe the mechanical properties of graphene and SWNTs.
Finally, we would like to list a few open problems which need to be addressed in the future work.
(i) The vesicles with lipid domains have been investi- gated in Sec. IIIB. There is a special lipid domain at liquid-ordered phase, so called the raft, which is enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipids. Cholesterol is a kind of chiral lipid molecules, which has not been included in the previous and present theory of lipid domains. A new theory with the chirality on the raft domain should be developed.
(ii) The composite shell, as a model of cell mem- branes, has been investigated in Sec. IIIC where the constraint between the area of the lipid bilayer and membrane skeleton is totally neglected. Additionally, only the small deformation of cell membranes are ad- dressed in this review. The large deformation behav- ior of cell membranes238,239,240 has recently discussed through numerical simulations. It is necessary to re- consider the composite shell model with the constraint   JdA =   JbdA and its behavior under large deforma- tion theoretically.
(iii) We suggest adopting four parameters kc, k ̄, kd, and k ̃ to describe the mechanics of graphitic structures in Sec. IV. However, there are sparse studies on k ̄ in previous literature. It is highly expected to theoretical and experimental work on this quantity.
(iv) We only talk about the thermal fluctuation on the discussion of graphene. The fluctuations of DNA, lipid
