Adaptive mutation of biochemical reaction constants:
Fisher’s geometrical model without pleiotropy
Ryan N. Gutenkunsta,∗, James P. Sethnab
a Theoretical

Biology and Biophysics & Center for Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545
b Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853

arXiv:0712.3240v2 [q-bio.PE] 28 Jun 2010

Abstract
The distribution of fitness effects of adaptive mutations remains poorly understood, both empirically and theoretically.
We study this distribution using a version of Fisher’s geometrical model without pleiotropy, such that each mutation
affects only a single trait. We are motivated by the notion of an organism’s chemotype, the set of biochemical reaction
constants that govern its molecular constituents. From physical considerations, we expect the chemotype to be of high
dimension and to exhibit very little pleiotropy. Our model generically predicts striking cusps in the distribution of the
fitness effects of arising and fixed mutations. It further predicts that a single element of the chemotype should comprise
all mutations at the high-fitness ends of these distributions. Using extreme value theory, we show that the two cusps
with the highest fitnesses are typically well-separated, even when the chemotype possesses thousands of elements; this
suggests a means to observe these cusps experimentally. More broadly, our work demonstrates that new insights into
evolution can arise from the chemotype perspective, a perspective between the genotype and the phenotype.
Keywords: fitness landscape; pleiotropy; fitness effects distribution; extreme value theory

1. Introduction
Adaptive mutation is fundamental to the evolutionary
process, and it is medically important to the emergence of
drug resistance in microbes [1] and tumors [2]. Given the
selective advantage of a mutation, the probability that it
fixes in a population (i.e., rises to frequency 1) and the
mean time to do so are well-known [3]. Comparatively
little is known, however, about the distribution of selective advantages among new mutations. This distribution
can be experimentally measured by confronting genetically
identical populations with a novel environment such a new
food source and measuring the fitness of newly arising mutations [4]. Such measurements are difficult, because adaptive mutations are rare; thus theoretical analysis can offer
important insights [5].
A popular predictive framework for studying adaptive
evolution is R. A. Fisher’s geometrical model, which considers adaptation in phenotypic “trait” space [6]. Mutations are characterized by the phenotypic changes they
induce, which correspond to moves in trait space. Fisher
used this model to argue that evolution is primarily driven
by the accumulation of many mutations that each have
only a small effect [6]. This argument was influential until Motoo Kimura pointed out that mutations with larger
effects are more likely to fix, so most adaptive mutations
that fix have intermediate effect [7].
∗ Corresponding

author

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Recent studies have applied Fisher’s model to a gamut
of questions in evolutionary biology and population genetics; these include the distribution of mutation fitness
effects near an optimum [8], sequential adaptation [9, 10],
and the load of deleterious mutations carried by finite populations [11, 12]. Of particular note, predictions from the
model regarding epistasis compare favorably with data [13].
The model predicts a roughly exponential distribution of
fitness effects for new mutations [14], similar to mutational
landscape models of adaptive evolution [15]. This prediction is consistent with experiments in viruses [16] and bacteria [17], although more recent experiments by Rokyta et
al. point toward a truncated distribution [18]. Here we
consider a geometrical model without pleiotropy, a model
in which each mutation affects only a single trait. We are
motivated by considering the phenotype at a finer scale
than is typical.
One can view the information specifying an organism
through a variety of scales [19]. On the largest scale, the
phenotype of the entire organism, a single mutation often affects multiple traits, implying substantial pleiotropy.
On the finest scale, the genotype, a single mutation often
affects only one amino acid codon or one regulatory binding site, implying no pleiotropy. Systems biology is often
modeled at the intermediate scale of biochemical reaction
constants; multiple codons combine to determine a single
biochemical reaction constant and multiple constants combine to determine a single phenotypic trait. Motivated by
this useful intermediate level of description, we introduced
the word “chemotype” [19] to refer to the set of biochemDecember 27, 2013

ical reaction constants determining the rates of molecular
reactions in an organism. Other authors have considered
specific biochemical reaction constants to be aspects of the
phenotype, for example Hartl, Dykhuizen and Dean [20].
We find it useful to distinguish the chemotype, because it
differs in important ways from the large-scale phenotype
typically considered.
The chemotype differs from the large-scale phenotype
in both dimensionality and pleiotropy. The number of independent high-level phenotypic traits for even a complex
organism may be modest [21, 22]. The number of independent elements of a chemotype, however, is comparable
to the number of an organism’s genes. Each gene codes
for a protein or RNA with its own biochemical reaction
constants, so each gene contributes at least one element
to the chemotype. The chemotype is additionally distinguished by very low pleiotropy, the degree to which single
mutations affect multiple traits. Recent experiments on
mouse skeletal traits have demonstrated that this system
possess a moderate degree of pleiotropy; a given mutation typically affects around five traits [23]. By contrast, a
single mutation is expected to affect only one or a few elements of the chemotype. This is because single-nucleotide
mutations are dominant in short-term and laboratory evolution [24, 25], and they typically change only a single protein residue or a single DNA binding site. Such a change
will in turn impact only one or a few biochemical reaction constants, implying very low pleiotropy in chemotype
space.
Other authors have considered zero pleiotropy geometric models in the study of drift load [26, 12]. We focus
here on the distributions of fitness effects of adaptive mutations that arise and that subsequently fix in a population. A general argument shows that these distributions
possess sharp cusps, one for each element of the chemotype. Given the high dimensionality of chemotype space,
however, it is not obvious whether these cusps are observable. To address this question, we study a more specific
model, in which the fitness landscape is Gaussian. For this
model, we show using extreme value theory that the two
cusps with the highest fitnesses are well-separated, even in
a space with thousands of dimensions. This suggests that
the cusps, and thus the nature of evolution in chemotype
space, can be studied experimentally.

Figure 1: Illustration of the model. Motived by the evolution
of biochemical reaction constants, we consider evolution in a highdimensional space with no pleiotropy (chemotype space). The current uniform chemotype ~k of a population is a point in this space.
The optimal chemotype is the origin of our coordinate system and lies
at the center of the fitness contours. In the absence of pleiotropy,
mutations change one element of ~k at a time, so moves are made
along the coordinate axes. The dashed arrow indicates an adaptive
mutation of magnitude r in element k1 .

size of the mutation (which may be negative) and r̂i is a
unit vector along the ith coordinate axis. We define each
r̂i so that mutations which increase fitness have positive
values of r. We work in the limit of strong selection and
weak mutation, so that the population is genetically homogenous aside from rare mutants that arise one at a time
and either fix or are lost before the next mutation arises.
In this limit, the state of the entire population corresponds
to a single point ~k in chemotype space, and fixation of the
mutation ~r moves the entire population to ~k + ~r.
2.1. Gaussian landscape
For analysis, we specialize to a Gaussian fitness landscape in which the fitness W (~k) of a population with chemotype ~k is


1~ ~
~
(1)
W (k) = exp − k·S· k ,
2
where S is a symmetric positive definite matrix and S· ~k
denotes the dot product of the matrix S and the vector ~k.
Without loss of generality, the optimum fitness is set to
one.
It is convenient to work with the logarithmic fitness
change Q, introduced by Waxman and Welch [27] and defined as
h
i

Q ≡ log W (~k + ~r) W (~k) .
(2)

2. Model

Q is related to the selection coefficient s by s = eQ − 1,
and for mutations with small selective advantage Q ≈ s.
Adaptive mutations are those with Q > 0. For the Gaussian landscape, the log-fitness change caused by a mutation
of size r in chemotype element i is

As illustrated in Fig. 1, the state of an organism with
N chemotype elements can be represented as a point in
N -dimensional space: ~k = hk1 , k2 , . . . kN i. The change in
state caused by a mutation can be described by an N dimensional vector ~r; the mutant has chemotype ~k + ~r.
Because mutations will typically change only one or a few
elements of the chemotype, most pairs of mutations are
orthogonal in this space. We thus restrict our attention to
mutations with zero pleiotropy, which change only a single
chemotype element at a time. Thus ~r = r r̂i , where r the

1
Qi (r) = −~k·S· r̂i r − r̂i ·S· r̂i r2 .
2

(3)

The largest possible gain in log-fitness achievable by mutating chemotype element i is denoted θi and obtained by
2

maximizing Qi (r) with respect to r:

θi =


2
~

k·S· r̂i 
2 r̂i ·S· r̂i

.

The above argument relies only on a lack of pleiotropy,
a smooth fitness landscape, and a distribution of fitness
affects which is non-singular and broad enough to access
the optimal mutation of a given chemotype element. A
natural question is whether these cusps will be observable
in experiments. To address this, we analyze a more specific
landscape for which we can perform concrete calculations.

(4)

The magnitude of the largest possible mutation in chemotype element i that can be made without decreasing fitness
is ρi :


~

k·S· r̂i 
ρi = 2
.
(5)
r̂i ·S· r̂i

3.2. Gaussian landscape
Comparisons between empirical mutation effect distributions in different environments for several organisms
support a Gaussian form for the fitness landscape close
to the optimum chemotype [28]. For the remainder of this
paper, we assume a Gaussian landscape as in Eq. 1.
We must also specify the distribution of mutational
effects f (r) on the chemotype. In Appendix A, we use the
fact that most mutations are deleterious [29, 30] to show
that this distribution must typically span the full range
of adaptive mutations for all elements of the chemotype.
In other words, mutations must often ‘hop over’ the ridge
of increased fitness. For computational ease, we take f (r)
to be uniform over the range of adaptive mutations; our
qualitative results are robust to this choice.
Given these two assumptions, we can calculate the distribution fa (Q) of fitness effects for adaptive mutations,
as detailed in Appendix B:
X
1
√
√
.
(8)
fa (Q) ∝
r̂
·S·
r̂
i
i θi − Q
i

These quantities are illustrated in Fig. 2A.
Many of our results are derived for spherically symmetric fitness landscapes, for which S = λI, where I is the
identity matrix. For such a landscape,
θi =

λ|~k· r̂i |2
≡ Qtot |k̂· r̂i |2 ,
2

(6)

and
ρi = 2|~k· r̂i |.

(7)

Here Qtot ≡ λ|~k|/2 = − log W (~k) is the difference in logfitness between the optimum (which has a fitness of one)
and the current chemotype.
3. Results

Here the sum is over elements of the chemotype, and each
element contributes its own cusp. Fig. 3A plots fa (Q)
for a population at a particular random chemotype ~k in a
30-dimensional spherical fitness landscape (in which S is
proportional to the identity matrix). Note that the distribution is bound by a roughly exponential envelope. As
detailed in Appendix C, if we average our distribution over
initial states ~k with a given fitness, we obtain Waxman and
Welch’s previous result [27] for the spherical model with
maximum pleiotropy.
For a large population, the probability that an adaptive
mutation fixes is proportional to its fitness effect Q [7, 31];
thus the density of fitness effects of fixed mutations ff (Q)
is
ff (Q) ∝ Qfa (Q).
(9)

We first show generally that adaptation on a smooth
fitness landscape without pleiotropy leads to cusps in the
distribution of fitness effects of newly arising and fixed
mutations, one cusp for each element of the chemotype
(i.e., each dimension of the landscape). To assess whether
these cusps will be observable, we specialize to Gaussian
landscapes for which we can perform detailed calculations.
We show that the cusps will be difficult to directly observe in a histogram of experimental fitness measurements.
Nevertheless, we show that the cusps do have observable
consequences, because the two cusps with the highest fitnesses are typically well-separated, even if the landscape
has thousands of dimensions and deviates strongly from a
sphere.

This density of fixed mutations is shown in Fig. 3B for the
same spherical fitness landscape and initial chemotype ~k as
in Fig. 3A. The cusps at large Q are much more prominent
in the distribution of fixed mutation fitness effects.
Distributions of fitness effects can be measured experimentally by introducing identical populations to identical novel environments and tracking mutations that sweep
through them. The histogram in Fig. 3B simulates such an
experiment, representing 1000 samples from ff (Q), each
polluted by Gaussian measurement noise in Q/Qtot with a
standard deviation 0.01. Given the rarity of adaptive mutations, such an experiment would be difficult, but even

3.1. Cusps
Fig. 2A illustrates the slice Qi of the fitness landscape
accessible by mutations to a particular chemotype element
i. For a mutation of size r, the range of mutations ∆r
about r that produce fitness changes in a given range ∆Q
is inversely proportional to the slope dQi /dr. By definition, Qi is at a maximum for the fittest mutation ri∗ and
thus has zero slope there. This yields an infinite inverse
and thus a cusp in the distribution of fitness effects of
adaptive mutations to chemotype element i, as illustrated
in Fig. 2B.
3

log-fitness change

B

log-fitness change

A

mutation magnitude

probability density

Figure 2: Origin of cusps. A: The log-fitness Qi (r) as a function of the mutation size r in chemotype element i. Qi (r) has a maximum of θi
at r = ri∗ , and it returns to zero at r = ρi . B: The probability density of mutation fitness effects. It generically has a cusp at Qi (r) = θi ,
corresponding to the point at which Qi (r) has zero slope. The density is plotted sideways to emphasize the connection between the cusp and
the maximum of Qi (r).

such a difficult experiment cannot directly resolve the cusps.
We now show, however, that the spacing between the fittest
and second-fittest cusps is typically substantial. This implies that the upper end of the fitness distribution should
be dominated by mutations to a single element of the
chemotype, a prediction that can be tested experimentally.

A

3.2.1. Cusp spacings
Each cusp in Fig. 3 corresponds to mutations affecting
a different chemotype element ki . Thus our model not only
predicts cusps, but also predicts that the most adaptive
mutations will all affect the same element of the chemotype. To experimentally test this prediction, it suffices to
measure relative fitness differences of order ∆, where
∆ ≡ (θ1 − θ2 )/θ1

B

(10)

is the normalized separation between the two cusps with
the highest fitnesses. In Appendix D we derive the distribution of ∆ predicted by our model for a spherical landscape, using methods of extreme value theory [32].
The solid line in Fig. 4 is the exact asymptotic result
(using Eq. D.4 and D.5) for the mean of ∆, given a spherical fitness landscape. The dashed line is the approximation
h∆i ≈

1
1 + log N + log

p
,
2/π

(11)

which is valid for large landscape dimension N . The circles
in Fig. 4 are the results from numerical simulations in the
spherical landscape at each N . The agreement between
the exact asymptotic result and the numerical simulations
is excellent, and the approximate result captures the trend
well. Note that h∆i declines very slowly as a function of
N ; for a chemotype with N = 10, 000 elements the mean
∆ is approximately 0.11, a relative fitness difference that
is straightforward to measure experimentally. For comparison, Fig. 3 has ∆ ≈ 0.27, which is approximately the
predicted h∆i when the chemotype has N = 30 elements.
Thus our model predicts that, even for a high-dimensional

Figure 3: Example of cusps. A: The probability distribution fa (Q)
of the fitness effects of adaptive mutations for a 30-dimensional spherical fitness landscape with a random initial chemotype ~k. B: The
probability distribution ff (Q) of fitness effects of fixed mutations,
for the same ~k as in A. The cusps at large values of the fitness Q
are much more prominent. The grey histogram shows 1000 samples
from the distribution, each including a 1% error in the measurement
of Q/Qtot .

4

logarithm from 106 to 10−6 . This corresponds to the narrowest axis of the fitness contours being one-millionth the
width of the longest axis. Even for these very non-spherical
fitness landscapes, the average spacing h∆i remains substantial and comparable to the average in the spherical
case.

∆i

0.5

h

0.25

4. Discussion

0

We analyzed adaptive mutation in a version of Fisher’s
geometric model in which mutations are restricted to acting in only one dimension at a time. This condition of
zero pleiotropy is appropriate when the population is described in terms of its chemotype, the biochemical reaction
Figure 4: Mean relative spacing ∆ between the fittest and secondfittest cusps as a function of landscape dimension N . The solid line
constants of the molecules that comprise the organism,
is the asymptotically exact result for the spherical fitness landscape,
only one or a few of which will be altered by any given
while the dashed line is the approximation of Eq. 11. The circles
point mutation. We showed that the probability density
are numerical simulations for the spherical landscape, while the diamonds and triangles are simulation results for mildly and severely
of fitness effects of adaptive mutations will generically exnon-spherical landscapes, respectively. The mean value of ∆ dehibit cusps, each associated with mutations of a particular
clines very slowly with N (especially for large N ), suggesting that
chemotype element. These cusps are particularly promithe cusps will typically be well-separated even for chemotype spaces
nent in the density of fitness effects of fixed mutations.
of high dimension.
Simulations suggest that directly resolving these cusps experimentally will be difficult. However, each cusp correchemotype, a substantial range ∆ of the most adaptive
sponds to a different element of the chemotype, and we
mutations will affect the same element of the chemotype.
showed that the relative spacing between the two cusps
with the highest fitness remains substantial even in very
3.2.2. Non-spherical landscapes
non-spherical landscapes of high dimension. This suggests
To assess the robustness of our results regarding cusp
a testable prediction that is robust to details of the model:
spacing, we numerically test them in non-spherical landthe fittest mutations should all affect the same element of
scapes. Studying non-spherical fitness landscapes also imthe chemotype.
plicitly considers different mutation scales amongst chemoIt may be surprising that even very non-spherical fittype elements, because any differences in the typical size of
ness landscapes (range in eigenvalues of 1012 ) yield a qualchemotype mutation effects on different elements (anisotropic itatively similar cusp distribution to the spherical landf (r)) can be eliminated by rescaling the chemotype elescape. Our simulations assume that the eigenvectors, and
ments ki . A convenient way to characterize a landscape
thus the correlations between chemotype elements and fitis by the eigenvalues of S. Spherical landscapes have all
ness, are random. In this case, each chemotype element
eigenvalues equal, while for non-spherical landscapes the
contributes about equally to each eigenvector, so the fitwidth of the fitness contour along any given eigenvector of
ness function is similar when projected along each chemoS is proportional to the square root of the corresponding
type direction, yielding a narrow distribution of θi which
eigenvalue, so landscapes with a larger range of eigenvalues
is similar to the spherical case. The assumption of ranare more non-spherical.
dom correlation structure is motivated by empirical study
For a given landscape S and initial chemotype ~k, ∆ can
of the sensitivity of biochemical networks to reaction conbe calculated numerically from the definition of θi . In the
stant variation [35] and theoretical study of sloppy systems
tests described below, the mean of ∆ is calculated from
in general [36]. In both cases, random eigenvectors are a
104 simulations, each instance involving an independent
reasonable approximation to the complicated correlations
landscape S and initial chemotype ~k. The eigenvectors of
found.
S were random orthogonal vectors, and the initial chemoA key assumption of our model is that each chemotype
types were chosen at random among those with a fixed
element is continuously adjustable throughout the range
fitness Qtot , as described in Appendix E.
of possible adaptive mutations. Because the genetic code
The diamonds in Fig. 4 result from mildly non-spherical
is discrete, this cannot be strictly true. The distribution
fitness landscapes corresponding to eigenvalues of S drawn
of effects of random mutations on chemotype elements is
uniformly from the range 0.4 < λ < 3.6, following Waxnot well-known, in part because most biochemical studman [33]. The deviations of h∆i from the spherical case
ies focus on mutations of large effect. However, studies
are small.
have shown that random mutations can introduce small
The triangles in Fig. 4 arise from “sloppy” fitness landbut non-zero changes to the enzymatic activity of proscapes [34, 35] with the N eigenvalues evenly spaced in the
teins [37] and the expression driven by promoter sites [38],

0

50

N

100

150

5

suggesting that our assumption of continuous chemotype
variation is reasonable.
The substantial average separation h∆i we predict between the fittest and second-fittest cusp implies that the
mutations conveying the largest fitness benefits will all involve a single chemotype element. A similar result holds
for the mutational landscape model [15, 39], in which the
largest fitness spacings are between the fittest sequences.
The spacing distributions in the mutational landscape model,
however, depend on the correlation assumed between the
effects of different mutations. A recent analysis of such correlations considers mutations within “blocks” of sequence
that contribute independently and identically to fitness [40].
Each block may be roughly interpreted as a different chemotype element in our model, but in our model the relative
contributions to fitness differ between blocks and naturally
arise from the structure of the landscape. Nevertheless,
the fact that both models predict the upper end of the fitness distribution to be dominated by few mutations, or in
our case mutations in a few chemotype elements, may help
explain the large amount of parallel evolution that can be
observed in separate populations exposed to similar environments [41, 42].
The distribution of fitness effects of adaptive mutations
has been studied in bacteria and viruses [43, 17]. Typically
the distribution is found to be consistent with a smooth
exponential distribution. Our theory predicts only gentle
cusps in this distribution, but much more prominent cusps
in the distribution of fitness of effects of fixed mutations.
This distribution has been studied experimentally in bacteria [44, 45, 30], and those results are also consistent with
a smooth distribution. We showed, however, that it would
be difficult for such experiments to directly resolve the
cusps. Intriguingly, a recent study of virus adaptation by
Rokyta et al. points toward a fitness effects distribution
with a truncated right-hand tail [18], consistent with our
model.
Directly resolving the cusps is challenging; it will be
easier to test the prediction that the fittest mutations will
all affect a single element of the chemotype. Given that
the average fittest cusp separation h∆i is roughly 0.1 even
for very large N , resolving this effect requires a relative
precision in fitness of a few percent, which is achievable
by averaging repeated assays. Recent developments in
microarray-based genotyping [24] allow the sites of mutations to be cost-effectively identified. Mutations that
reside in, for example, the same region of a protein likely
affect the same element of the chemotype. Correlating
fitness measurements of mutations with identification of
which chemotype element they affect will allow direct testing of our model predictions.
Motivated by the adaptation of the chemotype, the set
of biochemical rate constants comprising an organism, we
have studied a version of Fisher’s geometrical model without pleiotropy. The model predicts cusps in the distribution of fitness effects of fixed mutations and that the
fittest mutations all involve a single element of the chemo6

type. Analysis suggests that the second prediction is experimentally accessible. More broadly, our work suggests
that viewing evolution in terms of the chemotype may offer new insights beyond those found at the genotype or
phenotype level.
Acknowledgments
We thank Carl Franck, whose exam question prompted
this investigation. We also thank Jason Mezey and Ben
Logsdon for helpful discussions relating to population genetics and evolution and Chris Myers, Josh Waterfall, and
Fergal Casey for discussions of the model itself. This work
was supported by US National Science Foundation grant
DMR-070167.
References
[1] N. Woodford, M. J. Ellington, The emergence of antibiotic
resistance by mutation, Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 13 (2007) 5–18.
[2] L. M. F. Merlo, J. W. Pepper, B. J. Reid, C. C. Maley, Cancer
as an evolutionary and ecological process, Nat. Rev. Cancer 6
(2006) 924–935.
[3] W. J. Ewens, Mathematical Population Genetics, volume 1,
Springer-Verlag, 2nd edition, 2004.
[4] S. F. Elena, R. E. Lenski, Evolution experiments with microorganisms: the dynamics and genetic bases of adaptation, Nat.
Rev. Genet. 4 (2003) 457–469.
[5] H. A. Orr, Theories of adaptation: what they do and don’t say,
Genetica 123 (2005) 3–13.
[6] R. A. Fisher, The genetical theory of natural selection, Oxford
Univ Press, Oxford, U.K., 1930.
[7] M. Kimura, The neutral theory of molecular evolution, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, U.K., 1983.
[8] G. Martin, T. Lenormand, The distribution of beneficial and
fixed mutation fitness effects close to an optimum, Genetics 179
(2008) 907–916.
[9] H. A. Orr, The population genetics of adaptation: the distribution of factors fixed during adaptive evolution, Evolution 52
(1998) 935–949.
[10] H. A. Orr, The evolutionary genetics of adaptation: a simulation study, Genet. Res. 74 (1999) 207–214.
[11] D. L. Hartl, C. H. Taubes, Towards a theory of evolutionary
adaptation, Genetica 102-103 (1998) 525–533.
[12] A. Poon, S. P. Otto, Compensating for our load of mutations:
freezing the meltdown of small populations, Evolution 54 (2000)
1467–1479.
[13] G. Martin, S. F. Elena, T. Lenormand, Distributions of epistasis
in microbes fit predictions from a fitness landscape model, Nat.
Genet. 39 (2007) 555–560.
[14] H. A. Orr, The distribution of fitness effects among beneficial
mutations in Fisher’s geometric model of adaptation, J. Theor.
Biol. 238 (2006) 279–285.
[15] H. A. Orr, The population genetics of adaptation: the adaptation of DNA sequences, Evolution 56 (2002) 1317–1330.
[16] D. R. Rokyta, P. Joyce, S. B. Caudle, H. A. Wichman, An
empirical test of the mutational landscape model of adaptation
using a single-stranded DNA virus, Nat. Genet. 37 (2005) 441–
444.
[17] R. Kassen, T. Bataillon, Distribution of fitness effects among
beneficial mutations before selection in experimental populations of bacteria, Nat. Genet. 38 (2006) 484–488.
[18] D. R. Rokyta, C. J. Beisel, P. Joyce, M. T. Ferris, C. L. Burch,
H. A. Wichman, Beneficial fitness effects are not exponential
for two viruses, J. Molec. Evol. 67 (2008) 368–376.

[19] B. C. Daniels, Y.-J. Chen, J. P. Sethna, R. N. Gutenkunst,
C. R. Myers, Sloppiness, robustness, and evolvability in systems
biology, Curr. Opin. Biotech. 19 (2008) 389 – 395.
[20] D. L. Hartl, D. E. Dykhuizen, A. M. Dean, Limits of adaptation:
the evolution of selective neutrality, Genetics 111 (1985) 655–
674.
[21] G. Martin, T. Lenormand, A general multivariate extension
of Fisher’s geometrical model and the distribution of mutation
fitness effects across species, Evolution 60 (2006) 893–907.
[22] O. Tenaillon, O. K. Silander, J.-P. Uzan, L. Chao, Quantifying organismal complexity using a population genetic approach,
PLoS ONE 2 (2007) e217.
[23] G. P. Wagner, J. P. Kenney-Hunt, M. Pavlicev, J. R. Peck,
D. Waxman, J. M. Cheverud, Pleiotropic scaling of gene effects
and the ‘cost of complexity’, Nature 452 (2008) 470–472.
[24] D. Gresham, D. M. Ruderfer, S. C. Pratt, J. Schacherer, M. J.
Dunham, D. Botstein, L. Kruglyak, Genome-wide detection
of polymorphisms at nucleotide resolution with a single DNA
microarray, Science 311 (2006) 1932–1936.
[25] M. Lynch, W. Sung, K. Morris, N. Coffey, C. R. Landry, E. B.
Dopman, W. J. Dickinson, K. Okamoto, S. Kulkarni, D. L.
Hartl, W. K. Thomas, A genome-wide view of the spectrum
of spontaneous mutations in yeast, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
105 (2008) 9272–9277.
[26] J. R. Peck, G. Barreau, S. C. Heath, Imperfect genes, Fisherian
mutation and the evolution of sex, Genetics 145 (1997) 1171–
1199.
[27] D. Waxman, J. J. Welch, Fisher’s microscope and Haldane’s
ellipse, Am. Nat. 166 (2005) 447–457.
[28] G. Martin, T. Lenormand, The fitness effect of mutations across
environments: a survey in light of fitness landscape models,
Evolution 60 (2006) 2413–2427.
[29] A. Eyre-Walker, P. D. Keightley, The distribution of fitness
effects of new mutations, Nat. Rev. Genet. 8 (2007) 610–618.
[30] L. Perfeito, L. Fernandes, C. Mota, I. Gordo, Adaptive mutations in bacteria: high rate and small effects, Science 317 (2007)
813–815.
[31] G. Sella, A. E. Hirsh, The application of statistical physics to
evolutionary biology, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102 (2005)
9541–9546.
[32] E. J. Gumbel, Statistics of Extremes, Columbia University
Press, New York, 1958.
[33] D. Waxman, Mean curvature versus normality: a comparison
of two approximations of Fisher’s geometrical model, Theor.
Popul. Biol. 71 (2007) 30–36.
[34] K. S. Brown, J. P. Sethna, Statistical mechanical approaches
to models with many poorly known parameters, Phys. Rev. E
68 (2003) 021904.
[35] R. N. Gutenkunst, J. J. Waterfall, F. P. Casey, K. S. Brown,
C. R. Myers, J. P. Sethna, Universally sloppy parameter sensitivities in systems biology, PLoS Comput. Biol. 3 (2007) e189.
[36] J. J. Waterfall, F. P. Casey, R. N. Gutenkunst, K. S. Brown,
C. R. Myers, P. W. Brouwer, V. Elser, J. P. Sethna, Sloppymodel universality class and the Vandermonde matrix, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 97 (2006) 150601.
[37] J. D. Bloom, P. A. Romero, Z. Lu, F. H. Arnold, Neutral genetic
drift can alter promiscuous protein functions, potentially aiding
functional evolution, Biol. Direct 2 (2007) 17.
[38] C. R. Landry, B. Lemos, S. A. Rifkin, W. J. Dickinson, D. L.
Hartl, Genetic properties influencing the evolvability of gene
expression, Science 317 (2007) 118–121.
[39] H. A. Orr, A minimum on the mean number of steps taken in
adaptive walks, J. Theor. Biol. 220 (2003) 241–247.
[40] H. A. Orr, The population genetics of adaptation on correlated
fitness landscapes: the block model, Evolution 60 (2006) 1113–
1124.
[41] T. E. Wood, J. M. Burke, L. H. Rieseberg, Parallel genotypic
adaptation: when evolution repeats itself, Genetica 123 (2005)
157–170.
[42] L. Pelosi, L. Khn, D. Guetta, J. Garin, J. Geiselmann, R. E.
Lenski, D. Schneider, Parallel changes in global protein profiles

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

during long-term experimental evolution in Escherichia coli, Genetics 173 (2006) 1851–1869.
M. Imhof, C. Schlotterer, Fitness effects of advantageous mutations in evolving escherichia coli populations, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 98 (2001) 1113–1117.
D. E. Rozen, J. A. G. M. de Visser, P. J. Gerrish, Fitness
effects of fixed beneficial mutations in microbial populations,
Curr. Biol. 12 (2002) 1040–1045.
R. D. H. Barrett, R. C. MacLean, G. Bell, Mutations of intermediate effect are responsible for adaptation in evolving Pseudomonas fluorescens populations, Biol. Lett. 2 (2006) 236–238.
M. Abramowitz, I. A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions with Formulas, Graphs, and Mathematical Tables, Dover,
New York, 10th edition, 1964.

Appendix A. Scale of chemotype mutation
If the distribution f (r) of mutation effects on the chemotype were small for r greater than the typical ρi , the mutational distance over which adaptive mutations are possible, then the fraction Pa of mutations that were adaptive
would be approximately one-half. The rarity of adaptive
mutations thus suggests that f (r) must be appreciable for
r greater than the typical ρi . We now show that f (r) must
remain substantial even for r greater than the largest ρi .
To do so, we make the simplifying assumption that the
distribution of mutational effects is identical for all chemotype elements. We then consider the scenario in which this
distribution barely covers the range of all possible adaptive
mutations, extending only to the largest of the ρi , demoted
maxi ρi . For this scenario, we derive an analytic approximation to Pa for spherical landscapes, and we calculate Pa
numerically for the non-spherical landscapes considered in
Fig. 4. In both cases we find that this scenario leads to an
unrealistically high probability of adaptive mutation, implying that the distribution of mutation chemotype effects
must have a scale larger than that of the largest possible
adaptive mutation.
If the probability density of mutation chemotype effects f (r) were uniform over (− maxi ρi , + maxi ρi ), the
probability of a random mutation being adaptive would
be
P
i ρi
.
(A.1)
Pa =
2N maxi ρi
The numerator is the total length of intervals where mutations are adaptive, and the denominator is the total length
of intervals over which mutations are distributed.
Specializing to the spherical case and plugging in for
ρi , we have
D
E
|k̂· r̂i |
.
(A.2)
Pa =
2 maxi |k̂· r̂i |
Asymptotically for large N , k̂·r̂i has a Gaussian probability
density with variance 1/N . Averaging yields
D
E
√ √
|k̂· r̂i | = 2/ πN .
(A.3)
7

The largest absolute value of N samples drawn from
Appendix D. Extreme value theory for ∆
q a
√ 
Gaussian density with variance 1/N is asymptotically 2 log N/ The
2π normalized
N [32,
spacing between cusps ∆ is a ratio of
Eq. 4.2.3(11)]. Plugging these into Eq. A.2 yields
two values; to calculate its probability density we first calculate the density of i1 ≡ log θ1 − log θ2 , the spacing be1
Pa (N ) ∼ q
.
(A.4)
tween the logarithms of the largest two θs. Defining
√
2 π log(N/ 2π)


θN
ω
≡
log
(D.1)
This probability remains substantial even for very large N .
Qtot
For example, Pa (10, 000) is roughly 0.1, an unrealistically
large value.
and using the asymptotic χ2 density for θ yields the asympNumerical tests with both the mildly and wildly nontotic probability density of ω:
spherical landscapes considered in Fig. 4 yield a Pa of at


 √
1
least 0.13, consistent with the spherical result of Eq. A.4.
f (ω) = exp − exp (ω) − ω / 2π.
(D.2)
2
This suggests that, for a realistic fraction of mutations to
be deleterious, the typical scale of chemotype effects for
The
cumulative probability distribution F (ω) ≡
R ω corresponding
mutations must be larger than maxi ρi , even for very non0
0
f
(ω
)dω
is
−∞
spherical landscapes.

√ 
F (ω) = erf exp (ω/2) / 2 ,
(D.3)
Appendix B. Fitness effects distribution
where erf is the error function. This distribution has
exponential-type extreme value statistics [32].
Following the terminology and notation of Gumbel [32],
the typical size u1,N of the largest of N samples from the
density f (ω) is given by F (u1,N ) = 1 − N1 . In our case this
is
√

u1,N = 2 log
2 erf −1 (1 − 1/N ) .
(D.4)

Given the probability density of chemotype mutation
effects f (r), the distribution fa (Q) of fitness effects for
adaptive mutations is
XZ
fa (Q) ∝
drf (r) δ(Q − Qi (r)),
(B.1)
i

where the sum is over all chemotype elements i, and Qi (r)
is given by Eq. 3. Making the variable substitution u =
Qi (r) yields
XZ
f (Q−1 (u)) δ(Q − u)
.
(B.2)
fa (Q) ∝
du r i 
~
2
i
k·S· r̂i  − 2 r̂i ·S· r̂i u

The corresponding scale parameter α1,N is
α1,N = N f (u1,N ) ,

and distance i1 between the largest two samples has probability density

Further making the approximation that f (r) is uniform
over the range of adaptive mutations, and substituting
Eq. 4 yields Eq. 8.

f (i1 ) = α1,N exp(−α1,N i1 ).

(D.6)

(Gumbel’s result [32] for this distribution, his Eq. 5.3.5(4),
has α2,N in place of α1,N . In the limit N → ∞ the two
expressions are equal, but α1,N is a better approximation
for small N .)
The distance between the logarithms i1 is related to ∆
by ∆ ≡ 1 − θ2 /θ1 = 1 − exp(−i1 ). Thus the probability
density for ∆ is

Appendix C. Average distributions
The distribution of adaptive fitness effects averaged
over initial chemotypes with a given fitness can be calculated by averaging fa (Q) over the probability density
for θi . For a spherical fitness landscape, the θi are proportional to the squared magnitudes of the components of
the unit vector k̂. Asymptotically as the number of dimensions N → ∞, these are squares of Gaussian variables
and have probability density
p
fθ (θi ) ∝ exp [−θi N/(2Qtot )]/ θi ,
(C.1)

(α1,N −1)

f (∆) = α1,N (1 − ∆)

,

(D.7)

and the average of ∆ is
h∆i =

2

which is a χ density with one degree of freedom. For the
spherical fitness landscape the result is:
fa,e (Q) ∝ exp [−QN/(4Qtot )] K0 [QN/(4Qtot )] ,

(D.5)

1
.
1 + α1,N

(D.8)

A useful approximation for α1,N can be obtained using
an asymptotic expansion for erf −1 [46]:
s 



√
2
2
−1
2 erf (1 − x) ∼ log
− log log
.
πx2
πx2
(D.9)

(C.2)

where K0 is the zero-order modified Bessel function of the
second kind. This is identical to Waxman and Welch’s
result for the model with maximum pleiotropy [27].
8

Propagating this expansion through u1,N and α1,N and
neglecting terms of order log log N in the final expression
yields
p

α1,N ≈ log N + log
2/π .
(D.10)
From this follows the approximate expression for h∆i in
Eq. 11.
Appendix E. Numerical simulation
A random set of orthogonal unit vectors v̂i can be
obtained from the eigenvectors of a matrix G from the
Gaussian Orthogonal Ensemble: G = H + HT where the
elements of H are standard normal random numbers. A
matrix S with eigenvalues λi can then be constructed via
X
Sj,k =
λi vi,j vi,k .
(E.1)
i

Random chemotypes ~k with specified log-fitness Qtot =
− log W (~k) are obtained using the Cholesky decomposition
A of S−1 , defined by A·AT = S−1 . ~k is then given by
p
~k = 2Qtot A· k̂,
(E.2)
where k̂ is a random unit vector.

9

