NETWORK TOPOLOGY AS A DRIVER OF BISTABILITY IN THE

arXiv:0807.3995v1 [q-bio.MN] 25 Jul 2008

LAC OPERON

BRANDILYN STIGLER AND ALAN VELIZ-CUBA

Abstract. The lac operon in Escherichia coli has been studied extensively and is
one of the earliest gene systems found to undergo both positive and negative control.
The lac operon is known to exhibit bistability, in the sense that the operon is either
induced or uninduced. Many dynamical models have been proposed to capture this
phenomenon. While most are based on complex mathematical formulations, it has
been suggested that for other gene systems network topology is sufficient to produce
the desired dynamical behavior.
We present a Boolean network as a discrete model for the lac operon. We include the two main glucose control mechanisms of catabolite repression and inducer
exclusion in the model and show that it exhibits bistability. Further we present a
reduced model which shows that lac mRNA and lactose form the core of the lac
operon, and that this reduced model also exhibits the same dynamics. This work
corroborates the claim that the key to dynamical properties is the topology of the
network and signs of interactions.

1. Introduction
The lac operon in the bacterium Escherichia coli has been used as a model system of
gene regulation since the landmark work by Jacob and Monod in 1961 [6]. Its study has
led to numerous insights into sugar metabolism, including how the presence of a substrate
could trigger induction of its catabolizing enzyme, yet in the presence of a preferred
energy source, namely glucose, the substrate is rendered ineffective. Originally termed
the “glucose effect”, catabolite repression became known as one of the mechanisms by
which glucose regulates the induction of sugar-metabolizing operons. Early work on the
lac operon also led to the discovery that transcription of an operon’s genes is subject
to positive or negative control and that the system of genes is either inducible (inducers
are needed to kick-start transcription) or repressible (corepressors are needed to stop
transcription). The lac operon is one of the earliest examples of a inducible system of
genes being under both positive and negative control.
There are many formulations modeling the behavior and interaction of the lac genes.
The first model was proposed by Goodwin two years after the discovery of the lac operon [3].
Since then there has been a steady flow of models following the advances in biological
insight of the system, with the majority describing operon induction using artificial nonmetabolizable compounds such as IPTG and TMG [10, 16, 17, 13]. For example, the first
model to consider catabolite repression and inducer exclusion, another control mechanism
of the operon by glucose, when the cells were grown in both glucose and lactose (lactose
was the inducer) was presented by Wong et al. [18]. Their model consisted of up to 13
ordinary differential equations involving 65 parameters. Further Santillán and coauthors
have presented mathematical models and analysis purporting bistability (the operon is
either induced or uninduced) [19, 12, 13, 11] as observed in the experiments of [9, 10].
These findings have given rise to the analogy of the lac operon acting as a biological
switch [10, 5].
The first author was supported by NSF Agreement Nr. 0112050. The second author was supported
by NSF grant DMS-051144.
1

2

BRANDILYN STIGLER AND ALAN VELIZ-CUBA

Most mathematical formulations of the lac operon, as well as other genetic systems,
are given as systems of differential equations; however, discrete modeling frameworks
are receiving more attention for their use in offering global insights. In fact Albert and
Othmer suggested that network topology and the type of interactions, as opposed to
quantitative mathematical functions with estimated parameters, were sufficient to capture
the dynamics of gene networks, which they demonstrated by constructing a Boolean model
for a segment polarity network in Drosophila melanogaster [2]. Setty et al. defined a
logical function for the transcription of the lac genes in terms of the proteins regulating
the operon, namely CRP and LacI [14]. Although the authors initially aimed to construct
a simple Boolean function to mimic the switching behavior of the operon, they discovered
that AND-like and OR-like expressions could not reproduce the complexity that the lac
genes exhibited. Instead they found that a logical function on 4 states (as opposed to 2
states - 0 and 1) was more biologically relevant. Mayo et al. tested and showed that this
logical function was robust with respect to point mutations, that is, given the formulation
in [14], the operon is still functional after point mutations [8].
To our knowledge, the model of Setty et al. is the first discrete model of the lac genes.
While this is an important example of the applicability of logical functions for describing
operon dynamics, one limitation is that it does not predict bistability. We propose a
logical model for the lac operon which predicts bistability (when stochasticity is included)
and includes the two main control mechanisms of glucose, namely catabolite repression
and inducer exclusion. In order to facilitate interpretation, we have added variables so
as to present the model as a Boolean network. Advantages of a Boolean framework
are that it naturally encodes network topology and interaction type by way of Boolean
expressions and it permits an intuitive, yet formal mathematical description, a feature
that is not readily accessible for more general logical models. An advantage of discrete
models in general is that the entire state space can be computed and explored, in contrast
to continuous modeling frameworks. Therefore we are able to show that the lac operon
has only two steady states, corresponding to the operon being either ON or OFF (induced
or uninduced).
An important question is to identify the key players in a network, in this case for the
purpose of determining the drivers of the dynamics. Aguda and Goryachev provided a
systematic approach for reducing a network pieced together from literature to a subnetwork which can be thought of as the core of the essential qualitative behavior [1]. Albert
and Othmer [2] showed that the topology and interaction type are the determining factors
in producing the steady-state behavior. We corroborate these findings by reducing the
Boolean model to a one involving only the lac genes and lactose. We show that the dynamics of the reduced model matches that of the full model. Our results further support
the hypothesis that the topology is the key to dynamical properties.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present the biological and modeling
background; we also present a Boolean network as a model for the lac operon. We present
its network topology, associated dynamics and bistability experiments. Section 3 contains
the reduction steps and the reduced model. We close with a discussion of future work in
Section 4.
2. Model
2.1. Biological Background. Here we describe the components and features of the lac
operon which we include in the model. This description is summarized largely from the
material provided in the online book [4]. Additional citations are given as necessary.
The lac operon contains three structural genes, lacZ, lacY, and lacA, and is a negative inducible system: the repressor protein LacI prevents transcription of the lac genes,
and the operon is induced by allolactose, an isomer of lactose. Extracellular lactose is
thought to be readily available, but can diffuse into the cell at low concentrations. Once

NETWORK TOPOLOGY AS A DRIVER OF BISTABILITY IN THE LAC OPERON

3

in the cell, lactose can induce the operon, though with lower probability than allolactose.
Transcription of the lac genes gives rise to a single mRNA, whose translation gives rise to
the following proteins: β-galactoside permease (LacY), a membrane-bound protein which
transports lactose into the cell; β-galactosidase (LacZ), an intracellular protein which
cleaves lactose into glucose and its stereoisomer galactose, and which converts lactose into
allolactose; and β-galactoside transacetylase (LacA) which transfers an acetyl group from
acetyl-CoA to β-galactosides.
Glucose is thought to regulate the lac operon through two key mechanisms: catabolite
repression and inducer exclusion. In the absence of glucose, the catabolite activator protein
CAP (also known as CRP for cAMP receptor protein) forms a complex with cAMP which
binds to a site upstream of the lac promoter region. Binding of the cAMP-CAP complex
makes a conformational change in the DNA, thereby allowing RNA polymerase to bind
to the DNA and enhancing transcription of the lac genes. Transcription continues until
extracellular glucose is available. However, when glucose is abundant, cAMP synthesis
is inhibited [18] and the repressor protein LacI can bind to the operator region of the
operon, preventing transcription of the lac genes. The presence of (sufficient amounts
of) glucose shuts off the operon, a phenomenon referred to as catabolite repression. The
second mechanism, inducer exclusion, occurs when the transport of lactose into the cell
by permease is inhibited by external glucose.
2.2. Modeling Background. A Boolean network on n variables is a collection of functions (defined over the set {0,1}) f1 , . . . , fn such that for each i = 1, . . . , n, the function
fi determines the next state of variable i and is written in terms of the Boolean operators
∨, ∧, ¬ (logical OR, AND, and NOT, respectively). The values 0 and 1 are the states of
the variables.
“Network topology” refers to the connectivity structure of a network and is typically
represented as a directed graph. For a Boolean network, a wiring diagram is a directed
graph on the variables of the system (in this case, mRNA, proteins, and sugars) with
edges defined in the following way: there is a directed edge from variable xi to xj if the
function fxj for xj depends on xi . An edge from xi to xj has a small circle at its head xj
if ¬xi appears in fxj (we consider this edge to correspond to an inhibitory interaction);
otherwise, edges have arrows at their heads. We call directed cycles feedback loops. The
parity of a feedback loop (or a path) can be either +1 or -1 and is calculated as follows.
Assign -1 to an edge if it is inhibitory and +1 otherwise. The parity of a feedback loop is
the product of +1/-1 on the edges of the loop. If the parity of a feedback loop is +1, we
call the loop positive; otherwise, it is negative.
“Dynamics” refers to the state transitions of the network as a whole. To generate the
dynamics of a Boolean network F on n variables, we evaluate its functions on all possible
combinations of 0-1 n-tuples. The dynamics can be viewed as a directed graph, called
the state space of F . In this graph each node is a state (n-tuple) of the system; there is
a directed edge from a to b if F evaluated at the current state a gives state b; that is, if
F (a) = b. Hence, b represents that next state of the system. Directed cycles are called
limit cycles. If length of the cycle is 1, then it is called a fixed point. In the context of
scientific applications, fixed points are also referred to as steady states, which we use in
this discourse. We draw the state space using the visualization software DVD [7].
2.3. Boolean Network. In this subsection we present the Boolean network for the lac
operon that models gene regulation such as the two main control mechanisms of glucose,
namely catabolite repression and inducer exclusion. The Boolean network consists of
variables and functions, each representing mRNAs, proteins and sugars. We assume that
each biomolecule can be either 0 or 1 (absent/inactive or present/active). The Boolean
variables are labeled as follows:
• M = lac mRNA
• P, B = lac permease and β-galactosidase, resp.

4

BRANDILYN STIGLER AND ALAN VELIZ-CUBA

• C = catabolite activator protein CAP
• R = repressor protein LacI
• L, A= lactose and allolactose (inducer), resp.
• Ll , Al = (at least) low concentration of lactose and allolactose, resp.
Next we derive the Boolean functions for mRNA based on the information in Section
2.1. The other Boolean functions are constructed in a similar fashion (see Supporting
Information).
Boolean function for M : When the concentration of the repressor is high (R = 1),
the production of mRNA will be low (M = 0) independent of the concentration of CAP
(C). On the other hand, when the concentration of the repressor is low (G = 0) and the
concentration of CAP is high (C = 1), mRNA production will be high (M = 1). In other
words, M will be 1 when R is not 1 and C is 1; that is, the future Boolean value of M is
NOT R AND C. Hence, the Boolean function for M is HM = ¬R ∧ C.
The complete Boolean network is given as follows (∧, ∨ and ¬ are the logical AND,
OR and NOT operators, respectively):
HM = ¬R ∧ C
HP = M
HC = ¬Ge
HA = L ∧ B
HL = ¬Ge ∧ P ∧ Le

HB = M
HR = ¬A ∧ ¬Al
HAl = A ∨ L ∨ Ll
HLl = ¬Ge ∧ (L ∨ Le )

where Le , Ge represent extracellular lactose and glucose, respectively, and are considered
as parameters in the model. For any variable a, the function Ha determines the value of
a after one time unit. We use H to refer to the model consisting of this Boolean network.
2.3.1. Network Topology. The network topology for the model H is shown in Figure 1 and
is displayed as a wiring diagram (see Section 2.2 for definitions). From the diagram we
can identify topological features such as the feedback loops in H. We see that there are
at least two positive feedback loops involving M , namely M → P → L → A → R → M
and M → B → A → R → M . Note that there are no negative feedback loops.

Figure 1. Wiring diagram for the model H. Edges in this diagram
represent interactions between variables. Arrows indicate positive interactions and circles indicate negative interactions.

2.3.2. Dynamics. The dynamics of H can be computed by evaluating the functions on all
possible combinations of vectors (M, P, B, C, R, A, Al , L, Ll ) with 0-1 entries (see Section
2.2 for more details). We say that the operon is OFF when the value of the triple (M, P, B)

NETWORK TOPOLOGY AS A DRIVER OF BISTABILITY IN THE LAC OPERON

5

is (0, 0, 0) and ON when (M, P, B) = (1, 1, 1). The parameters Le and Ge give rise to the
following four cases:
(1) For (Le , Ge ) = (0, 0), there is a single
sponds to the operon being OFF.
(2) For (Le , Ge ) = (0, 1), there is a single
sponds to the operon being OFF.
(3) For (Le , Ge ) = (1, 1), there is a single
sponds to the operon being OFF.
(4) For (Le , Ge ) = (1, 0), there is a single
sponds to the operon being ON.

steady state, (0,0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0), that corresteady state, (0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0), that corresteady state, (0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0), that corresteady state, (1,1,1,1,0,1,1,1,1), that corre-

In summary, the model predicts that the lac operon is OFF when extracellular glucose
is available or there is neither extracellular glucose or lactose. When extracellular lactose
is available and extracellular glucose is not, the model predicts that the operon is ON.
That is, the model has two steady states. This is consistent with the reports of bistability
as recently as that of [11].
2.3.3. Bistability. We have shown that the model H has essentially two steady states,
which correspond to the lac operon being either ON or OFF (one steady state for each set
of parameters). These steady states are stable, according to the definition in Appendix
C. However, to claim that H exhibits bistability we have to show that for a range of
parameters a population of “cells” may exhibit both stable steady states at the same
time, corresponding to the lac operon being ON and OFF (see [12] for details); that
is, there exists a region of bistability. We will show that if we consider stochasticity in
the uptake of the inducer, then bistability can occur. We performed in silico hysteresis
experiments similar to the experiments performed by Ozbudak et al. [10].
The experiment to investigate bistability consisted in introducing stochasticity in the
uptake of the inducer and vary its value. More precisely, we set the extracellular glucose
level to Ge = 0 (the lac operon would be OFF otherwise, independent of the value of the
inducer, which we denote by Le ). Stochasticity in the uptake of the inducer is introduced
by using a random variable, Le ∼ N (µ, σ) taken from a normal distribution with mean µ
and variance σ 2 . Then we can write Le as a function of Le defined by

0 if Le < 1
Le =
1 if Le ≥ 1
We will refer to this function as the stochastic model.
We start with a population of “cells” with Le ∼ N (µ, σ) and measure whether the
operon is induced in those cells after 10 time units; we then decrease the level of the
inducer (see Supporting Informationfor details). Similarly, we start with a population
of cells with Le ∼ N (µ, σ), measure whether the operon is induced in those cells and
increase the level of the inducer. In Figure 2 we started with a population of 100 cells
with Le ∼ N (1.25, 0.1) and plot the population after 10 time units; we then decrease the
level of the inducer to Le ∼ N (0.75, 0.1) with a step size of 0.5 (upper panel). We start
with a population of 100 cells with Le ∼ N (0.75, 0.1) and plot the population after 10
time units; we then increase the level of the inducer to Le ∼ N (1.25, 0.1) with a step size
of 0.5 (lower panel). We also performed experiments with different values of σ, µ and
obtained similar results (see Supporting Information).
We observe in Figure 2 the region of bistability. When we decrease the inducer, an
induced-to-uninduced transition can be observed: part of the induced population (top
row of upper panel) has turned OFF the lac operon (bottom row of upper panel). On
the other hand, when we increase the inducer, an uninduced-to-induced transition can be
observed: part of the uninduced population (bottom row of lower panel) has turned ON
the lac operon (top row of lower panel). The region where we can see both, cells induced
and uninduced, is the region of bistability. We can see that these in silico hysteresis

6

BRANDILYN STIGLER AND ALAN VELIZ-CUBA

ON
OFF

ON
OFF

Figure 2. Heat maps of bistability experiments. Grey density determines the percentage of the population that is induced (top row) or
uninduced (bottom row) (black:100%, white:0%).

Figure 3. Bistability experiments performed in [10].
experiments show the same pattern or qualitative behavior as those in [10] (Figure 3).
This bistable behavior was not present in model H; so it is caused by stochasticity.
3. Reduced Model
An important question is whether the fact that model H has two steady states (either
ON or OFF) is caused by the model itself or by topological features and interaction
type. We address this question by reducing the model; we reduce the model by deleting
vertices but keeping some topological features. If it is the case that topological features
and interaction type are the key players for dynamical properties, we would expect the
reduced model to have dynamics equivalent to the original model.
3.1. Reducing Boolean networks. We provide a method to reduce a Boolean network
and its corresponding wiring diagram. The idea behind the reduction method is the
following: the wiring diagram should reflect direct regulation and hence nonfunctional
edges should be removed; on the other hand, vertices (variables) can be deleted, without
losing important information, by allowing its functionality to be “inherited” to other
variables. Step (1) has higher priority than Step (2).
(1) Boolean functions are simplified and edges that do not correspond to a Boolean
expression are deleted (in the simplification of Boolean functions certain expressions may vanish).
(2) Let a be a vertex such that there is no self-loop (a 	). Consider all paths
of length 2 having a in the middle: xi → a → xj where xi and xj are vertices. Delete a and replace all edges from/to a by edges from xi to xj (the
signs of these edges are given by the sign of the path). Let fa and fxj be
the functions for a and xj , respectively. Note that fxj is a function of a, so
we can write it as fxj (x1 , . . . , a, . . . , xn ). Then the function fxj is replaced by
fxj (x1 , . . . , fa , . . . , xn ).

NETWORK TOPOLOGY AS A DRIVER OF BISTABILITY IN THE LAC OPERON

7

3.2. Reducing the Boolean Network H. Let us show some reduction steps applied to
the Boolean model of the lac operon.
Figure 4 shows how step 2 is used to delete R. We delete R and the edges from/to R
are replaced by edges from Al and A to M . The sign of these edges are positive because
the sign of the corresponding paths are positive.

M

C

Ge

B

P

A

L

Al

Ll

Le

Figure 4. Wiring diagram for the model H before and after using step
2 to delete R.
Now let us see how the Boolean functions change when we use step 2. The Boolean
functions of model H are given below:
HM = ¬R ∧ C
HP = M
HC = ¬Ge
HA = L ∧ B
HL = ¬Ge ∧ P ∧ Le

HB = M
HR = ¬A ∧ ¬Al
HAl = A ∨ L ∨ Ll
HLl = ¬Ge ∧ (L ∨ Le )

The Boolean function for R is not needed anymore and the Boolean function for M
becomes:
HM = ¬(¬A ∧ ¬Al ) ∧ C = (A ∨ Al ) ∧ C HP = M
HB = M
HC = ¬Ge
HA = L ∧ B
HAl = A ∨ L ∨ Ll
HL = ¬Ge ∧ P ∧ Le
HLl = ¬Ge ∧ (L ∨ Le )
We can see that the signs of edges are consistent with the Boolean functions.
After deleting P, B, C, R, Al , Ll we obtain the wiring diagram shown in Figure 5 with
Boolean functions given below.
HM = ¬Ge ∧ (A ∨ L ∨ Le )
HA = L ∧ M

Ge

HL = ¬Ge ∧ M ∧ Le

L

M

Le

A

Figure 5. Wiring diagram for the model H after deleting P, B, C, R, Al , Ll .

8

BRANDILYN STIGLER AND ALAN VELIZ-CUBA

Now we use step 2 to delete A. The new wiring diagram is shown in Figure 6. Notice
the self loop at M . The Boolean functions are:
HM = ¬Ge ∧ (L ∧ M ∨ L ∨ Le )
HL = ¬Ge ∧ M ∧ Le

Ge

M

L

Le

Figure 6. Wiring diagram after deleting A.
Using Boolean algebra we have the identity L ∧ M ∨ L = L; so using step 1 the Boolean
functions become:
HM = ¬Ge ∧ (L ∨ Le )
HL = ¬Ge ∧ M ∧ Le
Notice that the self loop at M is actually nonfunctional; then we delete it.
Finally the wiring diagram is given in Figure 7.

Ge

M

L

Le

Figure 7. Wiring diagram for the reduced model h.
3.3. Reduced model. We reduced the Boolean model H to show that a core subnetwork
exists which exhibits bistability. The reduced model, denoted by h, contains the variables
M , L, Le and Ge . The model h is given by
hM = ¬Ge ∧ (Le ∨ L)
hL = ¬Ge ∧ Le ∧ M
where Le and Ge are parameters.
3.3.1. Network Topology. The wiring diagram for the model h is shown in Figure 7. We
can see that the paths from Ge and Le to M are still present in the model; also, the signs
of these paths have not changed. Furthermore, the reduction steps have preserved the
positive feedback loop involving M and L.
Here we have identified the core of the network to be M and L. From the reduced
model, we can clearly see the roles of the parameters on the core subnetwork.
3.3.2. Dynamics. The state space for the reduced model h is shown in Figure 8. Just as
with the model H, the reduced model has two different steady states, each corresponding
to the operon being ON or OFF. Hence, reduction has preserved the dynamics of the
system.
We observe that the reduced model has only one positive feedback loop, whereas the
model H has several more. Since the reduced model still exhibits the ON/OFF switching
dynamics, this suggests that this steady-state behavior does not depend on the number
of positive feedback loops but simply on the existence of such a loop.

NETWORK TOPOLOGY AS A DRIVER OF BISTABILITY IN THE LAC OPERON

01

01

10

00

11

01

10

11

00

11

00

9

01

10

10

00

11

Figure 8. Dynamics of the reduced model h for all parameter values,
from left to right: (Le , Ge ) = (0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 1), and (1, 0).
3.3.3. Bistability. Figure 9 shows the results of the bistability experiments performed using model h. We can still see the region of bistability for the reduced model. This suggests
that bistability does not depend on the number of positive feedback loops but simply on
the existence of such a loop and stochasticity. Furthermore, because the feedback loop
involves only M and L, this suggests that bistability is maintained by stochasticity and
the interaction between the operon (represented by M) and lactose.

Figure 9. Heat maps of bistability experiments for model h. The parameters are the same as in Section 2.3.3.

4. Discussion
Many authors have studied the problem of inferring dynamical properties of a system from the network structure [15]. Furthermore, it has been proven for special classes
of Boolean networks and ODEs that the network structure contains all the information
needed for some dynamical properties [5]. On the other hand, it has been claimed that
network topology and sign of interactions are more important than quantitative functionality of the components of a system [2]. To test this hypothesis, we applied the ideas in
[2] to lactose metabolism.
The lac operon has been studied extensively and is one of the earliest discovered gene
systems that undergoes both positive and negative control. While there are numerous
continuous models of the lac operon, few discrete models exist; in fact, that of Setty [14]
is the only one known to the authors. The Setty model is a logical (on 4 states) function for
the lac genes written in terms of the regulators CRP and LacI that is capable of accurately
predicting induction of the operon based on concentration levels of the regulators. Further,
this function has been shown to be robust with respect to point mutations [8]. One
limitation of this model, however, is that it does not predict bistability, as has been
reported and confirmed in [9, 19, 12, 10, 5, 13, 11].
We proposed a Boolean network as a discrete model for the lac operon and included
the glucose control mechanisms of catabolite repression and inducer exclusion. We showed
that our model exhibits the ON/OFF switching dynamics and that when stochasticity
is included, bistability is also observed, in accordance with the work of Santillán and
coauthors [19, 12, 13, 11]. Further we presented a reduced model which shows that lac
mRNA and lactose form the core of the lac operon, and that this reduced model also

10

BRANDILYN STIGLER AND ALAN VELIZ-CUBA

exhibits the same dynamics. This suggests that the key to dynamical properties is the
topology of the network and signs of interactions. This is consistent with the analysis for
the segment polarity network in D. melanogaster made by Albert and Othmer [2].
The use of Boolean networks in modeling has many advantages, such as their mathematical formulation typically being more intuitive for a wider range of scientists than
that of differential-equations-based models. Boolean networks are particularly useful in
the case where one is interested in qualitatively behavior. For example, our bistability
experiments show that bistability can occur when stochasticity is considered and that it
depends on topological features rather than the network itself.
A future work may be to extend this model to a multi-state framework, which has
the potential to provide a more refined qualitative description of the lac operon. Such
a framework may allow for inclusion of other features of the operon, such as multiple
promoter and operator regions.

References
[1] B. Aguda and A. Goryachev. From pathways databases to network models of switching behavior.
PLoS Computational Biology, 3(9):1674–1678, 2007.
[2] R. Albert and H. Othmer. The topology of the regulatory interactions predicts the expression
pattern of the segment polarity genes in Drosophila melanogaster. Journal of Theoretical Biology,
223:1–18, 2003.
[3] B. Goodwin. Temporal Organization in Cells. Academic Press, New York, 1963.
[4] A. Griffiths, J. Miller, D. Suzuki, R. Lewontin, and W. Gelbart. Introduction to Genetic Analysis.
W. H. Freeman and Co., New York, 1999.
[5] Á. Halász, V. Kumar, M. Imieliński, C. Belta, O. Sokolsky, S. Pathak, and H. Rubin. Analysis of
lactose metabolism in E.coli using reachability analysis of hybrid systems. IET Systems Biology,
1(2):130–148, 2007.
[6] F. Jacob and J. Monod. Genetic regulatory mechanisms in the synthesis of proteins. Journal of
Molecular Biology, 3:318–356, 1961.
[7] A. Jarrah, R. Laubenbacher, and H. Vastani. DVD: Discrete visualizer of dynamics. Available at
http://dvd.vbi.vt.edu.
[8] A. Mayo, Y. Setty, S. Shavit, A. Zaslaver, and U. Alon. Plasticity of the cis-regulatory input
function of a gene. PLoS Biology, 4(4):0555–0561, 2006.
[9] A. Novick and M. Weiner. Enzyme induction as an all-or-none phenomenon. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 43(7):553–566, 1957.
[10] E. Ozbudak, M. Thattai, H. Lim, B. Shraiman, and A. van Oudenaarden. Multistability in the
lactose utilization network of Escherichia coli. Nature, 427:737–740, 2004.
[11] M. Santillán. Bistable behavior in a model of the lac operon in Escherichia coli with variable
growth rate. Biophysical Journal, 94(6):20652081, 2008.
[12] M. Santillán and M. Mackey. Influence of catabolite repression and inducer exclusion on the bistable
behavior of the lac operon. Biophysical Journal, 86(3):1282–1292, 2004.
[13] M. Santillán, M. Mackey, and E. Zeron. Origin of bistability in the lac operon. Biophysical Journal,
92(11):3830–3842, 2007.
[14] Y. Setty, A. Mayo, M. Surette, and U. Alon. Detailed map of a cis-regulatory input function. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 100(13):77027707,
2003.
[15] E. Sontag, A. Veliz-Cuba, R. Laubenbacher, and A. Jarrah. The effect of negative feedback loops
on the dynamics of boolean networks. Biophysical Journal, 95:518–526, 2008.
[16] M. van Hoek and P. Hogeweg. In silico evolved lac operons exhibit bistability for artificial inducers,
but not for lactose. Biophysical Journal, 91(8):28332843, 2006.
[17] M. van Hoek and P. Hogeweg. The effect of stochasticity on the Lac operon: An evolutionary
perspective. PLoS Computational Biology, 3(6):1071–1082, 2007.
[18] P. Wong, S. Gladney, and J. Keasling. Mathematical model of the lac operon: Inducer exclusion, catabolite repression, and diauxic growth on glucose and lactose. Biotechnology Progress,
13(2):132–143, 1997.
[19] N. Yildirim, M. Santillán, D. Horike, and M. Mackey. Dynamics and bistability in a reduced model
of the lac operon. Chaos, 14(2):279–292, 2004.

NETWORK TOPOLOGY AS A DRIVER OF BISTABILITY IN THE LAC OPERON

11

Supporting Information

Appendix A. Building Boolean Networks
• Boolean function for M : When the concentration of the repressor is high (R = 1),
the production of mRNA will be low (M = 0) independent of the concentration
of CAP (C). On the other hand, when the concentration of the repressor is low
(G = 0) and the concentration of CAP is high (C = 1), mRNA production will
be high (M = 1). In other words, M will be 1 when R is not 1 and C is 1; that is,
the future Boolean value of M is NOT R AND C. Hence, the Boolean function
for M is HM = ¬R ∧ C.
• Boolean functions for P, B: When mRNA production is high (M = 1), the production of P, B will be also high (P = B = 1). Hence, the Boolean functions are
HP = M and HB = M .
• Boolean function for C: When extracellular glucose is abundant (Ge = 1), cAMP
synthesis is inhibited (C = 0). Hence, the Boolean function is HC = ¬Ge .
• Boolean function for R: The concentration of the repressor will be high (R = 1)
only if the concentration of allolactose is not significant, that is, when A = Al = 0.
Hence, the Boolean function is HR = ¬A ∧ ¬Al .
• Boolean function for A: The concentration of allolactose will be high if the concentrations of permease and extracellular lactose are high. Then, the Boolean
function is HA = L ∧ B.
• Boolean function for Al : The concentration of allolactose will be at least low
(Al = 1) when the concentration of allolactose is high or when the concentration
of lactose is high or at least low (it would be converted to allolactose by a basal
level of β−galactosidase). It follows that the Boolean function is HAl = A∨L∨Ll .
• Boolean function for L: The concentration of lactose will be high when there is
no external glucose, the concentration of permease is high and there is abundant
extracellular lactose. Then, the Boolean function is HL = ¬Ge ∧ P ∧ Le .
• Boolean function for Ll : When there is no external glucose and the concentration of extracellular lactose is high (Le = 1), at least a small number of lactose molecules will enter the cell, by diffusion or by a small number of permease
molecules (basal level of permease). Also, when there is no external glucose and
there is lactose inside the cell (L = 1), there will be at least a small number of
lactose. That is, there will be at least a low concentration of lactose (Ll = 1) when
there is not external glucose and the concentration of extracellular or intracellular
lactose is high (Le = 1, L = 1 respectively). Hence, HLl = ¬Ge (L ∨ Le ).
Appendix B. Alternative Models
Model H was constructed considering catabolic repression only; two other alternative
models may be obtained by considering inducer exclusion only (model J) or both, catabolic
repression and inducer exclusion (model K).
B.1. Network Topology. The Boolean functions for models J and K are given as follows:
Model J
JM = ¬R ∧ C
JP = M
JB = M
JC = 1
JR = ¬A ∧ ¬Al
JA = L ∧ B
JAl = A ∨ L ∨ Ll
JL = ¬Ge ∧ P ∧ Le JLl = ¬Ge ∧ (L ∨ Le )

12

BRANDILYN STIGLER AND ALAN VELIZ-CUBA

Model K
KM = ¬R ∧ C
KP = M
KC = ¬Ge
KA = L ∧ B
KL = P ∧ Le

KB = M
KR = ¬A ∧ ¬Al
KAl = A ∨ L ∨ Ll
KLl = L ∨ Le

The wiring diagrams for models J and K are shown in Figure 10. We can observe that
there are paths from Ge to M and that they are, for both models, inhibitory. Also, both
models have positive feedback loops involving M and no negative feedback loops. We can
observe that models H, J and K have common topological features.

Figure 10. Wiring diagram for the models J and K.

B.2. Dynamics. The parameters Le and Ge give rise to the following four cases:
Dynamics for model J:
(1) For (Le , Ge ) = (0, 0), there is a single
sponds to the operon being OFF.
(2) For (Le , Ge ) = (0, 1), there is a single
sponds to the operon being OFF.
(3) For (Le , Ge ) = (1, 1), there is a single
sponds to the operon being OFF.
(4) For (Le , Ge ) = (1, 0), there is a single
sponds to the operon being ON.

steady state, (0,0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0), that corresteady state, (0,0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0), that corresteady state, (0,0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0), that corresteady state, (1,1,1,1,0,1,1,1,1), that corre-

Dynamics for model K:
(1) For (Le , Ge ) = (0, 0), there is a single
sponds to the operon being OFF.
(2) For (Le , Ge ) = (0, 1), there is a single
sponds to the operon being OFF.
(3) For (Le , Ge ) = (1, 1), there is a single
sponds to the operon being OFF.
(4) For (Le , Ge ) = (1, 0), there is a single
sponds to the operon being ON.

steady state, (0,0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0), that corresteady state, (0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0), that corresteady state, (0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,1), that corresteady state, (1,1,1,1,0,1,1,1,1), that corre-

We can see that models H, J and K predict that the lac operon is OFF when extracellular glucose is available or there is neither extracellular glucose or lactose. When
extracellular lactose is available and extracellular glucose is not, the model predicts that
the operon is ON. That is, all models have two steady states. This shows that qualitative
behavior of the model is determined by the topological features of the wiring diagram.

NETWORK TOPOLOGY AS A DRIVER OF BISTABILITY IN THE LAC OPERON

13

B.3. Reduced Models. Figure 11 shows the wiring diagrams for the models obtained
by the reduction of J (model j) and reduction of K (model k). Their Boolean rules are
given by:
reduced model j
jM = (¬Ge ∧ Le ) ∨ L
jL = Le ∧ M ∧ ¬Ge
reduced model k
kM = ¬Ge ∧ (Le ∨ L)
kL = Le ∧ M

Ge

M

L

Le

Ge

M

L

Le

Figure 11. Wiring diagram for the reduced models j and k. We can
see that in this case they are equal.
We can see that reduced models j and k maintain the main topological features that
the reduced model h has, such as the sign of the paths from Le and Ge to M , and the
positive feedback loop involving M and L. All reduced models have the same qualitatively
behavior; for example, they predict that the operon is OFF for parameters (Le , Ge ) =
(0, 0), (0, 1) and (1, 1), and ON for (Le , Ge ) = (1, 0). This provides more evidence that
bistability does not depend on the number of positive feedback loops but simply on the
existence of such a loop.
Appendix C. Bistability
C.1. Stability in a Discrete Framework. Before we explain the details of bistability
we need to define the concept of stability in a discrete framework. The definition we use
is based on the following idea: a steady state is stable if all nearby trajectories go to it.
C.1.1. Definition of Stability. Let x be a steady state of a Boolean network S; that is,
S(x) = x. We say that x is stable if for any state y such that |x − y| ≤ 1 then S k (y) = x
for some k. Where |x − y| is the Hamming distance that gives the number of nonzero
values of x − y; that is, the number of components in which x and y differ.
C.1.2. The two steady states of the lac operon operon are stable. For any set of parameters
there is only one steady state, the lac operon is either ON or OFF. Hence, the definition
of stable is clearly satisfied; the ON and OFF states are stable.
C.2. Stochastic Model. Stochasticity in the uptake of the inducer is introduced by using
a random variable, Le ∼ N (µ, σ) (normal distribution with mean µ and variance σ 2 ); Le
is then a function of Le defined by Le = 0 if Le < 1 and Le = 1 if Le ≥ 1. We will refer
to this function as the stochastic model, S.
More precisely, the stochastic model is given by:
SM = ¬R ∧ C
SP = M
SB = M
SC = ¬Ge
SR = ¬A ∧ ¬Al
SA = L ∧ B
SL = ¬Ge (P ∧ Le )
SAl = A ∨ L ∨ Ll
SLl = ¬Ge (L ∨ Le ) SLe = δ(Le ) = δ(N (µ, σ))
Where the function y = δ(x) is defined by y = 0 if x < 1 and y = 1 if x ≥ 1. Ge ∈ {0, 1}
and Le ∼ N (µ, σ) (actually µ and σ) are parameters for the stochastic model. On the

14

BRANDILYN STIGLER AND ALAN VELIZ-CUBA

other hand, when we say that we decrease (increase) the value of the inducer me refer to
decreasing (increasing) the value of µ and use the model with this new value.
For example, for Ge = 0, µ = 1.1 and σ = .1 the model is
SM = ¬R ∧ C
SP = M
SB = M
SC = ¬0
SR = ¬A ∧ ¬Al
SA = L ∧ B
SAl = A ∨ L ∨ Ll SL = P ∧ Le
SLe = δ(N (1.1, .1))
SLl = L ∨ Le
As an example let us generate a time series during 3 time units. Let the current state
be s0 = (0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0), the next state, s1 , is given by:
SM = ¬1 ∧ 0 = 0
SP = 0
SB = 0
SC = 1
SR = ¬0 ∧ ¬1 = 0
SA = 0 ∧ 1 = 0
SAl = 0 ∨ 0 ∨ 0 = 0 SL = 1 ∧ 0 = 0
SLe = δ(N (1.1, .1)) = δ(1.1236) = 1
SLl = 0 ∨ 0 = 0
that is, s1 = (0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1). The next state, s2 , is given by:
SM = ¬0 ∧ 1 = 1
SP = 0
SB = 0
SC = ¬0 = 1
SR = ¬0 ∧ ¬0 = 1
SA = 0 ∧ 0 = 0
SAl = 0 ∨ 0 ∨ 0 = 0 SL = 0 ∧ 1 = 0
SLe = δ(N (1.1, .1)) = δ(0.9998) = 0
SLl = 0 ∨ 1 = 1
that is, s2 = (1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0). If we now increase the value of the inducer to
Le ∼ N (1.2, .1), the next state, s3 is given by:
SM = ¬1 ∧ 1 = 0
SP = 1
SB = 1
SC = ¬0 = 1
SR = ¬0 ∧ ¬0 = 1
SA = 0 ∧ 0 = 0
SAl = 0 ∨ 0 ∨ 1 = 1 SL = 0 ∧ 0 = 0
SLe = δ(N (1.2, .1)) = δ(1.1529) = 1
SLl = 0 ∨ 0 = 0
that is, s3 = (0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1).
C.3. Heat Maps. In Figure 2 we started with a population of 100 cells with Le ∼
N (1.25, .1) and plot the population after 10 time units; we then decrease the level of
the inducer to Le ∼ N (0.75, .1) with a step size of .5 (upper panel). We start with a
population of 100 cells with Le ∼ N (0.75, .1) and plot the population after 10 time units;
we then increase the level of the inducer to Le ∼ N (1.25, .1) with a step size of .5 (lower
panel). This figure shows that we can have both stable steady states at the same time;
that is, some cells are induced and other uninduced. This bistability behavior was not
present with model H; hence it was caused by the stochasticity in the uptake of the
inducer. Figure 12 shows the same experiment with σ = .15, σ = .2, σ = .05 and σ = .03.
We can still observe the induced-to-uninduced (upper panel) and uninduced-to-induced
transitions. We also performed experiments using models J and K and obtained similar
results. The bistable behavior of the models seem to be caused by the topological features
of the models such as the sign of the paths from Le and Ge to M and the existence of the
feedback loop involving M .
Figure 13 shows the heat maps for models J and K. We can see that both models
exhibit bistability.
Mathematical Biosciences Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
Department of Mathematics, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA; Virginia Bioinformatics Institute,
Blacksburg, VA

NETWORK TOPOLOGY AS A DRIVER OF BISTABILITY IN THE LAC OPERON

Figure 12. Heat maps of bistability experiments using σ = .15, .2 (top)
and σ = .05, .03 (bottom).

Figure 13. Heat maps of bistability experiments for models J and K.
The parameters are the same as for H.

15

