Noise Characteristics of Molecular Oscillations in Simple Genetic Oscillatory Systems
Byungjoon Min, K.-I. Goh,∗ and I.-M. Kim

arXiv:0909.1411v2 [q-bio.MN] 1 Apr 2010

Department of Physics, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Korea
(Received 29 October 2009)
We study the noise characteristics of stochastic oscillations in protein number dynamics of simple
genetic oscillatory systems. Using the three-component negative feedback transcription regulatory
system called the repressilator as a prototypical example, we quantify the degree of fluctuations in
oscillation periods and amplitudes, as well as the noise propagation along the regulatory cascade in
the stable oscillation regime via dynamic Monte Carlo simulations. For the single protein-species
level, the fluctuation in the oscillation amplitudes is found to be larger than that of the oscillation
periods, the distributions of which are reasonably described by the Weibull distribution and the
Gaussian tail, respectively. Correlations between successive periods and between successive amplitudes, respectively, are measured to assess the noise propagation properties, which are found to
decay faster for the amplitude than for the period. The local fluctuation property is also studied.
PACS numbers: 87.17.Aa, 87.16.Yc, 05.40.-a
Keywords: Stochastic oscillation, Genetic network, Dynamic Monte Carlo, Noise propagation

I.

INTRODUCTION

Molecular events driving cellular processes, such as the
binding/unbinding of transcription factors to DNA sites,
the transcription of mRNAs, the translation of proteins
from the transcribed mRNAs, and their degradations,
are fundamentally stochastic processes governed by probabilistic contacts between these molecules and intracellular diffusion [1]. Therefore understanding the dynamic
fluctuations in the genetic regulatory system arising from
such stochasticity is crucial as they may provide a potential obstacle in maintaining the robustness of the cellular function and the homeostasis of the cellular behavior
directly or indirectly. Study on stochastic fluctuations
of cellular dynamics has been accelerated by the recent
advances in synthetic biology [2, 3] and in experimental
techniques using the fluorescent proteins [4], which has
allowed us to monitor the fluctuating molecular activities at the single-cell level in a controlled and designed
manner. Theoretical framework with which stochastic
dynamics of molecule number in time around the steady
state can be analyzed has been developed and applied for
simple gene expression systems [5]. How the fluctuation
(or “noise”) in one molecular component propagates to
the downstream components in a simple, linear genetic
network has also been studied [6].
Most studies so far, however, concern fluctuations
around the steady state, such as the variance in protein
number around its temporally-averaged constant mean
value. Meanwhile, there are only a limited number of
experimental and theoretical studies concerning out-ofsteady-state activities, such as oscillatory gene expression [7]. Therefore, their characteristics of dynamic fluctuations are largely unknown. To address this, here we
study the characteristics of fluctuations in the non-steady

∗ Electronic

address: kgoh@korea.ac.kr

states, that of oscillatory systems in particular, by using
a model genetic oscillatory system. Undoubtedly, oscillatory system is one of the most important systems that
never reach steady states, which underlie a number of important cellular and physiological processes ranging from
bacterial chemotaxis to mammalian circadian rhythms
[8–10]. A number of synthetic gene circuits with a few
components and relatively simple regulatory mechanisms
have been constructed to realize oscillatory dynamics in
protein numbers in vivo [11–13]. Among these models,
we consider the so-called repressilator (Fig. 1) [11], a simple negative feedback circuit with three genetic components, for its simplicity in the regulatory processes involved, thus making it appropriate for a starting point
in a systematic understanding of the noise properties of
more complicated oscillatory systems.
The repressilator system has been studied theoretically in both determinisitc [14, 15] and stochastic [16, 17]
frameworks. Most of these works were concerned with
the condition and the stability of sustained oscillations
in the circuit with respect to various system parameters,
such as DNA binding mechanisms, reaction rates, and
plasmid numbers. A general conclusion from these studies was that the stability and the coherence of the oscillation depends strongly on the system parameters and that
optimal conditions exist under which the system exhibits
the most stable oscillations. However, even under the
optimal conditions, the oscillation is never perfect, and
“noise” is inevitable. It is, thus, necessary to know the
general characteristics of the noise in oscillatory dynamics in such a stable oscillation regime, which is currently
lacking. Our primary aim in this paper is to fill this gap
by performing a detailed analysis of noisy oscillations in
this system.
Fluctuations in stable oscillatory dynamics can be classified into two major classes: global and local noise. The
former refers to fluctuations in the global variables of oscillatory signals, such as the oscillation periods and amplitudes, resulting from a series of temporally organized

2

FIG. 1: (Color online) Schematic illustration of the stochastic
model of the repressilator assembled into a plasmid containing
three genes, lacI, tetR, and λ-cI, and its elementary reaction
steps. See the text for the details.

molecular events. The latter is mainly due to momentary stochastic stepwise changes in the molecule number, which occur locally around the overall oscillatory
signal. Previous studies on dynamic fluctuations have
mostly been concerned with the latter. For the oscillatory activities, however, the characteristics of global noise
or fluctuation is equally, if not more, important, as both
the robust control of periods and achievement of sufficiently strong and regular strength (amplitudes) of the
signal would be required for an appropriate response of
the cell under fluctuating and noisy condition. Thus, our
focus in this work is toward the characterization of the
global noise and its propagation, with a brief discussion
on the local noise.
This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we describe the repressilator model and the methods of numerical calculations. In Sec. III, we present the main results
and discuss their interpretations and potential biological
meanings. In the final section, we will summarize and
conclude the paper.
II.

a typical value in the physiological condition following
Ref. [11]: The binding rate of repressor proteins to each
operator site is B0 = 1 nM−1 s−1 ; the unbinding rate of
repressor proteins from the singly-occupied and doublyoccupied operator sites are U1 = 224 s−1 and U2 = 9 s−1 ,
respectively; the protein translation rate is Θ = 0.167 s−1
per mRNA molecule; and the half-life (inverse decay rate)
of an mRNA molecule is τm = 120 s. The remaining reaction steps are mRNA transcription and protein degradation. We choose the transcription rate in the free (without inhibitor binding) state to be λ1 = α s−1 , and that in
the inhibited state to be much slower as λ0 = 10−3 × λ1 .
Finally, the half-life of a protein molecule is set to be
τp = τm /β (Fig. 1). In this model setting, the two parameters α and β control the overall stability of the oscillatory behaviors, the characteristics of which have been
studied in terms of deterministic modeling [11, 14, 15].
B.

Stochastic Simulations: Gillespie Algorithm

To fully realize the stochastic trajectories of protein
number dynamics, we perform dynamic Monte-Carlo
simulations of the reaction processes. We use the exact stochastic method first developed by Gillespie in
1970s [18]. This algorithm proceeds as follows: Given
a list of reactions that can occur at the moment {Ri }
with their reaction rates {ri }, the reaction occurring next
is chosen randomly in proportion to the reaction rates.
Then, the chosen reaction, say Rk , occurs, resulting in
changes in the molecule numbers involved in that reaction. At the same time, the time elapses by δ, which is
determined by a random number sampled from the exponential waiting time distribution Pw (δ) = rk exp(−rk δ),
following from the assumption that the reaction process
is a Poisson process with a rate rk . We repeat these procedures for a sufficiently long period of time to obtain a
sample trajectory of the given reaction system.

MODEL AND METHODS
C.
A.

Stability of Stochastic Oscillations

Repressilator Model

The repressilator [11] is a plasmid fed into an E.
coli, consisting of three transcriptional repressor genes
(Fig. 1). The first gene is lacI from E. coli itself, encoding the transcriptional repressor protein LacI. LacI
inhibits the transcription of the second gene tetR from
the tetracycline-resistance transposon Tn10. TetR, the
protein product of tetR, subsequently inhibits the transcription of the third gene cI originating from λ-phage.
Finally, its protein product CI inhibits lacI expression,
completing the tri-component negative feedback loop.
Elementary reaction steps involved in this process
include the binding/unbinding of repressor proteins,
mRNA transcription, translation into their protein product, and degradations of mRNA and protein molecules.
The reaction rate for each of these steps is chosen as

We perform the stochastic simulation for repressilator dynamics by varying the parameters α̃ ≡ α/β and
β, each from 2−10 to 210 . Depending on the parameter
values, the degree of stable oscillations exhibited by the
stochastic dynamics varies [16, 17]. To address that, we
consider the auto-correlation function
Γi (∆) =

hpi (t)pi (t + ∆)i − hpi (t)ihpi (t + ∆)i
, (1)
σpi (t) σpi (t+∆)

as a function of the time lag ∆, where pi (t) is the molecular number of protein i as a function of time, hx(t)i
denotes the time average of x(t) over t, and σx(t) is the
standard deviation thereof. For oscillatory signals, we
have an oscillatory behavior in Γ(∆). For imperfect oscillatory signals, Γ(∆) decays in amplitude with ∆ while
oscillating. The more regular the sustained oscillation,

3

FIG. 2: (Color online) (a) Stability diagram of the stochastic repressilator system. Plotted are the color-coded first-peak values
of the auto-correlation function Γ(∆) of the protein number time series obtained at each grid point. (b) Typical time-courses
1 (solid), 
2 (dashed), and
of the protein LacI number with time for three representative parameter sets indicated in (a): 
3 (dotted). (c) The auto-correlation function of the protein number time series shown in (b), corresponding to the stability

measures 0.83(1) (solid), 0.56(2) (dashed), and 0.14(3) (dotted). Numbers in parentheses denote the uncertainty in the last
digit.

the slower is the decay in the amplitude of Γ(∆) with
time; thus, the first peak in Γ(∆) (∆ > 0) is higher.
Therefore, we use the value of Γ(∆) at the first peak as
a stability measure for stochastic oscillations (Fig. 2).

III.
A.

RESULTS

Stability Diagram of the Stochastic
Repressilator

The so-called stability diagram has been used to display whether the system exhibits sustained oscillations
or not in the system parameter space [11, 15]. For the

800
600
400
200
0

(a)

0

5000

10000 15000

20000 25000 30000

Time t (s)
pLacI(t)

Due to constantly fluctuating protein numbers in time,
it is not trivial to pinpoint exact timings of the start and
the end of each oscillatory cycle under stochastic oscillations. In this work, we devise an ad-hoc procedure to
determine the oscillation periods and amplitudes from
a noisy oscillatory signal by assigning top and bottom
points of the oscillation in the time series. To this end,
we look at protein number dynamics at a coarse-grained
level by introducing a time window, inside which local
variations are integrated out. The width of the time
window is chosen to be order of the longest single reaction time scale, 102 s, which we find suitable for our
parameter choice, by comparing the result with manual
assignments. We identify the maximum and the minimum points within each (non-overlapping) time window
and use their time series to locate the oscillation peaks
and valleys. Oscillation periods are then the time intervals between two successive peak positions, and amplitudes are the difference in protein numbers at the valley
and the following peak position (Fig. 4(a)). Distributions
of oscillation periods and amplitudes determined in this
way are calculated from time series with a typical length
107 s.

pLacI(t)

Finding Oscillation Periods and Amplitudes

800
600
400
200
0

(b)

0

5000

10000 15000 20000 25000 30000

Time t (s)
1

Γ(∆)

D.

(c)

0
-1

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

∆ (s)

FIG. 3: (Color online) Noise-induced sustained oscillations.
(a) Deterministic protein number dynamics with the parameter set (α̃ = 21 , β = 26 ) shows damped oscillations which
decay to zero amplitude in the long-time limit according to
the linear stability analysis. (b) Stochastic protein number
dynamics with the same parameter set as in (a) shows the existence of noise-induced sustained oscillations in that regime.
(c) The auto-correlation function of the time series shown in
(b), leading to the stability measure 0.75.

4

FIG. 4: (Color online) (a) Portion of the sample trajectory of the LacI protein number with time for (α, β) = (1/2, 1/4).
(b) Distributions of the oscillation periods PT (T ) and (c) that of the oscillation amplitudes PA (A) in the protein number
oscillations obtained from the full simulation with the same parameter set in (a). The horizontal bin sizes are (b) 100 s and
(c) 100 molecules. The inset of (b) shows PT (T ) in semi-logarithmic scale, indicating an initial exponential increase of PT (T ).
The solid curve in (c) is a fit to the Weibull distribution, Eq. (3).

stochastic dynamics, one cannot set a strict borderline
between the oscillating and the non-oscillating states due
to the noisy dynamics. However, it is meaningful to
ask if the overall stability characteristics of the oscillatory dynamics is affected by the stochasticity. In general, stochasticity elevates the degree of nonlinearity in
the dynamics, thereby providing an additional potential
source of instability leading to oscillatory behaviors [19].
In other cases, noise can quench the system’s dynamics,
thereby destroying the oscillatory activity [20].
Figure 2(a) shows the stability diagram corresponding to stochastic oscillation of the repressilator, plotting
the stability measure, the first peak value of Γ(∆), in
(α̃, β) space (Figs. 2(b,c)). There is a clear dark region
near the center of the stability diagram with decreasing
stability away from the center. This central region corresponds to the oscillation parameter region obtained in
the deterministic modeling [11, 15]. There is, however,
an additional dark region near (α̃ ≈ 21 , β ≈ 26 ) with as
high stability measure as the central one, suggesting the
existence of sustained oscillations due to the fluctuationdriven instability (Fig. 3), an example of the so-called
deviant effects [21]. In this additional region, which is on
the border of the sustained oscillation regime in the deterministic dynamics, large amplitudal fluctuations are
expected. This additional oscillatory region, however,
although theoretically intriguing, may not be physiologically relevant because it corresponds to extremely unstable proteins with very short half-lives. In typical cells,
the protein half-life is known to be typically much longer
than that of mRNA, thus excluding large values of β.

In the following, we fix the parameters to be α = 1/2
and β = 1/4 (indicated by × in Fig. 2(a)), well inside the
sustained oscillation region with the stability measure of
0.63, to study the fluctuation properties of the stochastic
oscillations in the system. These parameter values are
chosen to be close to those used specifically in Ref. [11],
as they reproduce well the in-vivo repressilator dynamics. We also verified that in this regime the stochastic
simulation reproduces well the on-average characteristics
of the deterministic dynamics such as the mean period
and the mean amplitude, allowing us to focus exclusively
on the additional role of stochasticity.
B. Single Protein-Species Level Fluctuation:
Distribution of Oscillation Periods and Amplitudes

Due to the topological symmetry of the repressilator
system and our choice of identical reaction parameters
for all three components, the statistical properties of the
protein number dynamics of the three genes are identical.
Thus, we focus on the dynamics of the first gene product,
LacI. A portion of the sample trajectory of the LacI time
series is shown in Fig. 4(a). The distribution of oscillation
periods PT (T ) and that of amplitudes PA (A) obtained
from the full simulation are shown in Figs. 4(b,c). The
LacI protein number oscillates in time with a mean period
µT = 6612 s and a standard deviation σT = 747. Thus,
the coefficient of variation (CV) is
CV (T ) ≡

σT
= 0.11.
µT

(2)

5

FIG. 5: (Color online) Noise propagation. (a) Sample time series of the protein number dynamics illustrating the correlation
measurements. (b-g) Correlation between the oscillation periods (b-d) and amplitudes (e-g) along the regulatory cascade. Plot
of the consecutive TCI vs. TLacI (b) and TT etR vs. TLacI (c); that of two consecutive TLacI ’s (d). Same plots are drawn for the
amplitude correlation in (e-g). The Pearson correlation coefficients measured from the plots are r = 0.76 (b), 0.60 (c), 0.31 (d),
0.59 (e), 0.29 (f), and 0.15 (g), respectively. (h, i) Plots of the correlation coefficients between oscillation periods (triangles)
and between amplitudes (circles) as functions of the regulatory step number on a (h) linear scale and on a (i) semi-logarithmic
scale.

Looking closer, PT (T ) decays like a Gaussian for large T
while the distribution is skewed leftward and increases as
∝ eT /T0 for small T (inset of Fig. 4(b)).
For the amplitude, the fluctuation is found to be
stronger, as can readily be seen from the sample time
series in Fig. 4(a). The mean amplitude is µA = 3659
molecules, and the standard deviation is σA = 1588, corresponding to a CV of CV (A) = 0.43, almost fourfold
larger than the periods. This higher degree of amplitude
fluctuation suggests the necessity for regulatory mechanisms controlling the oscillation amplitude to build a
more robust cellular oscillator. The distribution of oscillation amplitudes PA (A) is found to be reasonably described by the Weibull distribution
PA (A) =

k
λ

 k−1
k
A
e−(A/λ) ,
λ

(3)

with parameters k ≈ 2.33 and λ ≈ 4118 (Fig. 4(c)). The
Weibull distribution appears in a wide range of problems,
from the extreme statistics [22] to the return-interval
distributions in natural and social phenomena [23] and
fractures in disordered media [24], which may provide

clues for the mechanisms underlying the amplitude fluctuations.

C.

Noise Propagation

Noise propagation refers to how the fluctuations of upstream reaction processes affect the fluctuation of the
downstream processes, such as the effect of an mRNA
number fluctuation on the corresponding protein number
fluctuation [5] or that of a transcription factor number
fluctuation on its regulated protein number fluctuation
[6]. Most studies on noise propagation so far have been
concerned with a simple linear cascade [6] or a simple
autoregulated feedback structure [25].
Here, we are interested in how the global noise, such as
the oscillation period and amplitude fluctuations, propagates down the regulatory cascade. To this end, we
plot in Fig. 5 successive oscillation periods and amplitudes for the first three steps. For immediately following
periods, the periods are well correlated (Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.76; Fig. 5(b)). The correlation de-

6
creases monotonically (Figs. 5(c,d)), but not purely exponentially (Figs. 5(h,i)), leading to a correlation between
two consecutive periods of the same protein number as
high as r = 0.31. This means that the period fluctuation of a protein component does propagate down the
regulatory cascade, and that the effect is strong enough
not to be fully attenuated, not even after a complete
feedback cycle. Thus, the oscillation dynamics of the repressilator exhibits a correlated pattern period-wise, even
though the underlying reaction processes are assumed to
be purely Poissonian.
Meanwhile, the oscillation amplitude correlations
(Figs. 5(e-g)) are found to decay purely exponentially with the regulatory step number n as r(n) ≈
exp(−n/n∗ ), with the characteristic step n∗ ≈ 1.8, a
much faster decay than that of the oscillation periods
(Figs. 5(h,i)). This result implies that the oscillation amplitudes not only fluctuate more strongly individually but
also are less tightly controlled along the system. Amplitude control in a stochastic oscillation system would be
a more serious issue for robust functioning in this respect [26].

D.

regime, the global oscillatory dynamics of the repressilator is primarily brought about by a system-level longrange coordination of the reaction processes, with only a
weak perturbation due to stochasticity.

Local Fluctuations

Around the overall oscillatory change, there are constant ups and downs in the protein number, resulting
from the inherently stochastic reactions (inset of Fig. 6).
This part of the fluctuation, which we call the local noise,
can also affect the system’s function as it introduces
many local maxima and minima within a global oscillation period and provides a source of error in sensing
the system’s state. The degree of local noise strongly
depends on the individual reaction rates [16, 17] and, in
general, anti-correlates with the stability measure. Here,
we are again interested in the characteristics of local noise
in the stable oscillation regime.
The general characteristics of the noise in protein number dynamics are encoded in its spectral density S(f ), the
squared magnitude of its (complex) Fourier component
with frequency f . In particular, the high-frequency behavior of S(f ) tells us about the local noise properties.
In Fig. 6, we show the spectral density of the LacI protein number. There we can see a clear peak located at
f1 ≈ 1.5 × 10−4 Hz corresponding to the primary oscillation frequency, in good agreement with the mean
oscillation period in Fig. 4(b). This prominent peak is
accompanied by additional peaks at integer multiples of
f1 with decreasing height values. The frequency region
f & 10−3 Hz is dominated by the local noise, in which
S(f ) decreases algebraically with f as
S(f ) ∼ f −2 ,

FIG. 6: (Color online) Spectral density of the LacI protein
number dynamics. The peak at f1 ≈ 1.5 × 10−4 Hz is in good
correspondence with the mean oscillation period. The data
for f > 10−3 are binned logarithmically for visual clarity.
The slope of the dotted straight line is −2, drawn for the eye.
(Inset) Zoom-up of the protein number trajectory highlighting
the local fluctuation.

(4)

implying that the protein number locally performs an
uncorrelated random walk around the overall oscillatory
trajectory. This implies that in the stable oscillation

IV.

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

In this paper, we have studied the noise characteristics of stochastic (noisy) oscillations in the repressilator
system for stable oscillation regime. Distinguishing the
global and the local noises, we first found that even in
this relatively loosely regulated system, the oscillation
period is well controlled, fluctuating moderately as approximately a Gaussian with a CV value of 0.11, whereas
the amplitudes fluctuate much strongly, with a Weibull
distribution and a CV value of 0.43. Likewise, the period
fluctuation of a protein species is attenuated more slowly
down the regulatory cascade, leading to a correlated behavior in adjacent oscillation periods, a short-term collective memory, within the feedback cycle. The amplitude
fluctuation, however, propagates much more weakly, with
a characteristic step number of 1.8, less than the feedback cycle length. Finally, the local fluctuations entail an
inverse-square spectral density at high frequencies, meaning that the protein number trajectory performs locally
an uncorrelated random walk around the global oscillatory dynamics. Furthermore, we have checked that the
overall noise characteristics do not change qualitatively
when we run the repressilator for different parameter sets
with varying degree of stability, or we consider other simple oscillator circuits based on negative feedback, such as
the 3-component cyclic circuit with two activators and
one repressor, supporting the generality of the results.
The repressilator is built with one of the simplest negative feedback structures capable of sustained oscillations.

7
Oscillatory circuits functioning in real biological systems
exhibit much more complex structures with multiple regulatory components, which might have evolved to ensure
robust control and fine-tuning of the oscillatory activities. In this respect, we hope that the current work
can be extended to systematic structural and dynamic
studies towards the design principles of biological oscillatory networks including the stochastic effects [27, 28].
Indeed, our result that the oscillation amplitude fluctuates strongly even in the most stable oscillatory regime
in the simple circuit may imply the intrinsic tunability of
the simple oscillatory circuit [29] on the one hand, but at
the same time, it demands an improved oscillatory network design for robust and resilient oscillatory function.
Areas of future research to this end would include, e.g.,
investigating the role of various regulatory mechanisms
besides simple transcription-factor binding for noise con-

trol, especially for the oscillation amplitude [26], and the
effect of a molecular network on the stochastic dynamics [15, 17, 30, 31]. Further insights into the stochastic
dynamics of the biological oscillatory system could be
gained by studies of more complex synthetic or natural
circuits [12, 13] and of the theory of competition-based
ecological systems [32, 33].

[1] For a recent review, see for example: A. Raj and A.
van Oudenaarden, Cell 135, 216 (2008), and references
therein.
[2] D. Sprinzak and M. B. Elowitz, Nature (London) 438,
443 (2005).
[3] D. Endy, Nature (London) 438, 449 (2005).
[4] J. C. W. Locke and M. B. Elowitz, Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
7, 383 (2009).
[5] J. Paulsson, Nature (London) 427, 415 (2004); Phys. Life
Rev. 2, 157 (2005).
[6] J. M. Pedraza and A. van Oudenaarden, Science 307,
1965 (2005).
[7] J. R. Chabot, J. M. Pedraza, P. Luitel, and A. van Oudenaarden, Nature (London) 450, 1249 (2007).
[8] A. Goldbeter, Biochemical Oscillations and Cellular
Rhythms (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,
1997).
[9] J. S. Lee, B. Kahng, and E. Oh, J. Korean Phys. Soc.
52, 193 (2008).
[10] C. Modchang, W. Triampo, P. Kanthang, U. Junthorn,
S. Unai, W. Ngamsaad, N. Nuttavut, D. Triampo, and
Y. Lenbury, J. Korean Phys. Soc. 53, 851 (2008).
[11] M. B. Elowitz and S. Leibler, Nature (London) 403, 335
(2000).
[12] J. Stricker, S. Cookson, M. R. Bennett, W. H. Mather,
L. S. Tsimring, and J. Hasty, Nature (London) 456, 516
(2008).
[13] M. Tigges, T. T. Marquez-Lago, J. Stelling, and M.
Fussenegger, Nature (London) 457, 309 (2009).
[14] H. El Sammad, D. del Vecchio and M. Khammash, Proc.
Am. Control Conf. 6, 4405 (2005).
[15] K.-I. Goh, B. Kahng, and K.-H. Cho, Biophys. J. 94,
4270 (2008).
[16] M. Yoda, T. Ushikubo, W. Inoue, and M. Sasai, J. Chem.
Phys. 126, 115101 (2007).

[17] A. Loinger and O. Biham, Phys. Rev. E 76, 051917
(2007).
[18] D. T. Gillespie, J. Phys. Chem. 81, 2340 (1977).
[19] W. Horsthemke and R. Lefever, Noise-Induced Transitions (Springer, Heidelberg, 1983).
[20] W. Lim and S.-Y. Kim, J. Korean Phys. Soc. 52, 1913
(2008).
[21] M. S. Samoilov and A. Arkin, Nat. Biotechnol. 24, 1235
(2006).
[22] E. J. Gumbel, Statistics of Extremes (Columbia University Press, New York, 1958).
[23] M. S. Santhanam and H. Kantz, Phys. Rev. E 78, 051113
(2008).
[24] B. Kahng, G. G. Batrouni, S. Redner, L. de Arcangelis,
and H. J. Herrmann, Phys. Rev. B 37, 7625 (1988).
[25] Y. Dublanche, K. Michalodimitrakia, N. Kümmerer, M.
Foglierini, and L. Serrano, Mol. Syst. Biol. 2, 41 (2006).
[26] T. Y.-C. Tsai, Y. S. Choi, W. Ma, J. R. Pomerening, C.
Tang, and J. E. Ferrell Jr., Science 321, 126 (2008).
[27] B. Novak and J. J. Tyson, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 9,
981 (2008).
[28] T. Çağatay, M. Turcotte, M. B. Elowitz, J. GarciaOjalvo, and G. M. Süel, Cell 139, 512 (2009).
[29] K. Sato, Y. Ito, T. Yomo, and K. Kaneko, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 14086 (2003).
[30] J. M. Vilar, H. Y. Kueh, N. Barkai, and S. Leibler, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 5988 (2002).
[31] C.-M. Ghim and E. Almaas, BMC Syst. Biol. 2, 94
(2008); Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 028101 (2009).
[32] P.-J. Kim, T.-W. Ko, H. Jeong, K. J. Lee, and S. K. Han,
Phys. Rev. E 76, 065201 (2007).
[33] T. Reichenbach, M. Mobilia, and E. Frey, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 99, 238105 (2007).

Acknowledgments

We thank the anonymous reviewer for useful comments. This work is supported by a grant from the
Korean Government (MEST) through KRF (KRF-2007331-C00111). B.M. acknowledges the support from the
Seoul Scholarship Foundation.

