arXiv:1003.5992v2 [physics.bio-ph] 1 Apr 2010

The dynamics of the HIV infection: a time-delay
differential equation approach
Flora Souza Bacelara,b and Roberto F. S. Andradea
a

Instituto de Fı́sica, Universidade Federal da Bahia,
40210-340 Salvador, Bahia, Brazil.
b

Instituto de Fisica Interdisciplinar y Sistemas Complejos (CSIC-UIB).
Campus Universitat Illes Balears, E-07122 Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
E-mail: florabacelar@ifisc.uib-csic.es and randrade@ufba.br

Rita M. Zorzenon dos Santos
Departamento de Fı́sica
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco
CEP 50670-901, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil
E-mail: zorzenon@df.ufpe.br
Abstract.
In this work we introduce a differential equation model with time-delay that
describes the three-stage dynamics and the two time scales observed in HIV infection.
Assuming that the virus has high mutation and rapid reproduction rates that stress
the immune system throughout the successive activation of new responses to new
undetectable strains, the delay term describes the time interval necessary to mount
new specific immune responses. This single term increases the number of possible
solutions and changes the phase space dynamics if compared to the model without
time delay. We observe very slow transits near the unstable fixed point, corresponding
to a healthy state, and long time decay to the stable fixed point that corresponds to the
infected state. In contrast to the results obtained for models using regular ODE, which
only allow for partial descriptions of the course of the infection, our model describes
the entire course of infection observed in infected patients: the primary infection, the
latency period and the onset of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). The
model also describes other scenarios, such as the very fast progression to the disease
and the less common outcome in which, although the patient is exposed to HIV, he/she
does not develop the disease.

PACS numbers: 02.30.Ks,02.30.Hq,87.18.Hf,87.19.Xx

Keywords: Time delay, HIV, Virus strain

The dynamics of the HIV infection: a time-delay differential equation approach

2

1. Introduction
After almost three decades of research attempting to understand the dynamics of HIV
infection, many aspects of its underlying mechanisms remain unrevealed. Understanding
the three-stages dynamics and two time scales has also challenged the scientific
community over the past decades. Despite the intrinsic differences between individuals,
the evolution of HIV infection follows a common pattern [1] that starts with the primary
infection during the first weeks after contamination and is characterized by an extensive
dissemination of the infection (large virus count), followed by a pronounced decline
in the virus count caused by the development of the virus-specific immune response.
Notwithstanding the decrease in the virus load, the system does not recover completely
from the infection after the primary infection and very low concentrations of virus
remain in the organism. This second stage, called the latency period, is asymptomatic
and varies from patient to patient. The time-scale of the clinical latency period ranges
from months to several years, and if untreated, is characterized by a progressive decrease
in the number of HIV target cells, the T CD4+ cells. The third phase corresponds to
the onset of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) defined as the time when the
T cell counts reaches the order of 20 − 30% of the concentration of the T CD4+ cells
in healthy individuals [2].Without any treatment, the patient dies from opportunistic
diseases.
Among the efforts to understand the dynamics of the disease, many mathematical
models have been proposed to describe either specific aspects of the HIV dynamics or
the overall behavior of the evolution of the infection. The attempts of the first two
decades are reviewed in details in [3, 4] and references therein, but recent contributions
still indicate an active interest in the theme [5–7]. To date, most of the proposed models
have been based on differential equations (ODE and PDE) ( see for exemple [3,4,8–12]),
although discrete models have also been considered [13–16]. While most of the models
proposed until 2001 were very successful in describing specific aspects of the dynamics or
the primary infection or the latency period, none was able to describe the entire course of
the infection employing the same set of parameters. The first model that described the
three-stage dynamics and two time scale as observed in infected patients was a cellular
automaton model put forward to describe the dissemination of infection in the target T
cells located in the lymph nodes [15]. Recently, Stilianakis and Schenzle [17] proposed an
ODE approach to reproduce the entire course of HIV infection. The model describes the
targeted infection of T CD4+ cells generating new variants of HIV that compete between
themselves with a capacity of increased reproducibility within the selected variants that
in turn leads to the immune system’s loss of control over the infection. Using seven
non-linear ODE’ s and 22 parameters, the results presented by the authors reproduce
the entire course of the infection on the time scale of days, corresponding to the very fast
progression of the disease. The authors claim that although the results presented do not

The dynamics of the HIV infection: a time-delay differential equation approach

3

reproduce the typical course, they were able to reproduce (not revealed in the paper)
the whole spectrum of courses observed in infected patients by varying the parameters.
In a further discussion, they mention that due to complications in the dynamics of the
disease, the model loses its applicability to the third phase of the infection. According
to the results and discussions presented throughtout the paper the model seems to
reproduce the three stages only for fast progressions of the disease (one time scale) and
fails to reproduce the two time scales (days and years) observed in infected patients to
describe the third phase.
Here we seek to describe the entire course of the HIV infection using a unique
set of parameters and a non-linear differential equation approach that includes timedelayed terms. Our model follows the same assumptions as the cellular automata
model introduced by Zorzenon dos Santos and Coutinho [15]: HIV’s high mutation
and rapid replication rates and the ability of the immune system to mount a new
regular immune response to any non-identified HIV resulting from the virus proliferation
process. However, since a time interval (τ ) is necessary for the immune system to mount
any specific response developing from the necessary signaling among the cells, the nonidentified strain remaining during this time interval is able to disseminate the infection
throughout the target cells. In the follow up, these newly infected cells would be able
to produce new strains (through mutations) that may not be recognized by the immune
system (IS) therefore, disseminating the infection during the same period of time.
The addition of this single delay term changes the dynamics of the model in the
phase space, generating trajectories that depend on its non-local properties. These
properties change the transit of the trajectories near the fixed points allowing for the
description of the entire course of the HIV with the two time scale and three-stage
dynamics. Time -delay effects are present in different (molecular, cellular or organ)
mechanisms of various biological systems [18] and recently, other models with time
delay terms have been introduced to describe HIV infection. However, in these models,
the time delay either represents a finite incubation time before the release of new viruses
by infected T CD4+ cells [19, 20] or describes the delayed effects of the anti-retroviral
drugs on the plasma viremia that leads to the viremia decay [7, 11, 21, 22]. Although
these ODE models have time delay terms, they do not reproduce the two time scales
and three-stage dynamics of the HIV infection as in the model we introduce.
2. The model
In order to facilitate the understanding of the model introduced herein, let us briefly
summarize the main assumptions of the CA model [15]. The CA model describes the
local interaction among target cells (T cells and macrophages) and the virus in the
lymph nodes, taking into account the HIV’s high mutation and rapid reproduction
rates, as well as the fact that the immune system responds regularly to HIV as to any
other virus. The target cells can be found in four states: healthy (h), infected (A and
B) and dead (d) (or empty sites). Healthy cells are the target cells that may become

The dynamics of the HIV infection: a time-delay differential equation approach

4

infected. Infected-A corresponds to the stage in which the infected cell disseminates the
infection during τ time steps (the period of time necessary to mount the specific immune
response) and infected-B corresponds to the last state of the infection in which the cells
are recognized and killed in the next time step. The dynamics of the interaction among
automata is defined by four rules: (1) h cells become infected if at least one nearest
neighbor is infected- A. Since it is considered that each new infected- A that enters
the system carries a new strain of virus, (2) asserts that infected -A cells spread the
infection into its vicinity during τ time steps, and afterwards the infected-A cell turns
to a less infective-B stage. Rule (3) describes the turnover of B cells into d cells (or
empty sites) in the next time step. The regular blood flow in the system allows for the
natural replenishment of the target cells in the lymph nodes, therefore (4) replaces d
cells by h with probability prepl or by infected-A cells with probability prepl ∗ pinf ec ,
since we also consider that the empty sites may be occupied by infected cells coming
from other lymphatic compartments. In the CA model, the fast dynamics of the primary
infection corresponds to a rapid increase in the number of infected cells through the cycle
h→A→B→d→h. The slow dynamics of the latency period is related to the formation
of the spatial structures of infected cells. As shown in [15], these growing structures
slowly compromise more and more cells, segregating and trapping the healthy ones and
leading to a reduction in T CD4+ cell counts. These structures are associated with
syncytia (aggregation of infected cells) formation, observed in HIV cultures and in the
lymph nodes of HIV patients.
Our model describes the time evolution of T CD4+ cell density in healthy, infected
and dead states using a set of ordinary differential equations. As in the CA model,
we have differentiated the stages A and B in the population of infected cells, but in
turn there are also two differentiated two stages in the population of healthy cells : h1
corresponding to the healthy cells present in the tissue at the beginning of the HIV
infection, and h2 corresponding to the population of new cells that enter the system
when the infection has already set in. If instead we consider only one type of healthy
cells we will obtain the same qualitative results, but shorter latency periods, as discussed
bellow. The sum of all the variables (populations) remains constant over time and the
time delay terms would be included in the equations for infected-A and -B cells to
describe the time necessary for the IS to convert any new A cell into a type B cell.
Therefore, the model is described by the following set of differential equations:
ḣ1 = − k5 h1 (t) Ap − k6 h1 B n ,
ḣ2 = k3 d − k5 h2 Aq − k6 h2 B n ,
Ȧ = − k1 A (t − τ ) + k4 d + k5 (h1 Ap + h2 Aq ) + k6 (h1 + h2 )B n ,
Ḃ = k1 A (t − τ ) − k2 B (t) ,
d˙ = − k3 d (t) − k4 d (t) + k2 B (t) .

(1)

where p and q represent the number of A neighbors required to convert healthy (h1
or h2 ) cells into newly infected-A cells; n is the number of B neighbors necessary to

The dynamics of the HIV infection: a time-delay differential equation approach

5

infect healthy cells (h1 or h2 ). As in [15], we consider p = 1, n = 4 and τ = 4. The h2
population has no correspondent in the CA model but is expected to be more resistant
to HIV, requiring a larger number q (when compared to p) of A neighbors to become
infected. This assumption is based on the fact that once the virus is detected and the
specific immune response is developed the system would respond faster to newly infected
cells, therefore more infected cells would be necessary to infected a healthy one, once
the infection has set in. The rate constants describe the different transitions between
states. Two of them can be directly related to CA parameters: k3 being the rate at
which new A-cells are produced is related to prepl mentioned above, and k4 corresponds
to the rate at which newly infected cells enter the system( prepl ∗ pinf ec ). The remaining
rate constants, k1 , k2 , k5 and k6 describe, respectively, the transitions from states A to
the B, B to d, and h1 and h2 to A.
As in the CA model [15], values were chosen for some rate constants and parameters
based on certain biological data : (i) the replenishment ability of the system k3 O(1) ;
(ii) a very low but finite probability (1 in 10000 cells of the peripheral blood harbor the
viral DNA) that some of the newly infected cells entering the system would come from
other compartments k4 << 1; and (iii) since the responses to different virus can vary
from a few days to 8 weeks, as in the CA model, we adopted τ = 4.
The values of ki are not freely chosen, but obey certain constraints that result from
considering : i) the coordinates of the fixed points (F P = (h1 , h2 , A, B, d) representing
densities that should remain in the [0, 1] interval; (ii) at the infected state the densities
would respect the inequalities: inf ected − A > inf ected − B > 0 and d < inf ected − B
; and (iii)prepl > pinf otherwise would replace the empty sites only by infected-A cells.
Therefore, k2 > k1 , k5 > k1 , k3 + k4 > k2 , k3 > k4 .
3. Results
The system of equations (1) admits three FP solutions. Two, F P0 = (1, 0, 0, 0, 0) and
Fd
P0 = (0, 1, 0, 0, 0), represent the healthy states and a third that represents the infected
state F P1 = (0, h2 , A, B, d). To find its coordinates, it is necessary to solve the following
equation for B :
n

RB + SB

n−1

"

k2
+T
k1

#q−1

"

k2
B +U
k1
q

#q−1

B

q−1

+ V = 0.

(2)

Equation (2) is obtained by making the left-hand sides from the equations of system
(1) equal zero, as well as considering the condition of normalization. Once equation
(2) has been obtained, it is then possible to describe the behavior of the infected Bcells, in which coefficients R, S, T, U and V are functions of the parameters of the
model. Depending on the value of q ( integer or not), (2) becomes either a polynomial
or a transcendental equation. However, for integer q ∈ [0, 4], the resulting analytical
expression for B is very complex and has no practical application to the analysis of F P1 .
Therefore, (2)is always solved by numerical methods.

The dynamics of the HIV infection: a time-delay differential equation approach

6

0.9
0.6
0.3
0.0
-0.3
-0.6
-0.9
-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Figure 1. Location of some eigenvalues in the (α, β) plane, corresponding to the
intersections of the nullclines u(α, β) = 0 (solid) and v(α, β) = 0 (dotted). The main
features are: u ≡ 0 when β = 0; there are two real eigenvalues for α = 0 (λ0 ), and
α < 0 (λ4 );there is a pair of complex eigenvalues (λ2,3 ) close to the origin; and an
absence of eigenvalues with α > 0.

F P0 and Fd
P0 are both unstable. F P0 is reached only for initial condition with
h1 =1, while few heteroclinic orbits converge to Fd
P0 along the direction of its attractive
manifold. To analyze the stability of the F P1 , we follow the standard procedure using
the equation for the eigenvalues of the Jacobean matrix J, M(λ)=det(J − λI)=0. For
τ >0, M(λ)=0 becomes a transcendental equation since it contains terms that depend on
e−λτ . Irrespective of the value of τ , we always obtain an identically vanishing eigenvalue
(λ0 ), related to the conservation of the number of cells.
When τ =0 there is no delay in mounting the specific immune response
and its spectral equation is polynomial.
For example, if we choose k1 =0.16,
−5
k2 =0.2, k3 =0.68, k4 =2.5 × 10 , k5 =0.6, k6 =0.1, n=4, p=q=1, we obtain F P1 =(0,
0.266,0.361,0.289,0.085), while the spectrum is given by (λ0 , λ1 , λ2,3 , λ4 )=(0,-0.705,0.196±0.215i,-0.217). Since h1 = 0, λ4 describes only the decay of h1 to 0; λ1 indicates
a fast decay to a two-dimensional space in which the slow decay towards F P1 , actually
described by λ2,3 , takes place. In other words, as observed in the CA model [23] the
absence of time delay in mounting the specific response would favor the spread of the
infection and shorten the latency period. If instead of unity we adopt q = 1.13, the
decaying dynamics slow down as Re(λ2,3 ) = −0.169, i. e., the effect of shortening the
latency period can be reduced if we increase the resistance of the new incoming healthy
cells.
For τ > 0, the complex eigenvalues are obtained employing the Newton-Raphson
(NR) procedure, using the notation λ = α + iβ where α = Re(λ) and β = Im(λ),
M(λ) = u(α, β)+iv(α, β). The eigenvalues correspond to the points where the nullclines
of u(α, β) = 0 and v(α, β) = 0 intersect in the (α, β) plane, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Graphs are very helpful for finding roots of M(λ) = 0, since they indicate the initial

The dynamics of the HIV infection: a time-delay differential equation approach

7

values for the NR procedure. The overall picture remains essentially the same if we
enlarge the region of the (α, β) plane in which the nullclines are drawn. Note that the
nullclines cross each other only in the negative α region and F P1 remains stable. The
several nullcline branches, when α < 0, indicates that both u and v oscillate and that
there are an infinite number of solutions to M(λ) = 0. The influence of τ on the decay
rate influences only the eigenvalues with the smallest real part, i.e., λ2,3 . The stability
analysis shows that, when τ is increased from 0 to 4, the decay time to F P1 is amplified
by factor 7 for q = 1.13, and factor 5.4 for q = 1.0. All results of the stability analysis
for τ = 0 are checked by measuring the slope of the amplitude of the decaying solution
to F P1 that coincides with Re(λ2,3 ).
If we vary the parameters respecting the conditions discussed at the beginning of
this section, we note that the coordinates of FP1 change in a continuous manner and
F P1 remains a stable fixed point. Furthermore, by fixing the values of the rate constants,
we find that the attracting properties of F P1 weaken as q and τ increase. These two
parameters of the model contribute to reducing the velocity at which the trajectories
decay. In other words according to this model the duration of the latency period is
determined by the slow dynamics on the trajectories close to the stable fixed point,
which in turn is controlled by parameters q and τ . By increasing the value of q we require
a larger number of infected-A cells in order to infect healthy cells h2 , indicating that an
increase in the resistance of the incoming target cells also increases the latency period.
On the other hand, greater the τ , the greater the latency period or the individual’ s
survival lifetime. Nevertheless, these features are not sufficient in themselves to account
by themselves for the observed increase in the time-scale associated with the latency
phase. It also depends on the presence of heteroclinic orbits generated by the time delay
term, uncovered by numerically integrating the set of equations (1) using a fourth order
Runge-Kutta method adapted to the time-delay approach.
As in the case of the FP analysis, a detailed investigation of all possible trajectories
of the system (1) for large regions of parameter space has been carried out. For the sake
of clarity, here we report only the results that illustrate the typical patterns obtained in
different regions of the parameter space. Since F P0 is unstable, almost all trajectories
starting in its neighborhood are pushed away. When τ = 0 the system evolves rapidly
to the infected state (F P1 ) and the onset of AIDS occurs a few weeks after the infection.
This would correspond to cases where the disease progresses rapidly , which in general
is observed in HIV patients who have been contaminated under immune-depression
conditions, caused by malnutrition or other diseases that compromise T CD4+ cells
(e.g. tuberculosis). If we increase the value of τ from 0 to 4, the trajectory is deviated
from F P1 towards the neighborhood of Fd
P0 , where the slow transit leads to the a steady
increase of latency period.
Figure 2(a) summarizes the main results obtained for this model: the appropriate
description of the three-stage dynamics observed in infected individuals who have not
been submitted to drug therapies. In contrast to other ODE models, here, using a
unique set of parameters, we were able to reproduce the primary infection and a large

The dynamics of the HIV infection: a time-delay differential equation approach

8

1.0

Cell densities

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

(a)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Years

1.0

FP1

0.8

0.4
0.2

FP0, FP0

0.004

0.0

(b)

FP0,FP0

0.008

A+B

A+B

0.6

0.000

0.0

0.992

0.996

h1 + h2

0.2

1.000

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

h1 + h2

Figure 2. (a) Time evolution of HIV infection showing three distinct phases.
Squares, circles and triangles represent h1 + h2 , A + B and d cells, respectively. The
parameter values and initial conditions adopted are: k1 =0.163, k2 =0.228, k3 =0.65,
k4 =3.25×10−5, k5 =0.606, k6 =0.02, n=4, p=1, q=1.13, h1 =0.95, A=0.05. (b) The
same orbit in a plane projection of phase space. Diamond indicates the initial
point. Inset: details of the first transit close to Fd
P0 . The trajectory first lies in
the attracting manifold, but later it is pushed away from Fd
P0 along the repulsive
manifold. Heteroclinic orbits occur if Fd
P0 is reached.

The dynamics of the HIV infection: a time-delay differential equation approach

9

range of latency periods (plateau in Figure 2a) that vary from weeks to years. Moreover,
a plateau is obtained on the T cell counts when the trajectory on the phase space goes
towards the region of very slow dynamics, close to Fd
P0 (see Figure 2b and inset). As
previously mentioned, the deviation of the trajectory in the phase space to the slow
transit region largely depends on the values of q and τ . Since an increase of these
parameters leads to a decrease in Re(λ2,3 ) , the return of the phase space trajectory
towards F P1 proceeds at a much slower pace, thus increasing the length of the latency
period.
With regard to the estimates of the latency period, we observe that at the end of
the plateau, the healthy T CD4+ cell counts oscillates for some time until it stabilizes
below the threshold associated to the onset of AIDS. Since the latency period is defined
as the time between the end of the primary infection and the onset of AIDS, we may
make a second estimate of the latency period that will be larger than that roughly
estimated from the plateau. The parameter values used in Figure 2 were chosen so as
to maximize the length of the latency phase. However, the same qualitative pattern,
with a well-defined latency period, is observed for a finite region of the parameter space.
Usually, the three-phase pattern remains stable to changes ∼ 1−2% in parameter values
of the reported sets. Besides this, if no distinction is made between h1 and h2 , (p = q),
similar patterns are obtained, albeit with a smaller plateau. For other regions of the
space parameter, the decay of the trajectory to F P1 may proceed with less defined slow
transits close to Fd
P0 and therefore lose the clearly defined latency period.
Different patterns other than those of the three-stage dynamics may be obtained for
other parameter values not considered here. Without going into detailed description, a
brief comment follows on the most important patterns obtained by changing the values
of q and τ . For low values of q, the plateau is reduced, however, if it is increased beyond
1.18, we observe that all trajectories starting in a neighborhood of F P0 converge to
Fd
P0 . These heteroclinic trajectories, linking two unstable FPs that are not related to
the infected state, describe the situation well documented in the literature, where the
patient has contact with the virus but does not develop the disease. Moreover, for
q = 1.13 and τ = 3, the latency phase is still short, while, for τ = 5, a sustained
oscillation pattern is found due to the existence of stable limit cycles around a locally
stable F P1 . In such a case, two attracting stable sets are present. In other words for
τ > 4.5 the monotonic behavior disappears.
Therefore, it is possible ’grosso modo’ , to group the different trajectories into the
following groups: i) rapid decay to F P1 ; ii) decay to F P1 through a latency phase, whose
duration will depend on the values of q and τ ; iii) trajectories converging to Fd
P0 for
q sufficiently large (>1.18); iv) stable limit cycle around F P1 with a large amplitude,
when τ is larger than 4.5
Figure 3 illustrates the average values of the cell counts resulting from the
integration of (1) for Nt = 200 trajectories. The initial conditions were randomly
chosen from the very close neighborhood of F P0 for the same parameter values used in
Figure 2. This assumption may be interpreted as if each of the 200 individuals had been

The dynamics of the HIV infection: a time-delay differential equation approach

10

1.0

Cell densities

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0 10 20 30
Weeks

1

2

3

4
Years

5

6

Figure 3. Average values of healthy, infected and dead cell counts resulting from 200
trajectories using different initial conditions starting in a neighborhood of F P0 . The
parameter values are the same as those used in Figure 2, as are the symbols used to
describe different concentrations . The error bars indicate the standard deviation.

exposed to different initial viral loads. Similar results are obtained if slight fluctuations
of the parameters are permitted to characterize different individuals of the simulated
population. When we compare the results obtained to its corresponding counterparts
obtained with the CA model [15], we observe the same overall dispersion pattern in both.
However, in the present case the average dispersion is lower in the primary infection and
after the onset of AIDS, but as obtained with the CA model it increases greatly during
the latency phase. The large error bars obtained during the latency period indicate a
large range of variability on the development of the disease among the 200 individuals
(trajectories).
The results of this study show that a set of ordinary differential equations with time
delay terms describing the retard on mounting the specific response, is able to provide
a description of the entire course of the HIV infection using a single parameter set. To
our knowledge, this has not been achieved previously by any other similar approach.
As the model is essentially based on the rules of a CA model, our results indicate that
these rules capture the main elements and mechanisms underlying the dynamics of the
infection of T CD4+ cells. In the CA model, spatial localization is very important for
the emergence of distinct time-scales. In the model presented here, with no spatial
dependence, the individual phases are found to be associated with particular structures
in the phase space, which are induced by the time-delay terms. These terms describe the
interplay amongst new generations of infected cells (strains) and new specific responses
and increase the number of possible classes of solution. Although the number of different
solutions is not as broad as those of systems with explicit spatial dependence, it is

The dynamics of the HIV infection: a time-delay differential equation approach

11

sufficient to generate phase space structures that drive the system to regions of very
slow dynamics. A more detailed discussion of all types of solution for system (1) will
be published elsewhere.
Acknowledgements: This work was partially supported by the following Brazilian
funding agencies: CNPq, CAPES and FACEPE (grant PRONEX/FACEPE EDT 001205.03/04 and PRONEX/FACEPE APQ 0203-1.05/08.). RMZS would also like to thank
the hospitality of KITP -UCSB during the conclusion of this research paper, which was
therefore supported by the National Science Foundation under grant No. NSF PHY0551164.
References
[1] Pantaleo G, Graziozi G and Fauci A S, 1993 New England J. Med. 328 327
[2] Campos D P et al, 2005 AIDS 19 S22-S26
[3] Nowak M A and May R M , Virus dynamics: Mathematical principles of immunology and virology
2000 Oxford University Press, Oxford,
[4] Perelson A S and Nelson P W , 1999 Siam Review 41 (1) 3
[5] M.S. Ciupe, B.L. Bivort, D.M. Bortz, P.W. Nelson 200 Math. Biosc. (2006) 127.
[6] Xueyong Zhou, Xinyu Song, Xiangyun Shi, 2008 J. Math. Anal. Appl. 342 13421355.
[7] Cuifang Lv, Zhaohui Yuan, 2009 J. Math. Anal. Appl. 352 672683.
[8] Stafford M A , Corey L , Cao Y , Daar E C , Ho D D and Perelson A S , 2000 J. Theor. Biol. 203
285
[9] Mascio M Di , Ribeiro R M , Markowitz M , Ho D D and Perelson A S, 2004 Math. Biosci. 188 47
[10] A. Landia, A. Mazzoldi, C. Andreoni, M. Bianchi, A. Cavallini, M. Laurino, L. Ricotti, R. Iuliano,
B. Matteoli, L. Ceccherini-Nelli, 2008 Comp. Meth. Progr. Biomed. 89 162168
[11] Z. Mukandavire, W. Garira, C. Chiyaka, 2007 J. Math. Anal. Appl. 330 916933
[12] M. Bar
tildeao, J.M. Lemos, 2007 Biomed. Sign. Process. Contr. 2 248257
[13] Mannion R, Ruskin H and Pandey R B, 2000 Theor. Biosc. 11910
[14] Mannion R, Ruskin H and Ruskin R B, 2000 Theor. Biosc. 119 94
[15] Zorzenon dos Santos R M and Coutinho S, 2001 Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 168102
[16] R. M. Jafelice, B.F.Z. Bechara, L.C. Barros, R.C. Bassanezi, F. Gomide, 2009 Math. Comp. Model.
50 32-44
[17] N. I. Stilianakis, D. Schenzle 2006 Math. Biosc. 199 125
[18] Kuang Y , Delay Differential Equations with Aplications in Population Dynamics, 1993 Academic
Press, Boston
[19] Culshaw R V and Ruan S , 2000 Math. Biosci. 165 27
[20] Culshaw R V, Ruan S and Webb G, 2003 J. Math. Biol. 46 425
[21] Nelson P W, Murray J D and Perelson A S, 2000 Math. Biosci. 163 201
[22] Nelson P W and Perelson A S, 2002 Math. Biosci. 179 73
[23] Solovey G, Peruani F, Ponce Dawson S and Zorzenon dos Santos R M, 2004 Physica A 343 543-556

