Tempo and Mode of Evolution in the Tangled Nature Model

arXiv:1003.2955v1 [cond-mat.stat-mech] 15 Mar 2010

Dominic Jones and Henrik Jeldtoft Jensen1, ∗ and Paolo Sibani2
1
Institute of Mathematical Sciences, 53 Princes’ Gate,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2PG & Department of Mathematics,
Imperial College London, South Kensington campus, London SW7 2AZ, UK
2
Institut for Fysik og Kemi, SDU, DK5230 Odense M, Denmark†
(Dated: 15.3.2009)

We study the Tangled Nature model of macro evolution and demonstrate that the co-evolutionary
dynamics produces an increasingly correlated core of well occupied types. At the same time the
entire configuration of types becomes increasing de-correlated. This finding is related to ecosystem
evolution. The systems level dynamics of the model is subordinated to intermittent transitions
between meta-stable states. We improve on previous studies of the statistics of the transition times
and show that the fluctuations in the offspring probability decreases with number of transitions.
The longtime adaptation, as seen by an increasing population size is demonstrated to be related to
the convexity of the offspring probability. We explain how the models behaviour is a mathematical
reflection of Darwin’s concept of adaptation of profitable variations.
PACS numbers:

I.

MOTIVATION

In his 1944 book [1], Simpson’s expressed aim was
to reconcile the fruits of paleontological research with
the Darwinian synthesis. The Darwinian synthesis, such
as it was, consisted of Darwin’s original ideas concerning competition for scarce resources and natural selection married to more recent discoveries revealing the first
genetic, then fundamentally molecular, mechanisms by
which Darwin’s ideas were realised. The question that
Simpson wanted to answer was: is it possible to infer
anything about the mode of evolution simply by observing its tempo.
The point, that has been made in different ways since
Simpson’s seminal work, is that, as Simpson has it, and
as Gould has subsequently underlined [2], what holds for
ten rats over a hundred years may not be true, or may
not be simply extrapolated, to a million rats over a billion
years. In this paper, we take this point further, by observing the tempo of evolution of a model of interacting
populations of different species. We find that there are
two separate dynamical regimes on which evolution takes
place. In one of those, the tempo gradually decelerates
due to the frustration in the interactions between different species. In the other, observable quantities fluctuate
around stationary values.
A related issue is whether evolutionary dynamics on
all spatial scales, ranging from bacterial colonies confined in a flask (see eg. [3]) to biological species can be
understood, at least in an approximate fashion, using a
small set of unifying theoretical principles. These principles would explain the emergent properties of evolu-

∗ Electronic address: dominic.jones@imperial.ac.uk; Electronic address: h.jensen@imperial.ac.uk
† Electronic address: paolo.sibani@ifk.sdu.dk

tionary systems, for example the decrease of the rate of
evolutionary events on coarse-grained time scales [4], in
spite of the microscopic rate of change remaining constant. Clearly, evolution at the collective level is a nonstationary process, characterised by various trends. How
are these trends related to the dynamics at the level of
individuals? .
An approach which has gained momentum due to
the increasing speed and availability of computers, is to
search for unifying principles by simulating simple evolutionary models with Monte Carlo techniques. These
models blend a random element, the noise, with deterministic rules for the average rates of reproduction, mutation and death in a group or groups of individuals.
Precursors to our approach include Kauffman’s NK(C)
model, which has been used primarily as a tool to study
the way fitness landscapes affect the course of evolution
[5]. Our approach, while partially derived from the NKC
model, is different in two ways: we have frequency dependent interaction, and we do not explicitly build in a
optimisation. The fact that our model nevertheless appears to optimise certain macroscopic parameters is a
matter of some interest, and is discussed further below.
There are many elements of the puzzle that we will
simply neglect. Indeed the model we shall study does
not even have the rudimentary innovation of sexual reproduction. This approach, we should make clear, is limited and cannot provide a complete answer to the question of how the microscopic and macroscopic are related.
However, we show that even such a simple model as the
one discussed can give rise to macroscopic evolution of
a very different tempo from the individual dynamics on
which it is based, and we show how this emergent macroscopic behaviour comes about from the interaction of
many individuals following Darwinian principles. It is
the glassy nature of evolutionary dynamics - the existence of quenched disorder giving rise to slow relaxation
- that in our model produces the macroscopic tempo of

2
a different nature from that of the underlying dynamics.

II.

THE MICROSCOPIC LEVEL

The Tangled Nature model of co-evolution [6] has already been studied in several contexts. Its simplicity along with the rich complexity of its resulting behaviour makes it a paradigmatic model for testing coevolutionary ideas. The model retains the binary string
genotype geometry found in previous approaches, but
replaces their ‘ad hoc’ static fitness landscapes with a
set of population dependent interactions between extant
species, similar to the ‘tangled’ interactions of an ecosystem. This simple addition creates a fascinating complex behaviour: the model retains the intermittent dynamics found for adaptive walks in fitness landscapes[?
], where periods of quasi-stasis which are long with respect to the timescale of the underlying, reproductive
dynamics, are interspersed by transition events, termed
quakes, which occur at a decreasing rate. The overall
tempo of evolution is decelerating in the model, indicating the possibility of an underlying process optimising
a hidden variable. Importantly, the model introduces
new, and biologically relevant, variables in the dynamics
at the macroscopic level. As the system evolves from a
‘random’ initial state in the presence of scarce external
resources, the network of extant and interacting population changes, slowly, but radically over time, enabling the
system to support an ever growing number of individuals
in the face of a constant supply of external resources.
Despite its simplicity, the model is able to reproduce
the long time decrease reported in the overall macroscopic extinction rate, the observed intermittent nature
of macro-evolution, denoted punctuated equilibrium by
Gould and Eldrdege [8], the log-normal shape often observed for the species abundance distributions [9], the
power law relation often seen between area and the number of different species number [10], the frame work of
the model is also able to reproduce often reported exponential degree distributions of the network of species as
well as the decreasing connectance with increasing species
diversity that has attracted much observational and theoretical interest [11].
Individuals are defined by a binary string of length
L, and are thus points in an L dimensional hypercube,
whose elements, or nodes, will be denoted by Latin letters
i and j. An a priori given fixed and random matrix Jij ,
specifies the strength and type of potential interaction
between populations at nodes i and j. The evolutionary
dynamics of the model, to be explained in detail below,
leads to the occupancy of types evolving with time. Mutation allows new nodes to become inhabited and existing
occupied types to go extinct. The configuration of occupied types changes accordingly with time. Although the
dynamics at the level of individuals is smooth and always happens at the same rate, at the systems level, i.e.
the level of occupied configurations in type space, the

dynamics is highly intermittent, and, as mentioned, decelerating. The dynamics of the model is characterised
by a succession of quasi stable states (or QESS: quasi
evolutionary stable strategy). Each QESS is described
by a network of sites which are populated and interact
with each other. As the system undergoes the intermittent burst of changes to the occupancy one network of
occupied sites is replaced by another.
The long time evolution of the occupancy in type
space, and all the properties that can be derived form the
composition and interactions of the extant population,
are subordinated to the transitions, or the quakes, as
they are customarily denoted in record dynamics. This is
because no essential change occurs during the metastable
state. The occupancy of individual sites may fluctuate
but, since essentially the same set of types are present
during the metastable periods, no net drift can manifest
itself. The most conspicuous overall effect of the succession of QESS is a logarithmically slow increase in the
overall population size.
The evolution of the configuration in type space is nonstationary nature and the population grows logarithmically with time as the configurations, through the adaptive search that takes place during the quakes events,
manage to become collectively better adapted. The
adaptation consists in selecting networks of occupied sites
in type space connected by increasingly mutualistic or
beneficial interactions, which enables the temporal averaged net-reproduction rate to slightly overcome the
killing rate.
A time-step in the model is carried out as follows: an
individual is picked at random. Its offspring probability
is calculated by first calculating the value of
H=

C X
Jij nj − µN
N j

where N is the total population, nj the site populations, C a strength parameter and µ the carrying capacity determining the resources available to the population.
This value is then mapped on to the interval 0,1 using
the function
Pof f =

1
,
1 + exp(−H)

which is the probability of reproduction in that time
step. Reproduction is asexual: the parent is replaced
by two copies of itself, with each offspring susceptible to
mutations with probability pmut per genome site. In the
next step a randomly chosen individual is killed with constant probability pkill . Note that while a point mutation
creates a new individual on a neighboring site of the hypercube on which populatons reside, the interaction matrix generally involves populations located at arbitrary
positons on the hypercube.
Typically the population is initially located on a randomly chosen, single site. To start with, the population

3

III.

THE MACROSCOPIC LEVEL
A.

5
4.5
4
Change in COM ; Diversity/100

decreases. Then, as reproduction becomes more likely,
mutants begin to populate neighbouring sites. Soon
a stable “ecosystem” is formed, a subset of genotypes
whose mutual interactions form a (meta)stable dynamical system. This subsystem can be characterised by some
key macroscopic properties - the average total number of
individuals in the system, the average number of sites
occupied, and the properties of the realised interaction
network.

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1

Centre of mass

0.5

Since the system is made up of weighted nodes (each
with a vector position in genotype space) interacting with
each other, we can define a quantity analogous to the
centre of mass in classical mechanics. We define this as
the species occupancy weighted average position of the
system in genotype space, A, where
A=

1 X
nj s j
N j

(1)

where sj denotes the position of vertex number j =
1, ..., 2L in the L dimensional hypercube of genotypes,
nj is the occupancy of species j located
at vertex sj and
P
N is the total population: (N = j nj ).
During meta-stable periods this quantity remains practically constant, since it is only slightly modified by population fluctuations, which chiefly occur on the periphery of the system due to mutations. In contrast, when a
quake occurs the centre of mass undergoes a major displacement. While it may be theoretically possible that
a quake would occur which does not shift the centre of
mass perceptibly, this is highly unlikely since any nearby
stable configuration would undermine the stability of the
current configuration.
The CM then unambiguously identifies significant rearrangements in genotype space. In what follows, monitoring the CM position allows us to explore how the tempo
of such rearrangements evolves with the age of the system, counted from the beginning of the simulation..
Figure 1 plots the changes in this quantity, with a plot
of the total population for reference. Importantly we see
that both variables exhibit the same behaviour, and it
follows that one can be used as a good proxy for the
other. In what follows we analyse population increments
as a proxy for the underlying shift in configuration, since
this is much more computationally efficient.
B.

Aging

There are two distinct tempos in the dynamics of the
model, as has been suggested in previous papers. The
nature of these two tempos is investigated here. Figure

0

0

1000

2000

3000

4000 5000 6000 7000
time (100 generations)

8000

9000 10000

FIG. 1: The time evolution for a typical run of the Tangled
Nature model. The diversity (blue) displays intermittent behaviour, exhibiting long plateaux interspersed with chaotic
fluctuations (the diversity counts the number of species in
the system, and behaves in much the same way as the population). The change in centre of the mass of the system
(red) follows the same pattern - in general there is very little
movement, with occasional big leaps in position.

1 gives a qualitative picture of their origin - we see that
the dynamics can be broadly divided into chaotic and
stable phases, with the stable phases tending to be longlived, as opposed to the chaotic phases which tend to be
brief interludes. Within the stable phases there is still
some dynamics due to the stochastic nature of the system: fluctuations and sometimes natural cycles around
a fixed point are observed. Thus, there are two obvious
timescales in the system - one governing the fluctuations
within each stable phase, the other the chaotic transitions
between stable phases.
To determine the tempo of these phases, or more precisely to determine how the frequency of these two types
of events scale with the age of the system we use a technique borrowed from analysis of spin glasses [12, 13]. In
spin glasses the thermally activated evolution can be analyzed by constructing the Probability Density Function
(PDF) of the heat flow between the system and its thermal reservoir. Large, irreversible flows of heat out of the
system only occur when the system undergoes a significant rearrangement, or quake. Consequently, observing
how the PDF evolves over time reveals how the tempo of
reversible and irreversible events evolve over time. In
our case, an exact equivalent of the energy in a spin
glass is not available. Instead, we choose a characteristic scalar function of the dynamics, the population. In
spin glasses the energy has a much more well defined role
in the dynamics than does the population in the Tangled Nature model -possible changes in configuration are

4
namely accepted or rejected based on energetic considerations, whereas the population plays no such discriminatory role in the present model.
Letting tw be the age of the system, we consider the
distribution of population increments

0

10

−1

10

−2

N (tw + k∆t) − N (tw + (k − 1)∆t),
tw
∆tK ,

i.e. at different epochs in the
where k = 1, 2, 3, ...,
system’s evolution over the observation interval [tw , tw +
tw
K ], . The nature of the PDF will be determined by
three parameters - tw , K and ∆t. The first quantity,
tw , measures as mentioned the age of the system, while
K is inversely proportional to the size of the observation
window. The last parameter is the number of Monte
Carlo sweeps between consecutive measurements of the
population size. We need the observation window to be
large enough to capture both the quasi-equilibrium and
non-equilibrium dynamics, while not being so long that
the system changes too significantly over the window. In
practice this is a matter of trial and error. In figures 2
and 3 the PDF of the population fluctuations is plotted
for three different epochs, with tw = 1000, 10000, 100000
and K = 4. The data comes from an ensemble of 1500
runs.
Figure 2 shows the data with ∆t = 10 for all
epochs.The first thing to note is that the PDF has the
characteristic shape common to similar spin glass studies, with one important difference. Since the data is plotted on linear-log axes, the parabolic shape in the centre
represents a gaussian distribution, and the straight tails
are exponential. The difference from the spin glass case
is that here we have both positive and negative tails,
whereas a in the heat flow PDF for a spin glass the positive tail is undetectable, corresponding to the fact that
quakes reduce the energy of the system. The population,
on the other hand, may go up or down in a quake, although, as we shall see, there is still an overall tendency
for the population to increase.
In analogy with spin glasses, we identify the large, rare
events in the tails with the irreversible quakes in the
system. We see that as the system ages, these quakes
become less and less frequent while the gaussian peak
remains unchanged. We quantify this observation by
rescaling the data - we anticipate a logarithmic decrease
in the quake frequency, and so we make ∆t proportional
to the age of the system. When we do this, the PDF
from three different ages collapses on to a single curve,
so that the probability of large fluctuations (that is fluctuations appearing in the exponential tails) must scale as
t−1
w , since the probability of a large fluctuation in time
∆t is to leading order ∆tP (tw ), where P (tw ) is the probability of a large fluctuation as a function of tw .
The waiting time distribution for quakes (figure 4)
shows that the ratio of waiting time to age of the system remains non zero right throughout a million generation run, giving further proof that the quake probability
decays with the age of the system.

Probability

10

−3

10

−4

10

−5

10

−6

10

−7

10
−2000

−1500

−1000

−500

0

500

1000

Population change in ∆ t

1500

FIG. 2: The PDF of population increments for an ensemble
of 1500 runs of 106 generations. Black: tw = 1000, red tw =
10000, blue tw = 100000. In this plot ∆t = 10. The older
the system, the less probable a large population fluctuation
becomes.

IV.

DISCUSSION

We have shown that by studying the tempo of the evolution in a schematic model we can infer a great deal
about the mode - broadly speaking we find that we can
split the dynamics into two bits, one quasi-equilibrium
and the other non-equilibrium relaxation. Here we would
like to suggest a mechanism for the observed slowing
down of the dynamics at the macroscopic scale. First, let
us recall the work done in spin glasses on similar aging
phenomena. It has been found there that many microscopically different systems can be modelled by a unifying
mesoscopic principle of barrier hopping. In this picture
the system becomes increasing stable against quakes as
each quake corresponds to the jumping of a barrier in the
energy landscape which is marginally larger than the barrier corresponding to the previous quake. Consequently,
the evolution of the system is well described by record
dynamics - each new maximum energy leads to a change
in configuration and a new energy minimum. The energy
landscape is such (for more detailed discussion see [14])
that each new well is deeper than the previous one, so
the relaxation of the system slows as records become less
and less frequent.
We propose that the similar relaxation dynamics seen
in the Tangled Nature model is due to a similar scenario,
with some caveats. One way of interpreting the spin glass
dynamics is that the system falls into wells of increasing depth, from which it becomes increasingly hard to
escape since the magnitude of the fluctuations of the energy about each new fixed point remains constant. In
the tangled nature model, it is harder to justify an en-

2000

5
0

10

−1

10

−2

Probability

10

−3

10

−4

10

−5

10

−6

10
−2000

−1500

−1000

−500

0

500

1000

Population change in ∆t

1500

FIG. 3: The PDF of population increments for an ensemble
of 1500 runs of 106 generations. Black: tw = 1000, red tw =
10000, blue tw = 100000. The total number of data points is
equal for each age of the system; that is the sampling period
tw
∆t = 100
scales with the age of the system. The data collapses
onto a single curve, showing that the probability of a large
fluctuation scales like t1w

FIG. 4: Plot of a sample of quake waiting time ratios, where
tk is the time of the kth quake. A Poisson distribution of
quakes would give a more or less zero for long times, since
1
the ratio would decay as λt
for some average rate λ. Instead
we see many non zero points for long times. The clustering
of points along the t axis is due to small ’secondary quakes’
that are hard to distinguish from primary quakes.

ergy landscape picture, but we can measure the magnitude of fluctuations of the birthrate, which is a measure
of the systems ability to ‘break out’ from each equilibrium state. To do this we have determined the standard
deviation of the birth rate as a function of the age of the
system, sampled during the different equilibrium stages
of the dynamics. Indeed we find that there is a significant decrease in the fluctuation width over a simulation
of 106 generations.
To complete the circle, we also need to understand
why a decrease in the birthrate probability fluctuations
in turn leads to greater stability. A spike in the reproduction probability of the system has an effect beyond
simple increase in numbers - it also increases the likelihood that new species in different parts of genotype
space, generated by mutations, will interact and thus
destabilise the current configuration. It should be em2000
phasised that the difference between the fluctuations in
the average probability and the fluctuations of the population amount to a difference in the weighting of the core
and the periphery of the system - that is between between vital, heavily populated genotypes and transient,
sparsely populated ones. When considering the birthrate,
each site is weighted equally - so the fact that we see a decrease in these fluctuations while seeing a constant standard deviation in the population is not contradictory - it
merely shows that the fluctuations are increasingly limited to sites, which are gradually becoming more similar
in terms of the network of interactions Jij surrounding
the sites carrying the larger proportion of the population.

FIG. 5: The standard deviation of birth rate fluctuations decreases over time. The window index, x, gives the start and
end points of each sample window using the following conversion: tstart = 10 · 2x and tend = 18 · 2x . Error bars show that
while the effect is small, it is significant.

Figure 5 shows the decrease in the standard deviation
of these fluctuations plotted over logarithmically spaced

6
time intervals. The fluctuations were only measured in
the metastable parts of the dynamics. This suggests that
the system evolves in such a way that barrier hopping
becomes less and less likely, not because of an increase in
barrier height, but due to a decrease in the width of the
fluctuations in the system.
This is not the end of the story, since these fluctuations

[1] G. Simpson. Tempo and Mode in Evolution. Columbia
University Press, 1944.
[2] S. Gould. Tempo and mode in the macroevolutionary
reconstruction of darwinism. In W. Fitch and F. Ayala, editors, Tempo and Mode in Evolution: Genetics and
Palaeontology 50 years after Simpson. National Academy
Press, 1995.
[3] Zachary D. Blount, Christina Z. Borland, and Richard E.
Lenski. Historical contingency and the evolution of a key
innovation in an experimental population of escherichia
coli. PNAS, 105(23):7899–7906, 2008.
[4] D. Raup and J. Sepkoski Jr. Mass extinctions in the
marine fossil record. Science, 215:1501, 1982.
[5] Stuart A. Kauffman. The Origins of Order: Self Organisation and Selection in Evolution. Oxford University
Press, 1990.
[6] Kim Christensen, Simone A. Di Collobiano, Matt Hall,
and Henrik J. Jensen. Tangled nature: A model of evolutionary ecology. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 216(1):73
– 84, 2002.
[7] P. Sibani and A. Pedersen. Evolution dynamics in terraced NK landscapes. EuropPhysics Letters, 48:346–352,
1999.
[8] Steven J. Gould and Niles Eldredge. Punctuated equillibria; the tempo and mode of evolution reconsidered.
Paleobiology, 3:115, 1977.
[9] Paul Anderson, Henrik J. Jensen, L Oliveira, and Paolo
Sibani. Evolution in complex systems. Complexity, 10:49,
2004.
[10] Daniel Lawson and Henrik J. Jensen. The species-area
relationship and evolution. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 241(3):590 – 600, 2006.
[11] S. Laird and H. J. Jensen. Correlation, selection and the
evolution of species networks. Eco. Mod., 209(2 - 4):149,
2007.
[12] Paolo Sibani and Jesper Dall. Log-poisson statistics and
full aging in glassy systems. Europhys. Lett., 64:8, 2003.
[13] Paolo Sibani. Linear response in aging glassy systems,
intermittency and the Poisson statistics of record fluctuations. Eur. Phys. J. B, 58:483-491, 2007.
[14] Paolo Sibani, Ruud van der Pas, and J. Christian Schoen.
The lid method for exhaustive exploration of metastable
states of complex systems. Comp. Phys. Comm., 116,
1998.

are themselves governed by the nature of the network
of interactions. Why the systems chooses configurations
less susceptible to fluctuations has not been answered in
this paper, and will form the focus of future work.
Acknowledgement: HJJ and DJ gratefully acknowledge the EPSRC for funding under grant EP/D051223

1
0.9
0.8

tk − tk−1/tk

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Time (generations)

8

9

10
5

x 10

