Journal of Computational Neuroscience manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Comparative power spectral analysis of simultaneous
elecroencephalographic and magnetoencephalographic recordings in
humans suggests non-resistive extracellular media

arXiv:1003.5538v2 [q-bio.NC] 24 May 2010

Nima Dehghani∗ , Claude Bédard∗ , Sydney S. Cash, Eric Halgren and Alain Destexhe

November 7, 2013

Abstract The resistive or non-resistive nature of the
extracellular space in the brain is still debated, and is an
important issue for correctly modeling extracellular
potentials. Here, we first show theoretically that if the
medium is resistive, the frequency scaling should be the
same
for
electroencephalogram
(EEG)
and
magnetoencephalogram (MEG) signals at low frequencies
(<10 Hz). To test this prediction, we analyzed the
spectrum of simultaneous EEG and MEG measurements
in four human subjects. The frequency scaling of EEG
displays coherent variations across the brain, in general
between 1/ f and 1/ f 2 , and tends to be smaller in
parietal/temporal regions. In a given region, although the
variability of the frequency scaling exponent was higher
for MEG compared to EEG, both signals consistently
scale with a different exponent. In some cases, the scaling
was similar, but only when the signal-to-noise ratio of the
MEG was low. Several methods of noise correction for
environmental and instrumental noise were tested, and
they all increased the difference between EEG and MEG
scaling. In conclusion, there is a significant difference in
frequency scaling between EEG and MEG, which can be
explained if the extracellular medium (including other
layers such as dura matter and skull) is globally
non-resistive.
Keywords: EEG; MEG; Local Field Potentials;
Extracellular resistivity; Maxwell Equations; Power-law

Integrative and Computational Neuroscience Unit (UNIC),
UPR2191, CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France; Multimodal Imaging Lab.,
Dept. Radiology and Neurosciences, UCSD, La Jolla, USA; Dept.
Neurology, MGH, Harvard, Boston, USA
*: co-first authors
E-mail: Destexhe@unic.cnrs-gif.fr

1 Introduction

An issue central to modeling local field potentials is
whether the extracellular space around neurons can be
considered as a resistive medium. A resistive medium is
equivalent to replacing the medium by a simple
resistance, which considerably simplifies the computation
of local field potentials, as the equations to calculate
extracellular fields are very simple and based on
Coulomb’s law (Rall and Shepherd, 1968; Nunez and
Srinivasan, 2005). Forward models of the EEG and
inverse solution/source localization methods also assume
that the medium is resistive (Sarvas, 1987; Wolters and de
Munck, 2007; Ramirez, 2008). However, if the medium is
non-resistive, the equations governing the extracellular
potential can be considerably more complex because the
quasi-static approximation of Maxwell equations cannot
be made (Bédard et al., 2004).
Experimental characterizations of extracellular resistivity
are contradictory. Some experiments reported that the
conductivity is strongly frequency dependent, and thus
that the medium is non-resistive (Ranck, 1963; Gabriel et
al., 1996a, 1996b, 1996c). Other experiments reported
that the medium was essentially resistive (Logothetis et
al., 2007). However, both types of measurements used
current intensities far larger than physiological currents,
which can mask the filtering properties of the tissue by
preventing phenomena such as ionic diffusion (Bédard
and Destexhe, 2009). Unfortunately, the issue is still open
because there exists no measurements to date using
(weak) current intensities that would be more compatible
with biological current sources.
In the present paper, we propose an indirect method to
estimate if extracellular space can be considered as a

2

purely resistive medium. We start from Maxwell
equations and show that if the medium was resistive, the
frequency-scaling of electroencephalogram (EEG) and
magnetoencephalogram (MEG) recordings should be the
same. We then test this scaling on simultaneous EEG and
MEG measurements in humans.

2 Methods

2.1 Participants and MEG/EEG recordings

We recorded the electromagnetic field of the brain during
quiet wakefulness (with alpha rhythm occasionally
present) from four healthy adults (4 males ages 20-35).
Participants had no neurological problems including sleep
disorders, epilepsy, or substance dependence, were taking
no medications and did not consume caffeine or alcohol
on the day of the recording. We used a whole-head MEG
scanner (Neuromag Elekta) within a magnetically
shielded room (IMEDCO, Hagendorf, Switzerland) and
recorded simultaneously with 60 channels of EEG and
306 MEG channels (Nenonen et al., 2004). MEG SQUID
(super conducting quantum interference device) sensors
are arranged as triplets at 102 locations; each location
contains one “magnetometer” and two orthogonal planar
“gradiometers” (GRAD1, GRAD2). Unless otherwise
noted, MEG will be used here to refer to the
magnetometer recordings. Locations of the EEG
electrodes on the scalp of individual subjects were
recorded using a 3D digitizer (Polhemus FastTrack). HPI
(head position index) coils were used to measure the
spatial relationship between the head and scanner.
Electrode arrangements were constructed from the
projection of 3D position of electrodes to a 2D plane in
order to map the frequency scaling exponent in a
topographical manner. All EEG recordings were
monopolar with a common reference. Sampling rate was
1000 Hz.
For all subjects, four types of consecutive recordings were
obtained, in the following order: (1) Empty-room
recording; (2) Awake “idle” recording where subjects
were asked to stay comfortable, without movements in the
scanner, and not to focus on anything specific; (3) a visual
task; (4) sleep recordings. All idle recordings used here
were made in awake subjects with eyes open, where the
EEG was desynchronized. A few minutes of such idle
time was recorded in the scanner. For each subject, 3
awake segments with duration of 60 seconds were
selected from the idle recordings (see example signals in
Fig. 1).

As electrocardiogram (ECG) noise often contaminates
MEG recordings, Independent component analysis (ICA)
algorithm was used to remove such contamination; either
Infomax (Bell and Sejnowski, 1995) or the “Jade
algorithm” from the EEGLAB toolbox (Delorme and
Makeig, 2004) was used to achieve proper
decontamination. In all recordings, the ECG component
stood out very robustly. In order not to impose any change
in the frequency content of the signal, we did not use the
ICA to filter the data on any prominent independent
oscillatory component and it was solely used to
decontaminate the ECG noise. We verified that the
removal of ECG did not change the scaling exponent (not
shown).
In each recording session, just prior to brain recordings,
we recorded a few minutes of the electromagnetic field
present within the dewar in the magnetic shielded room.
Similar to wake epochs, 3 segments of 60 seconds
duration were selected for each of the four recordings.
This will be referred to “empty room” recordings and will
be used in noise correction of the awake recordings.
In each subject, the power spectral density (PSD) was
calculated by first computing the Fast Fourier transform
(FFT) of 3 awake epochs, then averaging their respective
PSDs (square modulus of the FFT). This averaged PSD
was computed for all EEG and MEG channels in order to
reduce the effects of spurious peaks due to random
fluctuations. The same procedure was also followed for
empty-room signals.

2.2 Noise correction methods

Because the environmental and instrumental sources of
noise are potentially high in MEG recordings, we took
advantage of the availability of empty-room recordings to
correct for the presence of noise in the signal. We used
five different methods for noise correction, based on
different assumptions about the nature of the noise. We
describe below these different correction methods, while
all the details are given in Supplementary Methods.
A first procedure for noise correction, exponent
subtraction (ES), assumes that the noise is intrinsic to the
SQUID sensors. This is justified by the fact that the
frequency scaling of some of the channels is identical to
that of the corresponding empty-room recording (see
Results). In such a case, the scaling is assumed to entirely
result from the “filtering” of the sensor, and thus the
correction amounts to subtract the scaling exponents.

3

A second class of noise subtraction methods assume that
the noise is of ambient nature and is uncorrelated with the
signal. This chatacteristics, warrants the use of spectral
subtraction (where one subtracts the PSD of the
empty-room from that of the MEG recordings), prior to
the calculation of the scaling exponent. The simplest form
of spectral subtraction, linear multiband spectral
subtraction (LMSS), treats the sensors individually and
does not use any spatial/frequency-based statistics in its
methodology (Boll et al., 1979). An improved version,
nonlinear multiband spectral subtraction (NMSS), takes
into account the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and its spatial
and frequency characteristics (Kamath and Loizou, 2002;
Loizou, 2007). A third type, Wiener filtering (WF), uses a
similar approach as the latter, but obtain an estimate of the
noiseless signal from that of the noisy measurement
through minimizing the Mean Square Error (MSE)
between the desired and the measured signal (Lim et al.,
1979; Abd El-Fattah et al., 2008).
A third type of noise subtraction, partial least squares
(PLS) regression, combines Principal component analysis
(PCA) methods with multiple linear regression (Abdi,
2010; Garthwaite, 1994). This methods finds the spectral
patterns that are common in the MEG and the
empty-room noise, and removes these patterns from the
PSD.

boundary effects (Eilers and Marx, 1996). The applied
method provides a reliable and automated approach that
uses our enforced initial frequency segments with a high
emphasis in low frequency and it optimizes itself based on
the data. After obtaining a smooth B-spline curve, a
simple 1st degree polynomial fit was used to estimate the
slope of the curve between 0.1-10 Hz (the fit was limited
to this frequency band in order to avoid the possible
effects of the visible peak at 10 Hz on the estimated
exponent).Using this method provides a reliable and
robust estimate of the slope of the PSD in logarithmic
scale, as shown in Fig. 2B. For more details on the issue
of automatic non-parametric fitting, and the rationale
behind combining the polynomial with spline basis
functions, we refer the reader to Magee, 1998 as well as
Royston & Altman, 1994 and Katkovnik et al, 2006.
This procedure was realized on all channels automatically
(102 channels for MEG, 60 channels for EEG, for each
patient). Every single fit was further visually confirmed.
In the case of MEG, noise correction is essential to
validate the results. For doing so, we used different
methods (as described above) to reduce the noise. Next,
all the mentioned steps of frequency scaling exponents
were carried out on the corrected PSD. Results are shown
in Fig. 4.

2.3 Frequency scaling exponent estimation
2.4 Region of Interest (ROI)
The method to estimate the frequency scaling exponent
was composed of steps: First, applying a spline to obtain a
smooth FFT without losing the resolution (as can happen
by using other spectral estimation methods); Second,
using a simple polynomial fit to obtain the scaling
exponent. To improve the slope estimation, we
approximated the PSD data points using a spline, which is
a series of piecewise polynomials with smooth transitions
and where the break points (“knots”) are specified. We
used the so-called “B-spline” (see details in de Boor,
2001).
The knots were first defined as linearly related to
logarithm of the frequency, which naturally gives more
resolution to low frequencies, to which our theory applies.
Next, in each frequency window (between consecutive
knots), we find the closest PSD value to the mean PSD of
that window. Then we use the corresponding frequency as
the optimized knot in that frequency range, leading the
final values of the knots. The resulting knots stay close to
the initial distribution of frequency knots but are modified
based on each sensor’s PSD data to provide the optimal
knot points for that given sensor (Fig. 2A). We also use
additional knots at the outer edges of the signal to avoid

Three ROIs were selected for statistical comparisons of
the topographic plots. As shown in Figure 4 (panel F), FR
(Frontal) ROI refers to the frontal ellipsoid, VX (Vertex)
ROI refers to the central disk located on vertex and PT
(Parietotemporal) refers to the horseshoe ROI.

3 Theory

We start from first principles (Maxwell equations) and
derive equations to describe EEG and MEG signals. Note
that the formalism we present here is different than the
one usually given (as in Plonsey, 1969; Gulrajani, 1998),
because the linking equations are here considered in their
most general expression (convolution integrals), in the
case of a linear medium (see Eq. 77.4 in Landau and
Lifchitz, 1984). This generality is essential for the
problem we treat here, because our aim is to compare
EEG and MEG signals with the predictions from the
theory, and thus the theory must be as general as possible.

4

3.1 General formalism

By taking the Fourier transform of Maxwell equations
(Eqs. 1) and of the linking equations (Eqs. 2,3,4), we
obtain:

Maxwell equations can be written as

ρ f ree

∇·D =
∇ × E = − ∂∂Bt

∇·B = 0
∇ × H = j + ∂∂Dt

(1)

Z +∞
−∞

ε (τ )E(t − τ )d τ

(2)

where ε is a symmetric second-order tensor.
A second equation links magnetic induction and the
magnetic field:
B=

Z +∞
−∞

µ (τ )H(t − τ )d τ

(3)

where µ is a symmetric second-order tensor.
If we neglect non-resistive effects such as diffusion
(Bédard and Destexhe, 2009), as well as any other
nonlinear effects1 , then we can assume that the medium is
linear. In this case, we can write:
j=

Z +∞
−∞

σ (τ )E(t − τ )d τ

Df = εf Ef
Bf = µf Hf
j f = j pf + σ f E f

(7)

where the relation σ f E f in Eq. 7 is the current density
produced by the (primary) current sources in the
extracellular medium. Note that in this formulation, the
electromagnetic parameters ε f , µ f and σ f depend on
frequency3. This generalization is essential if we want the
formalism to be valid for media that are linear but
non-resistive,
which
can
expressed
with
frequency-dependent electric parameters. It is also
consistent with the Kramers-Kronig relations (see Landau
and Lifchitz, 1984; Foster and Schwan, 1989).
j pf is the current density of these sources in Fourier
frequency space. This current density is composed of the
axial current in dendrites and axons, as well as the
transmembrane current. Of course, this expression is such
that at any given point, there is only one of these two
terms which is non-zero. This is a way of preserving the
linearity of Maxwell equations. Such a procedure is
legitimate because the sources are not affected by the field
they produce4.

(4)

where σ is a symmetric second-order tensor 2 . Because the
effect of electric induction (Faraday’s law) is negligible,
we can write:
∇ · D = ρ f ree ∇ · B = 0
∇×E = 0
∇ × H = j + ∂∂Dt

(6)

where ω = 2π f and

If we suppose that the brain is linear in the
electromagnetic sense (which is most likely), then we
have the two following linking equations. The first
equation links the electric displacement with the electric
field:

D=

0
∇ · D f = ρ ff ree ∇ · B f =
∇ × Ef = 0
∇ × H f = j f + iω D f

(5)

This system is much simpler compared to above, because
electric field and magnetic induction are decoupled.
1 Examples of nonlinear effects are variations of the macroscopic
conductivity σ f with the magnitude of electric field E. Such
variations could appear due to ephaptic (electric-field) interactions
for example. In addition, any type of linear reactivity of the medium
to the electric field or magnetic induction can lead to frequencydependent electric parameters σ , ε , µ (for a detailed discussion of
such effects, see Bédard and Destexhe, 2009).
2 Note that in textbooks, these linking equations (Eqs. 2–4) are
often algebraic and independent of time (for example, see Eqs. 5.2-6,
5.2-7 and 5.2-8 in Gulrajani, 1998). The present formulation is more
general, more in the line of Landau and Lifchitz (1984).

3.2 Expression for the electric field

From Eq. 6 (Faraday’s law in Fourier space), we can write:
E f = −∇V f .

(8)

From Eq. 6 (Ampère-Maxwell’s law in Fourier space), we
can write:
∇ · (∇ × H f ) = ∇ · j f + iω ∇ · (ε f E f )

= ∇ · j pf − ∇ · ((σ f + iωε f )∇V f ) = 0

(9)

3 In textbooks, the electric parameters are sometimes considered
as complex numbers, for example with the notion of phasor (see
Section 5.3 in Gulrajani, 1998), but they are usually considered
frequency independent.
4 If it was not the case, then the source terms would be a function
of the produced field, which would result in more complicated
equations

5

Setting γ f = σ f + iωε f , one obtains:
∇ · (γ f ∇V f ) = ∇ · j pf

(10)

where ∇ · j pf is a source term and γ f is a symmetric
second-order tensor (3 × 3). Note that this tensor depends
on position and frequency in general, and cannot be
factorized. We will call this expression (Eq. 10) the “first
fundamental equation” of the problem.

3.3 Expression for magnetic induction

From the mathematical identity
∇ × ∇ × X = −∇2 X + ∇(∇ · X)

(11)

it is clear that this is sufficient to know the divergence and
the curl of a field X, because the solution of ∇2 X is unique
with adequate boundary conditions.

The latter expression can be proven by calculating the total
current and apply the divergence theorem (not shown).

3.5 Quasi-static approximation to calculate magnetic
induction

The “second fundamental equation” above implies
inverting γ f , which is not possible in general, because it
would require prior knowledge of both conductivity and
permittivity in each point outside of the sources. If the
medium is purely resistive (γ f = γ where γ is independent
of space and frequency), one can evaluate the electric field
first, and next integrate B f using the quasi-static
approximation (Ampère-Maxwell’s law). Because for low
frequencies, we have necessarily j f >> iω D f , we obtain
∇ × B f = µo j f ,
which is also known as Ampère’s law in Fourier space.

As in the case of magnetic induction, the divergence is
necessarily zero, it is sufficient to give an explicit
expression of the curl as a function of the sources.
Supposing that µ = µo δ (t) is a scalar (tensor where all
directions are eigenvectors), and taking the curl of Eq. 6
(D), multiplied by the inverse of γ f , we obtain the
following equality:
inv p
∇ × (γ inv
f ∇ × B f ) = µo ∇ × (γ f j f )

(12)

because ∇ × E f = 0. This expression (Eq. 12) will be
named the “second fundamental equation”.

Thus, for low frequencies, one can skip the second
fundamental equation. Note that in case this quasi-static
approximation cannot be made (such as for high
frequencies), then one needs to solve the full system using
both fundamental equations. Such high frequencies are,
however, well beyond the physiological range, so for EEG
and MEG signals, the quasi-static approximation holds if
the extracellular medium is resistive, or more generally if
the medium satisfies ∇ × E f = −iω B f ⋍ 0 (see Eqs. 5
and 6).
According to the quasi-static approximation, and using the
linking equation between current density and the electric
field (Eq. 7), we can write:

3.4 Boundary conditions

∇ × B f = µo (j pf − γ ∇V f )

(14)

We consider the following boundary conditions:
1 - on the skull, we assume that V f (r) is differentiable in
space, which is equivalent to assume that the electric field
is finite.
2 - on the skull, we assume that n̂ · γ f ∇V f is also
continuous, which is equivalent to assume that the flow of
current is continuous. Thus, we are interested in solutions
where the electric field is continuous.
3 - because the current is zero outside of the head, the
current perpendicular to the surface of cortex must be zero
as well. Thus, the projection of the current on the vector n̂
normal to the skull’s surface, must also be zero.
n̂(x) · γ f ∇V f (x) = 0

(13)

Because the divergence of magnetic induction is zero, we
have from Eq. 11:
∇ × ∇ × B f = −∇2 B f = −µo ∇ × (j pf − γ ∇V f )

(15)

This equation can be easily integrated using Poisson
integral (“Poisson equation” for each component in
Cartesian coordinates) In Fourier space, this integral is
given by the following expression
B f (r) =

µo
4π

ZZZ ∇ × (j p (r′ ) − γ ∇V (r′ ))
f
f
head

kr − r′ k

dv′

(16)

6

3.6 Consequences
If the medium is purely resistive (“ohmic”), then γ does
not depend on the spatial position (see Bedard et al., 2004;
Bedard and Destexhe, 2009) nor on frequency, so that the
solution for the magnetic induction is given by:
B f (r) =

µo
4π

ZZZ ∇ × j p (r)
f
head

kr − r′k

dv′

had eyes open, a low-amplitude alpha rhythm was
occasionally present (as visible in Fig. 1). There were also
oscillations present in the empty-room signal, but these
oscillations are evidently different from the alpha rhythm
because of their low amplitude and the fact that they do
not appear in gradiometers (see Suppl. Fig. S1).

(17)

and does not depend on the nature of the medium.
For the electric potential, from Eq. 10, we obtain the
solution:
V f (x) = −

1
4πγ

ZZZ
head

∇ · j pf

|x − x′ |

dv′

(18)

Thus, when the two source terms ∇ × j pf and ∇ · j pf are
white noise, the magnetic induction and electric field must
have the same frequency dependence. Moreover, because
the spatial dimensions of the sources are very small (see
appendices), we can suppose that the current density j pf (x)
is given by a function of the form:
j pf (x) = j pe (x)F( f )

(19)

such that ∇ × j pf and ∇ · j pf have the same frequency
dependence for low frequencies. Eq. 19 constitutes the
main assumption of this formalism.
In Appendix A, we provide a more detailed justification
of this assumption, based on the differential expressions
of the electric field and magnetic induction in a dendritic
cable. Note that this assumption is most likely valid for
states with low correlation such as desynchronized-EEG
states or high-conductance states, and for low-frequencies,
as we analyze here (see details in the appendices).
Thus, the main prediction of this formalism is that if the
extracellular medium is resistive, then the PSD of the
magnetic induction and of the electric potential must have
the same frequency dependence. In the next section, we
will examine if this is the case for simultaneously
recorded MEG and EEG signals.

Fig. 1 Simultaneous EEG and MEG recordings in an awake human
subject. This example shows a sample of channels from MEG/EEG
after ECG noise removal. Labels refer to ROIs as defined in methods
(also see Figure 4). FR: Frontal, VX:Vertex and PT: Parietotemporal.
These sample channels were selected to represent both right and left
hemispheres in a symmetrical fashion. Inset: magnification of the
MEG (red) and “empty-room” (green) signals superimposed from 4
sample channels. All traces are before any noise correction, but after
ECG decontamination.

In the next sections, we start by briefly presenting the
method that was used to estimate the frequency scaling of
the PSDs. Then we report the scaling exponents for
0.1-10 Hz frequency bands and their differences in EEG
and MEG recordings.

4.1 Frequency scaling exponent estimation

4 Test on experimental data

A total of 4 subjects were used for the analysis. Figure 1
shows sample MEG and EEG channels from one of the
subjects, during quiet wakefulness. Although the subjects

Because of the large number of signals in the EEG and
MEG recordings, we used an automatic non-parametric
procedure to estimate the frequency scaling (see
Methods). We used a B-spline approximation by
interpolation with boundary conditions to find a curve
which best represents the data(see Methods). A high

7

density of knots was given to the low-frequency band
(0.1-10 Hz), to have an accurate representation of the PSD
in this band, and calculate the frequency scaling. An
example of optimized knots to an individual sensor is
shown in Figure 2A; note that this distribution of knots is
specific to this particular sensor. The resulting B-spline
curves were used to estimate the frequency scaling
exponent using a 1st degree polynomial fit. Figure 2B
shows the result of the B-spline analysis with optimized
knots (in green) capturing the essence of the data better
than the usual approximation of the slope using
polynomials (in red). The goodness of fit showed a robust
estimation of the slope using B-spline method. Residuals
were -0.01 ± 0.6 for empty-room, 0.2 ± 0.65 for MEG
awake, 0.05 ± 0.6 for LMSS, 0.005 ± 0.64 for NMSS,
0.08 ± 0.5 for WF,0.001 ± 0.02 for PLS, and -0.02 ±
0.28 for EEG B-spline (all numbers to be multiplied by
10−14).

4.2 MEG and EEG have different frequency scaling
exponents

Figure 3 shows the results of the B-spline curve fits to the
log-log PSD vs frequency for all sensors of all subjects.
In this figure, and only for the ease of visual comparison,
these curves were normalized to the value of the log(PSD)
of the highest frequency. As can be appreciated, all MEG
sensors (in red) show a different slope than that of the EEG
sensors (in blue). The frequency scaling exponent of the
EEG is close to 1 (1/ f scaling), while MEG seems to scale
differently. Thus, this representation already shows clear
differences of scaling between EEG and MEG signals.

Fig. 3 B-spline fits of EEG awake and MEG awake (prior to noise
correction) recordings from all four subjects. Each line refers to the fit
of one sensor in log(PSD)-log(frequency) scale. For the ease of visual
comparison of the frequency scaling exponent, log(PSD) values are
normalized to their value at the maximum frequency. Each panel
represents the data related to one of our four subjects. These plots
show a clear distinction between the frequency scaling of EEG and
MEG. Insets show the comparison between MEG awake (prior to
noise correction) and MEG empty-room recordings (not normalized).
Note that the empty-room scales the same as the MEG signal, but in
general EEG and MEG scale differently.

Fig. 2 A.log-log scale of the PSD vs frequency of a sample MEG
sensor along with the corresponding log(PSD) values (shown as
circles) at optimized knots in log-scale. B. 1st degree Polynomial fit
on B-spline curve effectively captures properties of the signal better
than simple polynomial fit and avoids the 10 Hz peak. The fit was
limited between 0.1 to 10 Hz excluding the boundaries. This limits
the fit approximation to the next limiting optimized knots (between
0.1 and 0.2 to between 9 and 10 Hz) to avoid the peaks at alpha and
low frquencies (shown by vertical dotted lines).

However, MEG signals may be affected by ambient or
instrumental noise. To check for this, we have analyzed
the empty-room signals using the same representation and
techniques as for MEG, amd the results are represented in
Fig. 3 (insets). Empty-room recordings always scale very
closely to the MEG signal, and thus the scaling observed
in MEG may be due in part to environmental noise or
noise intrinsic to the detectors. This emphasizes that it is
essential to use empty-room recordings made during the
same experiment to correct the frequency scaling
exponent of MEG recordings.
To correct for this bias, we have used five different
procedures (see Methods). The first class of procedure

8

(ES) considers that the scaling of the MEG is entirely due
to filtering by the sensors, which would explain the
similar scaling between MEG and empty-room
recordings. In this case, however, nearly all the scaling
would be abolished, and the corrected MEG signal would
be similar to white noise (scaling exponent close to zero).
Because the similar scaling may be coincidental, we have
used two other classes of noise correction procedures to
comply with different assumptions about the nature of the
noise. The second class, is composed of spectral
subtraction (LMSS and NMSS) or Wiener filtering (see
Methods). These methods are well-established in other
fields such as acoustics. The third class, uses statistical
patterns of noise to enhance PSD (PLS method, for details
see Methods).

4.3 Spatial variability of the frequency scaling exponent

We applied the above methods to all channels and
represented the scaling exponents in topographic plots in
Fig. 4. This figure portrays that both MEG and EEG do
not show a homogenous pattern of the scaling exponent,
confirming the differences of scaling seen in Fig. 3. The
EEG (Figure 4A) shows that areas in the midline have
values closer to 1, while those at the margin can deviate
from 1/ f scaling. MEG on the other hand shows higher
values of the exponent in the frontal area and a horseshoe
pattern of low value exponents in parietotemporal regions
(Figure 4B). As anticipated above, empty-room
recordings scale more or less uniformly with values close
to 1/ f (Figure 4C), thus necessitating the correction for
this phenomena to estimate the correct MEG frequency
scaling exponent. Different methods for noise reduction
are shown in Figure 4: spectral subtraction methods, such
as LMSS (Figure 4D), NMSS (Figure 4E), WF
enhancement (Figure 4F). These corrections preserve the
pattern seen in Figure 4B, but tend to increase the
difference with EEG scaling: one method (LMSS) yields
minimal correction while the other two (NMSS and WF)
use band-specific SNR information in order to cancel the
effects of background colored-noise (see Suppl. Fig. S2),
and achieve higher degree of correction (see
Supplementary Methods for details). Figure 4G portrays
the use of PLS to obtain a noiseless signal based on the
noise measurements. The degree of correction achieved
by this method is higher than what is achieved by spectral
subtraction and WF methods. Exponent subtraction is
shown in Figure 4H. This correction supposes that the
scaling is due to the frequency response of the sensors,
and nearly abolishes all the frequency scaling (see also
Suppl. Fig. S3 for a comparison of different methods of
noise subtraction).

Fig. 4 Topographical representation of frequency scaling exponent
averaged across four subjects. A. EEG awake. B. MEG awake. C.
MEG empty-room. D, E. MEG after spectral subtraction of the
empty-room noise using linear (LMSS) and non-linear (NMSS)
methods respectively. F. MEG spectral enhancement using Wiener
filtering (WF). G. MEG, partial least square (PLS) approximation
of non-noisy spectrum. H. Exponent subtraction (the exponent
represented is the value of the frequency scaling exponent calculated
for MEG signals, subtracted from the scaling exponent calculated
from the corresponding emptyroom signals). I. Spatial location of
ROI masks (shown in yellow). FR covers the Frontal, VX covers
Vertex and PT spans Parietotemporal. Dots show spatial arrangement
of 102 MEG SQUID sensor triplets. The background gray-scale
figure is same as the one in panel B. Note that panels A through H
use the same color scaling.

4.4 Statistical comparison of EEG and MEG frequency
scaling

Based on the patterns in Fig. 4, we created three ROIs
covering Vertex (FR), Vertex (VX) and the horseshoe
pattern (PT). These masks are shown in Fig. 4I.
Figure 5A represents the overall pattern providing
evidence on the general difference and the wider
variability in MEG recordings. The next three panels
relate to the individual ROIs. Of the spectral subtraction
methods, NMSS achieves a higher degree of correction in
comparison with LMSS (see Figure 4C, Figure 4D as well
as Suppl. Fig. S3). Because NMSS takes into account the

9

Fig. S3). Therefore, of this family of noise correction,
only NMSS is portrayed here. Of the methods dealing
with different assumptions about the nature of the noise,
the “Exponent subtraction” almost abolishes the
frequency scaling (Also see in Figure 4H, as well as
Suppl. Fig. S3). Applying PLS yields values in between
“Exponent subtraction” and that of NMSS and is
portrayed in Figure 5.

Fig. 5 Statistical comparison of EEG vs. MEG frequency scaling
exponent for all regions (A) and different ROI masks (B,C &
D). In each panel, a box-plot on top is accompanied by a nonparametric distribution function in the bottom. In the top graph, the
box has lines at the lower quartile, median (red), and upper quartile
values. Smallest and biggest non-outlier observations (1.5 times the
interquartile range IRQ) are shown as whiskers. Outliers are data with
values beyond the ends of the whiskers and are displayed with a
red + sign. In the bottom graph, a Non-parametric density function
shows the distribution of EEG, MEG and empty-room-corrected
MEG frequency scaling exponents (note that LMSS and WF are not
shown here; see the text for description.). Thick and thin vertical lines
show the mean and mean ± std for each probability density function
(pdf).

effects of the background colored-noise (Suppl. Fig. S2),
it is certainly more relevant to the type of signals analyzed
here. The results of NMSS and WF are almost identical
and confirm one another (see Figure 4E, as well as Suppl.

In the Frontal region (Figure 5B), the EEG scaling
exponents show higher variance by comparison to MEG.
Also, EEG shows some overlaps with the distribution
curve of non-corrected MEG; this overlap becomes
limited to the tail end of the NMSS correction and is
abolished in the case of PLS correction. As can be
appreciated, VX (Figure 5C) shows both similar values
and similar distribution for EEG and non-corrected MEG.
These similarities, in terms of regional overall values and
distribution curve, are further enhanced after NMSS
correction. It is to be noted that, in contrast to these
similarities, the one-to-one correlation of NMSS and EEG
at VX ROI are very low (see below, Table 1B-C). The
values of PLS noise correction are very different from that
of EEG and have a similar, but narrower, distribution
curve shape. Two other ROIs show distinctively different
values and distribution in comparing EEG and MEG.
Both NMSS and PLS agree on this with PLS showing
more extreme cases. Figure 5D reveals a bimodal
distribution of MEG exponents in the parietotemporal
region (PT ROI). This region has also the highest variance
(in MEG scaling exponents) compared to other ROIS. The
distinction between EEG and MEG is enhanced in PLS
estimates; however, the variance of PT is reduced in
comparison to NMSS while the bimodality is still
preserved but weakened. The values of mean and standard
deviation for these ROIs’ exponents are provided in
Table 1A (mean ± standard deviation).
The box-plots of Fig. 5-plots further show the difference
between the medians, lower/upper quartile and
interquartile range. The overall difference is that the
uncorrected MEG has much wider variance compared to
EEG and corrected MEG (in case of PLS correction); the
absolute value of the median of MEG (uncorrected, or
corrected with either NMSS or PLS) is always smaller
than that of EEG. The VX region is an exception to the
above rules; interestingly, the one-to-one correlation of
VX happens to be the lowest of all (see below). In the
case of NMSS-corrected MEG, the shape of the pdf is
preserved. However, PLS narrows the distribution curve
of MEG but further enhances the differences between
MEG and EEG. Therefore, median and lower/upper
quartiles will have different value than that of EEG.

10
A. Mean and standard deviation
EEG
MEG (awake)
All
-1.33 ± 0.19 -1.24 ± 0.26
-1.36 ± 0.25 -0.97 ± 0.10
FR ROI
VX ROI -1.21 ± 0.13 -1.36 ± 0.10
-1.36 ± 0.12 -1.30 ± 0.29
PT ROI

NMSS
-1.06 ± 0.29
-0.76 ± 0.09
-1.14 ± 0.11
-1.16 ± 0.32

B. Pearson correlation
EEG vs. MEG
0.29
All
0.41
FR ROI
VX ROI -0.17
0.35
PT ROI

EEG vs. Corrected MEG (NMSS)
0.32
0.32
-0.15
0.38

C. Kendall Rank Corr
EEG vs. MEG
All
0.21
0.29
FR ROI
VX ROI -0.03
0.23
PT ROI

EEG vs Corrected MEG (NMSS)
0.24
0.21
-0.04
0.26

D. KruskalWallis
All
All noise-corrected
FR ROI
FR ROI noise-corrected
VX ROI
VX ROI noise-corrected
PT ROI
PT ROI noise-corrected

p value
< 10−15
< 10−15
< 10−15
< 10−15
< 10−15
< 10−15
< 10−15
< 10−15

Chi-square
1.53 103
8.03 103
3.30 103
3.72 103
1.72 103
0.23 103
0.21 103
1.18 103

df Error
34838
34838
5008
5008
5452
5452
13010
13010

Table 1 ROI statistical comparison. A. mean and std of
frequency scale exponent for all regions and individual ROI.
B. numerical values of linear Pearson correlation. C. rank-based
Kendall correlation. D. non-parametric test of analysis of variance
(KruskalWallis). Corrected MEG refers to spectral subtraction using
NMSS. The full table is provided in Supplementary information.

Correlation values (Table 1B-C) show that, although VX
ROI has the closest similarity in terms of its central
tendency and probability distribution, it provides the
lowest correlation in a pairwise fashion. P-values (for
testing the hypothesis of no correlation against the
alternative that there is a nonzero correlation) for
Pearson’s correlation were calculated using a Student’s
t-distribution for a transformation of the correlation and
they were all significant (less than 10−15 for α = 0.05).
Similarly, a non-parametric statistic Kendall tau rank
correlation was used to measure the degree of
correspondence between two rankings and assessing the
significance of this correspondence between MEG and
EEG in the selected ROIs (Table 1C). P-values for
Kendall’s tau and Spearman’s rho calculate using the
exact permutation distributions were all significant (less
than 10−15 for α = 0.05). Kendall tau shows that the rank
correlation for all areas considered together as well as for
PT, show a lesser correlation than that is shown by
Pearson linear correlation. Furthermore, we carried out a
Kruskal-Wallis nonparametric version of one-way
analysis of variance. We used this test to avoid bias in
ANOVA (KruskalWallis assumes that the measurements
come from a continuous distribution, but not necessarily a

normal distribution as is assumed in ANOVA).
KruskalWallis uses analysis of variance on the ranks of
the data values, not the data values themselves and
therefore is an appropriate test for comparison of the
homogeneity of pattern between ROIs of two image as
well as their statistical median. As shown in Table 1D, all
p-values were significant emphasizing the difference
between the spatial aspect of the spectral nature of MEG
and EEG. Note that the difference of scaling exponent of
EEG and MEG was also confirmed by nonlinear spatial
kendall correlation analysis, independently of the ROIs
classification (not shown).

4.5 Relation of scaling exponent to signal-to-noise ratio

Noise correction does not affect all the sensors in a same
fashion. As presented in Suppl. Fig. S3, the simple linear
spectral subtraction (LMSS) may lead to an increment or
decrement of the scaling exponent. In any case, the
correction achieved by this method is minimal. This is due
to the fact that LMSS ignores the complex non-linear
patterns of the SNR in different channels (Suppl. Fig. S2).
We show that for all subjects, as the frequency goes up,
the SNR goes down. It is also noticable that in each
defined frequency band, i.e. 0-10 Hz (Slow, Delta and
Theta), 11-30 Hz (Beta), 30-80 Hz (Gamma), 80-200 Hz
(Fast oscillation), 200-500 Hz (Ultra-fast oscillation),
there is an observable sensor-to-sensor SNR variability.
This variability is at its maximum in the band with the
highest SNR (i.e. 1-10 Hz). All together, the non-linear
nature of MEG SNR shows that a linear spectral
subtraction could behave non-optimally, leading to
minimal correction. This also conveys that the optimal
spectral correction can be achieved only by non-linear
methods that explicitly take into account the SNR
information of the data. Therefore the correction achieved
by NMSS and WF have higher validity, in agreement with
the fact that both methods yield similar results in terms of
values and spatial distribution (Fig. 4E, Fig. 4F).
5 Discussion

In this paper, we have used a combination of theoretical
and experimental analyses to investigate the spectral
structure of EEG and MEG signals. In the first part of the
paper, we presented a theoretical investigation showing
that if the extracellular medium is purely resistive, the
equations of the frequency dependence of electric field
and magnetic induction take a simple form, because the
admittance tensor does not depend on spatial coordinates.
Thus, the macroscopic magnetic induction does not

11

depend on the electric field outside the neuronal sources,
but only depends on currents inside neurons. In this case,
the frequency scaling of the PSD should be the same for
EEG and MEG signals. This conclusion is only valid in
the linear regime, and for low frequencies.
An assumption behind this formalism is that the spatial
and frequency dependence of the current density factorize
(Eq. 19). We have shown in the appendices that this is
equivalent to consider the different current sources as
independent. Thus, the formalism will best apply to states
where the activity of synapses is intense and of very low
correlation. This is the case for desynchronized-EEG
states or more generally “high-conductance states”, in
which the activity of neurons is intense, of low
correlation, and the neuronal membrane is dominated by
synaptic conductances (Destexhe et al., 2003). In such
conditions, the dendrites are bombarded by intense
synaptic inputs which are essentially uncorrelated, and
one can consider the current sources as independent
(Bedard et al., 2010). In the present paper, we analyzed
EEG and MEG recordings in such desynchronized states,
where this formalism best applies.
Note that the above reasoning neglects the possible effect
of abrupt variations of impedances between different
media (e.g., between dura matter and cerebrospinal fluid).
However, there is evidence that this may not be influential.
First, our previous modeling work (Bedard et al., 2004)
showed that abrupt variations of impedance have a
negligible effect on low frequencies, suggesting that even
in the presence of such abrupt variations should not play a
role at low frequencies. Second, in the frequency range
considered here, the skull and the skin are very close to be
resistive at low frequencies (Gabriel et al., 1996b), so it is
very unlikely that they play a role in the frequency scaling
in EEG and MEG power spectra even at high frequencies.
In the second part of the paper, we have analyzed
simultaneous EEG and MEG signals recorded in four
healthy human subjects while awake and eyes open (with
desynchronized EEG). Because of the large number of
channels involved, we used an automatic procedure
(B-splines analysis) to calculate the frequency scaling. As
found in previous studies (Pritchard, 1992; Freeman et al.,
2000; Bédard et al., 2006a), we confirm here that the EEG
displays frequency scaling close to 1/ f at low
frequencies5. However, this 1/ f scaling was most typical
of the midline channels, while temporal and frontal leads
tended to scale with slightly larger exponents, up to 1/ f 2
5 Note that to compare scaling exponents between studies one
must take into account that the electrode montage may influence the
scaling. For example, in bipolar (differential) EEG recordings, if two
leads are scaling as 1/(A + f ) and 1/(B + f ), the difference will have
regions scaling as 1/ f 2 .

(see Fig. 4A). The same pattern was observed in all four
patients.
This approach differs from previous studies in two
aspects. First, in contrast to prior studies (such as Novikov
et al., 1997; Linkenkaer-Hansen et al., 2001), we
calculated the frequency scaling of all the sensors and did
not confine our analysis to a specific region. Second,
unlike other investigators (such as Hwa and Ferree,
2002a,b), we did not limit our evaluations to either EEG
or MEG alone, but rather analyzed the scaling of both
type of signals simultaneously. Such a strategy enables us
to provide an extended spatial analysis of the frequency
scaling. It also provides a chance to compare the scaling
properties of these signals in relation to their physical
differences.
For the MEG recordings, the frequency scaling at low
frequencies was significantly lower compared to the EEG
(see Fig. 3). This difference in frequency scaling was also
accompanied by spatial variability patterns (see Fig. 4)
showing three distinct regions: 1) a frontal area where the
exponents had their highest values in the case of MEG; 2)
a central area where the values of exponents of EEG and
MEG get closer to each other and 3) a parietotemporal
horseshoe region showing the lowest exponents for MEG
with bimodal characteristics (Fig. 5). In some cases, the
scaling of the uncorrected and corrected MEG signal was
also close to 1/ f , as reported previously (Novikov et al.,
1997). In the frontal area (FR mask), the scaling exponent
of the EEG was generally larger. At Vertex (VX mask),
EEG and MEG had similar values and at the
Parietotemporal region (PT mask), MEG showed a
bimodal property with a much broader range of scaling
exponent in comparison to EEG (see Fig. 4). Note that to
avoid the effect of spurious peaks, Novikov et al. used the
spectrum of signal differences and argued for the
existence of a local similarity regime in brain activity.
This approach fundamentally changes the spectral
characteristics of Magnetometers (which measure the
absolute magnitude of the magnetic induction) into a
measure that only for the neighboring sensors
approximates the behavior of the gradiometers (which
measures the gradient of the magnetic induction). So it is
not clear how to relate their values to the ones obtained
here.
To make sure that the differences of frequency scaling
between EEG and MEG were not due to environmental or
instrumental noise, we have used five different methods to
remove the effect of noise. These methods are based on
different assumptions about the nature and effect of the
noise. A first possibility is to correct for the noise induced
by the MEG sensors. It is known that the SQUID
detectors used in MEG recordings are very sensitive to

12

environmental noise and they can produce 1/ f noise
(Hämäläinen et al., 1993). Under this assumption, part of
the scaling of the MEG could be due to “filtering” by the
sensors themselves, which justifies a simple subtraction of
scaling exponents to remove the effects of this filtering.
Note that such empty-room recordings were not possible
for the EEG, although the noise from the recording setup
could be estimated (see Miller et al., 2009 for example).
Because in some cases both MEG and emptyroom signals
have similar scaling, a simple correction by subtracting
the exponents would almost entirely abolish the frequency
scaling while in other cases it may even revert the sign of
the scaling exponent (see Fig. 4H , Suppl. Fig. S3).
However, if noise is not due to the sensors but is of
additive uncorrelated nature, then another method for
noise correction must be used. For this reason, we have
used a second class of well-established methods
consisting of spectral subtraction (Boll et al. 1979; Sim et
al., 1998). Using three of such methods (LMSS, NMSS
and WF) changed the scaling exponent, without
fundamentally changing its spatial pattern (Fig. 4D-F).
The largest correction was obtained by non-linear
methods which take into account the SNR information in
the MEG signal. We also applied another class of method
which uses the collective characteristics of all frequencies
in noise correction (PLS). Similar to exponent subtraction,
this method nearly abolished all the scaling of the MEG
(Fig. 4G). In conclusion, although different methods for
noise subtraction give rise to different predictions about
frequency scaling, all of the used methods enhanced the
difference between EEG and MEG scaling. Thus, we
conclude that the difference of EEG and MEG scaling
cannot be attributed to noise, but is significant, therefore
reinforcing the conclusion that the medium must be
non-resistive.
An alternative method to investigate this is the “Detrended
Fluctuation Analysis” (DFA; see Kantelhardt et al., 2001;
Linkenkaer-Hansen et al., 2001; Hwa and Ferree,
2002a,b). Like many nonlinear approaches, DFA results
are very vulnerable to the selection of certain parameters.
Different filters severely affect the scaling properties of
the electromagnetic signals to different extents, and
therefore the parameters estimated through the DFA
analysis could be false or lead to distorted interpretations
of real phenomena (Valencia et al., 2008), and these
effects are especially prominent for lower frequencies,
which are precisely our focus of investigation here. One
of the fields for which DFA can provide robust results is
to analyze surrogate data with known characteristics.
Although the use of DFA to evaluate the scaling
exponents of EEG was vigorously criticized (Valencia et
al., 2008), a previous analysis (Hwa and Ferree, 2002a,b)
reported two different regions, a central and a more

frontal, which somehow correlate with the FR and VX
regions identified in our analysis. Similarly, a study by
Buiatti et al. (2007) using DFA provided evidence for
topographical differences in scaling exponents of EEG
recordings. They report that scaling exponents were
homogeneous over the posterior half of the scalp and
became more pronounced toward the frontal areas. In
contrast to Linkenkaer-Hansen et al. (2004) (where
envelope of alpha oscillations was used for DFA
estimation), this study uses the raw signal in its DFA
analysis and yields values closer to those reported here.
Both uncorrected signals and empty-room correction
show that there is a fundamentally different frequency
scaling between EEG and MEG signals, with near-1/ f
scaling in EEG, while MEG shows a wider range at low
frequencies. Although it is possible that non-neuronal
sources affect the lower end (<1Hz) of the evaluated
frequency domain (Voipio et al., 2003), the solution to
avoid these possible effects remain limited to invasive
methods such as inserting the electrode into the scalp
(Ferree et al., 2001) or using intracranial EEG recordings
(similar to Miller et al., 2009). This approach would
render wide range spatial recording as well as
simultaneous invasive EEG and MEG recordings
technically demanding or impractical. However, if
technically feasible, such methods could provide a way to
bypass non-neuronal effects at very low frequency. It
could also provide a chance to evaluate the effects of
spatial correlation on spectral structure at a multiscale
level.
The power spectral structure we observe here is consistent
with a scenario proposed previously (Bédard et al.,
2006a): the 1/ f structure of the EEG and LFP signals is
essentially due to a frequency-filtering effect of the signal
through extracellular space; this type of scaling can be
explained by ionic diffusion and its associated Warburg
impedance6 (see Bédard and Destexhe, 2009). It is also
consistent with the matching of LFPs with multi-unit
extracellular recordings, which can be reconciled only
assuming a 1/ f filter (Bédard et al., 2006a). Finally, it is
also consistent with the recent evidence from the transfer
function calculated from intracellular and LFP recordings,
which also showed that the extracellular medium is well
described by a Warburg impedance (Bédard et al., 2010,
submitted to this issue). If this non-resistive aspect of
extracellular media is confirmed, it may influence the
results of models of source localization, which may need
to be reformulated by including more realistic
extracellular impedances.
6 Ionic diffusion can create an impedance known as the “Warburg
√
impedance”, which scales as 1/ ω , giving 1/ f scaling in the power
spectra (Taylor and Gileadi, 1995; Diard et al., 1999).

13

In conclusion, the present theoretical and experimental
analysis suggests that the scaling of EEG and MEG
signals cannot be reconciled using a resistive extracellular
medium. The 1/ f structure of EEG with smaller scaling
exponents for MEG is consistent with non-resistive
extracellular impedances, such as capacitive media or
diffusion (Warburg) impedances. Including such
impedances in the formalism is non trivial because these
impedances are strongly frequency dependent. The
Poisson integral (the solution of Poisson’s law
∇ · D = −∇ · ε ∇V = ρ ) would not apply anymore (see
Bédard et al., 2004; Bédard and Destexhe, 2009). Work is
under way to generalize the formalism and include
frequency-dependent impedances.

If we consider the differential expressions for the magnetic induction
(Eq. 20) and electric potential (Eq. 21), one can see that the frequency
dependence of the ratio of their modulus is completely determined
by the frequency dependence of the ratio of current density j mf and
j if . In Appendix D, we show that this ratio is quasi-independent of
frequency for a resistive medium, for low frequencies (smaller that
∼10 Hz), and if the current sources are of very low correlation.

Finally, it is arguable that the scaling could also be
influenced by the cancellation and the extent of spatial
averaging of microscopic signals, which are different in
EEG and MEG (for more details on cancellation see
Ahlfors et al., 2010; for details on spatial sensitivity
profile see Cuffin and Cohen, 1979). Such a possible role
of the complex geometrical arrangement of underlying
current sources should be investigated by 3D models
which could test specific assumptions about the geometry
of the current sources and dipoles, and their possible
effect on frequency scaling. Such a scenario constitutes
another possible extension of the present study.

Because the functions of spatial and frequency are statistically
independent, we can write the following expressions for the square
modulus of the fields (see Eqs. 20 and 21):

Thus, magnetic induction and electric potential can be very well
approximated by:
N

V f (r) = N < V >= N < ∑ δ V fl >
l=1
N

(22)

B f (r) = N < B >= N < ∑ δ Blf >
l=1

for sufficiently small differential dendritic elements (N/l large).

N

2
2
2
|V f (r)|2 = N 2 | < ∑ V l (r)Gm
l ( f ) > | = |V (r)| |G( f )|
l=1
N

(23)

2
2
2
kB f (r)k2 = N 2 k < ∑ Bi (r)Gm
l ( f ) > k = kW(r)k |G( f )|
i=1

l
l
where G( f ) =< Gm
l ( f ) >, V (r) =< V (r) > and W(r) =<
l
B (r) > . Thus, the scaling of the PSDs of the electric potential and
magnetic induction must be the same for low frequencies (smaller
than ∼10 Hz) if the medium is resistive and when the current sources
have very low correlation.

B Differential expression for the magnetic induction
Appendix

According to Maxwell equations, the magnetic induction is given by:

A Frequency dependence of electric field and magnetic
induction

B f (r) =

µo
4π

ZZZ ∇′ × j p (r′ )
f

kr − r′ k

head
′

′

dv′

(24)

′

where dv′ = dx 1 dx 2 dx 3 and
To compare the frequency dependence of magnetic induction and
electric field, we evaluate them in a dendritic cable, expressed
differentially. For a differential element of dendrite, in Fourier
space, the current produced by a magnetic field (Ampère-Laplace
law) is given by the following expression (see Appendix B):

δ B f (r) =

µo p ′
r − r′
j f (r ) ×
δ v′
4π
kr − r′ k3

(20)

when the extracellular medium is resistive. Note that the source of
magnetic induction is essentially given by the component of j pf
along the axial direction ( j if ) within each differential element of
dendrite because the perpendicular (membrane) current does not
participate to producing the magnetic induction if we assume a
cylindrical symmetry.
For the electric potential, we have the following differential
expression for a resistive medium (see Appendix C):
m ′
⊥ ′
1 δ I f (r )
1 j f (r )
δ V f (r) =
δ S′
=
′
4πγ kr − r k
4πγ kr − r′ k

where j mf is the transmembrane current per unit of surface.

(21)

∇′ (

1
r − r′
)=
kr − r′ k
kr − r′ k3

for a perfectly resistive medium.
We now show that this expression is equivalent to Ampere-Laplace
law.
From the identity ∇′ × (gA) = g(∇′ × A) + ∇′ g × A, where
∇′ = êx ∂∂x′ + êy ∂∂y′ + êz ∂∂z′ , we can write:
B f (r) =

µo
4π

ZZZ
head

[∇′ × (

j pf (r′ )
kr − r′ k

)+

1
µ p ′
j (r )× ∇′
] dv′ (25)
4π f
kr − r′ k

Moreover, we also have the following identity
ZZZ
head

∇′ × (

j pf (r′ )

)
kr − r′ k

dv′ = −

ZZ

∂ head

j pf (r′ )
kr − r′ k

× n̂ dS′

(26)

where n̂ is a unitary vector perpendicular to the integration surface
and going outwards from that surface. Extending the volume integral

14
outside the head, the surface integral is certainly zero because the
current is zero outside of the head. It follows that:
B f (r) =

µo
4π

ZZZ
head

j pf (r′ ) ×

′

′

r − r′
dv′
kr − r′ k3

(27)

jm

frequency dependence because it is directly proportional to γ ff for
the two expressions. Also note that if the medium is resistive, then
γ f = γ and the frequency dependence of the electric field and
potential are solely determined by that of the transmembrane current
j mf .

′

where dv′ = dx 1 dx 2 dx 3 because
∇′ (

We note that the expressions for the electric field and potential
produced by each differential element of dendrite have the same

r − r′
1
)=
′
kr − r k
kr − r′ k3

Eq. 27 is called the Ampère-Laplace law (see Eq. 13 in Hämäläinen
et al., 1993). It is important to note that this expression for the
magnetic induction is not valid when the medium is not resistive.

D Frequency dependence of the ratio jif (x)/ jmf (x).

Finally, from the last expression, the magnetic induction for a
differential element of dendrite can be written as:

For each differential element of dendrite, we consider the standard
cable model, in which the impedance of the medium is usually
neglected (it is usually considered negligible compared to the
membrane impedance). In this case, we have:

δ B f (r) =

µo p ′
r − r′
j (r ) ×
δ v′
4π f
kr − r′ k3

(28)


m

 jf =



C Differential expression of the electric field and
electric potential
In this appendix, we derive the differential expression for the electric
field. Starting from Eq. 10, we obtain the solution for the electric
potential:
V f (r) = −

1
4πγ f

ZZZ ∇ · j p (r′ )
f

kr − r′ k

head

dv′

(29)

j if = −σ

ZZZ
head

∇ · j pf (r′ ) ·

r − r′
dv′
kr − r′ k3

(30)

such that every differential element of dendrite produces the
following electric field:

δ E f (r) =

∇ · j pf (r′ )
4πγ f

·

r − r′
δ v′
kr − r′ k3

(31)

⊥
′
′
The transmembrane current δ I ⊥
f obeys δ I f = iωρ f (r )δ v because
we are in a quasi-stationary regime in a differential dendritic element.
Taking into account the differential law of charge conservation ∇ ·
j f (r′ ) = −iωρ f (r′ ), we have:

δ E f (r) =

′
′
j mf (r′ ) r − r′
δ I⊥
f (r ) r − r
=
δ S′
′
3
4πγ f kr − r k
4πγ f kr − r′ k3

(32)

where j mf is the density of transmembrane current per unit surface
and δ S′ is the surface area of a differential dendritic element. This
approximation is certainly valid for frequencies lower than 1000 Hz
because the Maxwell-Wagner time (see Bedard et al., 2006b) of the
cyto
= ε /σ ∼ 10−10 s.) is much smaller than the typical
cytoplasm (τmw
membrane time constant of a neuron (τm ∼ 5 − 20 ms).
Finally the contribution of a differential element of dendrite to the
electric potential at position r is given by

δ V f (r) =

∂ V fm
∂x

= − r1i

∂ V fm
∂x

(34)

where V fm , j if , j mf , cm , rm et ri are respectively the membrane
potential, the current density in the axial direction, the
transmembrane current density, the specific capacitance (F/m2 ), the
specific membrane resistance (Ω .m2 ) and the cytoplasm resistivity
(Ω .m).

j if (x)

1
4πγ f

+ iω cmV fm

It follows that

It follows that the electric field produced by the ensemble of sources
can be expressed as:
E f (r) = −∇V f (r) =

V fm
rm

⊥ ′
j mf (r′ )
1 δ I f (r )
1
δ S′
=
′
4πγ f kr − r k 4πγ f kr − r′ k

(33)

j mf (x)

=

rm
∂
· [ln(V fm (x)]
ri (1 + iωτm ) ∂ x

(35)

where τm = rm cm .
Under in vivo–like conditions, the activity of neurons is intense and
of very low correlation. This is the case for desynchronized-EEG
states, such as awake eyes-open conditions, where the activity of
neurons is characterized by very low levels of correlations. There is
also evidence that in such conditions, neurons are in
“high-conductance states” (Destexhe et al., 2003), in which the
synaptic activity dominates the conductance of the membrane and
primes over intrinsic currents. In such conditions, we can assume
that the synaptic current sources are essentially uncorrelated and
dominant, such that the deterministic link between current sources
will be small and can be neglected (see Bedard et al., 2010). Further
assuming that the electric properties of extracellular medium are
homogeneous, then each differential element of dendrite can be
considered as independent and the voltages Vm have similar power
spectra.
In such conditions, we have:
V fm (x) = F m (x)Gm ( f )

(36)

Note that this expression implies that we have in general for each
differential element of dendrite:

m
m

)Gm ( f )
F m (x)( 1+irωτ
 j f (x) =
m
(37)

 j i (x) = − 1 ∂ F m (x) Gm ( f ) = F i (x)Gm ( f )
f
ri
∂x

according to Eq. 34.

15
It follows that
j if (x)
j mf (x)

=

∂
rm
rm ∂
· [ln(F(x))]
· [ln(F(x))] ≈
ri (1 + iωτm ) ∂ x
ri ∂ x

(38)

Thus, for frequencies smaller than 1/(ωτm ) (about 10 to 30 Hz for

τm of 5-20 ms), the ratio

jif (x)
jmf (x)

will be frequency independent, and for

each differential element of dendrite, we have:
 m
j f (x) = F m (x)Gm ( f )
j if (x) = F i (x)Gm ( f )

(39)

for frequencies smaller than ∼10 Hz.

Acknowledgments

We thank Philip Louizo for comments on spectral
subtraction methods and Hervé Abdi for comments on
Partial least square methods. Research supported by the
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS,
France), Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR,
France), the Future and Emerging Technologies program
(FET, European Union; FACETS project) and the
National Institutes of Health (NIH grants NS18741,
EB009282 and NS44623). N.D. is supported by a
fellowship from Ecole de Neurosciences de Paris (ENP).
Additional
information
is
available
at
http://cns.iaf.cnrs-gif.fr

References
1. Abd El-Fattah MA, Dessouky MI, Diab SM and Abd
El-samie FE. (2008) Speech enhancement using an
adaptive
Wiener
filtering
approach.
Prog.
Electromagnetics Res. 4: 167-184.
2. Abdi, H., and Williams, L.J. (2010) Principal
component analysis. Wiley, New York.
3. Abdi, H. (2010) Partial least square regression,
projection
on
latent
structure
regression,
PLS-Regression. Computational Statistics bf 2:
97-106.
4. Ahlfors SP, Han J, Lin FH, Witzel T, Belliveau JW,
Hämäläinen MS and Halgren E. (2010) Cancellation
of EEG and MEG signals generated by extended and
distributed sources. Hum. Brain Mapping 31:
140-149.
5. Bédard, C., Kröger, H. and Destexhe, A. (2004)
Modeling extracellular field potentials and the
frequency-filtering properties of extracellular space.
Biophys. J. 86: 1829-1842.
6. Bédard, C., Kröger, H. and Destexhe, A. (2006a) Does
the 1/ f frequency-scaling of brain signals reflect selforganized critical states ? Physical Review Letters 97:
118102.

7. Bédard, C., Kröger, H., Destexhe, A. (2006b) Model of
low-pass filtering of local field potentials in brain
tissue. Phys. Rev. E 73: 051911.
8. Bédard, C. and Destexhe, A. (2009) Macroscopic
models of local field potentials and the apparent 1/ f
noise in brain activity. Biophys. J. 96: 2589-2603.
9. Bédard, C., Rodrigues, S., Roy, N., Contreras, D. and
Destexhe,
A.
(2010)
Evidence
for
frequency-dependent extracellular impedance from
the transfer function between extracellular and
intracellular potentials. J. Computational Neurosci., in
press.
10. Bell A.J. and Sejnowski T.J. (1995) An information
maximisation approach to blind separation and blind
deconvolution. Neural Computation 7: 1129-1159.
11. Berouti M, Schwartz R and Makhoul J. (1979)
Enhancement of speech corrupted by acoustic noise.
Proc. ICASSP 1979, 208-211.
12. Boll S.F. (1979) Suppression of acoustic noise in
speech using spectral subtraction. IEEE Trans.
Acoustic, Speech and Signal Processing 27: 113-120.
13. Boubakir C., Berkani D. and Grenez F. (2007) A
frequency-dependent speech enhancement method. J.
Mobile Communication 1: 97-100.
14. Buiatti M, Papo D, Baudonnière PM and van
Vreeswijk C. (2007) Feedback modulates the temporal
scale-free dynamics of brain electrical activity in a
hypothesis testing task. Neuroscience 146: 1400-1412.
15. Buzsáki G and Draguhn A. (2004) Neuronal
oscillations in cortical networks. Science 304:
1926-1929.
16. Cuffin BN and Cohen D. (1979) Comparison of the
magnetoencephalogram and electroencephalogram.
EEG Clin. Neurophysiol. bf 47: 132-146.
17. de Boor, C. (2001) A Practical Guide to Splines,
Springer-Verlag, New York, revised edition, 2001.
18. Delorme, A. and Makeig, S. (2004) EEGLAB: an
open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG
dynamics including independent component analysis.
J. Neurosci. Methods 134: 9-21.
19. Destexhe, A., Rudolph, M. and Paré, D. (2003) The
high-conductance state of neocortical neurons in vivo.
Nature Reviews Neurosci. 4: 739-751.
20. Diard, J-P., Le Gorrec, B. and Montella, C. (1999)
Linear diffusion impedance. General expression and
applications. J. Electroanalytical Chem. . 471:
126-131.
21. Eilers, P.H.C. and Marx, B.D. (1996) Flexible
smoothing with B-splines and penalties. Statistical
Science 11: 89121.
22. Ferree TC, Luu P, Russell GS and Tucker DM. (2001)
Scalp electrode impedance, infection risk, and EEG
data quality. Clin. Neurophysiol. 112: 536-544.

16

23. Foster, KR. and Schwan, HP. (1989) Dielectric
properties of tissues and biological materials: a critical
review. Crit. Reviews Biomed. Engineering 17:
25-104.
24. Freeman WJ, Rogers LJ, Holmes MD and Silbergeld
DL. (2000) Spatial spectral analysis of human
electrocorticograms including the alpha and gamma
bands. J. Neurosci. Methods 95: 111-121.
25. Gabriel, S., Lau, R.W. and Gabriel, C. (1996a) The
dielectric properties of biological tissues : I. Literature
survey. Phys. Med. Biol.. 41 : 2231-2249.
26. Gabriel, S., Lau, R.W. and Gabriel, C. (1996b) The
dielectric properties of biological tissues : II.
Measurements in the frequency range 10 Hz to 20
GHz. Phys. Med. Biol.. 41: 2251-2269.
27. Gabriel, S., Lau, R.W. and Gabriel, C. (1996c) The
dielectric properties of biological tissues : III.
Parametric models for the dielectric spectrum tissues.
Phys. Med. Biol.. 41 : 2271-2293.
28. Garthwaite P. (1994) An interpretation of partial least
squares. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 89: 122-127.
29. Gulrajani, R.M. (1998) Bioelectricity and
Biomagnetism, Wiley, New York.
30. Hämäläinen, M., Hari, R., Ilmoniemi, R.J., Knuutila,
J.
and
Lounasmaa,
O.V.
(1993)
Magnetoencephalography – theory, instrumentation,
and applications to noninvasive studies of the working
human brain. Reviews Modern Physics 65: 413-497.
31. Hwa RC and Ferree TC (2002a). Scaling properties of
fluctuations in the human electroencephalogram. Phys
Rev E 66: 021901.
32. Hwa RC and Ferree TC (2002b). Fluctuation analysis
of
human
electroencephalogram.
Nonlinear
Phenomena in Complex Systems 5: 302-307.
33. Kamath, S. and Loizou, P. (2002). A multi-band
spectral subtraction method for enhancing speech
corrupted by colored noise. Proceedings of ICASSP
2002, 4160-4164.
34. Kantelhardt J, Koscielny-Bunde E, Rego H, Havlin S
and Bunde A. (2001) Detecting long-range correlations
with detrended fluctuation analysis. Phys A 295: 441454.
35. Katkovnik,V., Egiazarian, K. and Astola, J. (2006)
Local approximation in signal and image processing,
SPIE Press.
36. Landau L and Lifchitz E. (1984) Electrodynamics of
Continuous Media, MIR Editions, Moskow.
37. Lim, J.S. and Oppenheim, A.V. (1979) Enhancement
and band width compression of noisy speech. Proc. of
the IEEE 67: 1586-1604.
38. Linkenkaer-Hansen K, Nikouline VV, Palva JM, and
Ilmoniemi RJ. (2001) Long-range temporal
correlations and scaling behavior in human brain
oscillations. J. Neurosci. 21: 1370-1377.

39. Logothetis, N.K., Kayser, C. and Oeltermann, A.
(2007) In vivo measurement of cortical impedance
spectrum in monkeys: Implications for signal
propagation. Neuron 55: 809-823.
40. Loizou, PC. (2007) Speech Enhancement: Theory and
Practice, CRC Press, Boca Raton: FL.
41. Magee L. (1998) Nonlocal behavior in polynomical
regression. The American Statistican 52: 20-22.
42. Miller KJ, Sorensen LB, Ojemann JG, and den Nijs M.
(2009) Power-law scaling in the brain surface electric
potential. PLoS Comput Biol. 5: e1000609.
43. Nenonen, J., Kajola, M., Simola, J. and Ahonen, A.
(2004) Total information of multichannel MEG sensor
arrays. In: Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on Biomagnetism (Biomag2004), edited
by Halgren, E., Ahlfors, A., Hamalainen, M. and
Cohen, D., Boston, MA, pp. 630631.
44. Novikov, E., Novikov, A., Shannahoff-Khalsa, D.,
Schwartz, B. and Wright, J. (1997) Scale-similar
activity in the brain. Phys. Rev. E 56: R2387-R2389.
45. Nunez, P.L. and Srinivasan, R. (2005) Electric Fields
of the Brain. The Neurophysics of EEG (2nd edition).
Oxford university press, Oxford, UK.
46. Plonsey, R. (1969) Bioelectric Phenomena, McGraw
Hill, New York.
47. Pritchard, W.S. (1992) The brain in fractal time:
1/ f -like power spectrum scaling of the human
electroencephalogram. Int. J. Neurosci. 66: 119-129.
48. Rall, W. and Shepherd, G.M. (1968) Theoretical
reconstruction of field potentials and dendrodendritic
synaptic interactions in olfactory bulb. J.
Neurophysiol. 31: 884-915.
49. Ramirez
RR.
(2008)
Source
localization.
Scholarpedia 3 1733.
50. Ranck, J.B., Jr. (1963) Specific impedance of rabbit
cerebral cortex. Exp. Neurol. 7: 144-152.
51. Royston P and Altman D. (1994) Regression using
fractional polynomials of continuous covariates:
parsimonious
parametric
modelling.
Applied
Statistician 43: 429-467.
52. Sarvas, L. (1987) Basic mathematical and
electromagnetic concepts of the biomagnetic inverse
problem. Phys. Med. Biol. 32: 11-22.
53. Sim BL, Tong YC, Chang JC and Tan CT. (1998). A
Parametric formulation of the generalized spectral
subtraction method. IEEE Trans. Speech and Audio
Processing 6: 328-337.
54. Taylor, S.R. and Gileadi, E. (1995) The physical
interpretation of the Warburg impedance. Corrosion
51: 664-671.
55. Valencia M, Artieda J, Alegre M, and Maza D. (2008)
Influence of filters in the detrended fluctuation
analysis of digital electroencephalographic data. J.
Neurosci. Methods 170: 310-316.

17

56. Voipio J, Tallgren P, Heinonen E, Vanhatalo S, and
Kaila K. (1989) Millivolt-scale DC shifts in the
human scalp EEG: evidence for a nonneuronal
generator. J. Neurophysiol. 89: 2208-2214.
57. Wolters, C and de Munck JC. (2007) Volume
conduction. Scholarpedia 2: 1738.

Supplementary material

Supplementary methods

We give details below to some of the methods and
quantities used in the Results.

SNR

Two of the used methods for noise-correction are based
on band-specific signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in order to
cancel the effects of background colored-noise in the
spectra of interest. In each subject, average PSD was used
to calculate signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). For SNR
calculation, few frequency bands were defined based on
the categorization in Buzsaki & Draguhn (2004): 0-10 Hz
(Slow, Delta and Theta), 11-30 Hz (Beta), 30-80 Hz
(Gamma), 80-200 Hz (Fast oscillation), 200-500 Hz
(Ultra-fast oscillation). SNR was calculated as:
PSDsignal

SNRbi =

∑ 10 ∗ log10( PSDnoisebibi )
n

(40)

for a given band ”b” and sensor ”i”, ”n” is the frequency
resolution of that band. This method was applied on
individual average PSD as well as shape preserving spline
of each average PSD where each PSD was fist smoothed
in log10 scale using a shape preserving spline, i.e,
Piecewise Cubic Hermite Interpolating Polynomial
(PCHIP).

spectrum (original signal) and noise magnitude spectrum
estimate (“noise”), respectively. k is the frequency index,
while ak and bk are linear coefficient parameters of the
summation. Spectral subtraction methods fall into three
main categories (Sim et al., 1998). The simplest of all, a
linear method where ak = bk = 1, α =2, following Boll et
al. (1979) was used here. This linear multiband spectral
subtraction (LMSS) method is well-established for noise
subtraction (see Loizou, 2007 for a comparative study of
noise subtraction methods).
An improved method, with ak = 1 and bk = v, where ”v” is
the oversubtraction factor. This method uses
oversubtraction and introduces a spectral flooring to
minimize residual noise and musical noise (Berouti et al.,
1979). A second category of spectral subtraction is based
on ak = bk = f(k). Third and the most robust methods are
based on a non-linear multiband subtraction (NMSS)
where ak = 1 and bk = v(k); i.e., the oversubtraction factor
is adjusted based on a specfic band’s SNR. These methods
proposed by (Kamath and Loizou, 2002; Loizou, 2007)
are suitable for dealing with colored noise (Boubakir et
al., 2007; Sim et al., 1998), a case similar to MEG
recordings. The spectrum is divided into N
non-overlapping bands, and spectral subtraction is
performed independently in each band. The Eqs. 41 is
simply reduced to:
2
2
[ 2
|Sd
i (k)| = |Yi (k)| − αi δi |Di (k)| , bi ≤ k ≤ ei

(42)

where bi and ei are the beginning and ending frequency
bins of the ith frequency band, αi is the overall
oversubtraction factor of the ith band and δi is a tweaking
factor. The band specific oversubtraction factor αi is a
function of the segmental SNRi of the ith frequency band.
After calculating bandspecific SNR (Eqs. 40), we used the
product of lower 10 percent of crosssubject average SNR
and standard deviation of SNRi to estimate the αi δi
subtraction coefficient. Next, simply by multiplying the
noise PSD by this coefficient and subtracting it from the
measured PSD, the enhanced PSD was achieved.

Wiener filter (WF) spectral enhancement
Multiband spectral subtraction

Assuming the additive noise to be stationary and
uncorrelated with the clean signal, nearly most spectral
subtraction methods can be formulated using a parametric
equation:
d α
d α = ak |Y (k)|α − bk |D(k)|
|S(k)|

(41)

b k | refer to enhanced magnitude
where |Sbk |, |Yk | and |D
spectrum estimate (corrected signal), the noisy magnitude

The principle of the Wiener filter is to obtain an estimate
of the clean signal from that of the noisy measurement
through minimizing the Mean Square Error (MSE)
between the desired and the measured signal (Lim et al.,
1979; Abd El-Fattah et al., 2008). In the frequency
domain, this relation is formulated as filtering transfer
function:
W F(k) =

Ps (k)
Ps (k) + Pn (k)

(43)

18

where, as before, Ps (k) and Pn (k) refer to enhanced power
spectrum estimate and noise power spectrum estimate
respectively for a signal frame and k is the frequency
index. Based on the definition of SNR as, the ratio of
these two elements, one can formulate the WF as:
W FK = [1 +

1 −1
]
SNRk

(44)

After calculation of bandspecific WF, the noisy signal is
simply muliplied by the WF to obtain the enhanced signal.

Partial least square (PLS) approximation of non-noisy
spectrum

Partial least squares (PLS) regression, combines
“Principal component analysis” (PCA) and “Multiple
linear regression” (Abdi, 2010; Abdi and Williams, 2010).
While PCA finds hyperplanes of maximum variance
between the response and independent variables, PLS
projects the predicted variables and the observable
variables to a new space. Then from this new space, it
finds a linear regression model for the projected data.
Next, using this model, PLS finds the multidimensional
direction in the X space that explains the maximum
multidimensional variance direction in the Y space (Abdi,
2010; Garthwaite, 1994). If X is the PSD of noise
measurement and Y is the PSD of the measured signal
contaminated with background noise, one can use PLS to
”clean” one matrix (Y) by predicting Y from X and then
using the residual of the prediction of Y by X as the
estimate of pure PSD. The patterns of the awake spectrum
that statistically resembles the patterns of emptyroom
spectral noise are those that should be removed. As during
PLS algorithm, the data is mean subtracted and
z-normalized, the predection of Y from X is an
approximate of the zscored PSD. Therefore, the reseidual
Y, which is taken as the spectral features that can not be
predicted by noise, also has zscored values. It has too be
emphasized that this approach of denoising only works in
the spectral but not the time domain.

Supplementary table

Supplementary figures

A. Mean and standard deviation
EEG
MEG (awake)
All
-1.33 ± 0.19 -1.24 ± 0.26
-1.36 ± 0.25 -0.97 ± 0.10
FR ROI
VX ROI -1.21 ± 0.13 -1.36 ± 0.10
-1.36 ± 0.12 -1.30 ± 0.29
PT ROI
All
FR ROI
VX ROI
PT ROI

NMSS
-1.06 ± 0.29
-0.76 ± 0.09
-1.14 ± 0.11
-1.16 ± 0.32

WF
-1.05 ± 0.27
-0.76 ± 0.08
-1.12 ± 0.11
-1.14 ± 0.30

MEG(empty)
-1.04 ± 0.13
-0.97 ± 0.06
-1.10 ± 0.09
-1.08 ± 0.15
PLS
-0.50 ± 0.11
-0.40 ± 0.05
-0.50 ± 0.04
-0.54 ± 0.11

B. Pearson correlation of EEG vs.
MEG LMSS NMSS
0.29
0.29
0.32
All
FR ROI
0.41
0.39
0.32
-0.10
-0.15
VX ROI -0.17
PT ROI
0.35
0.34
0.38

WF
0.33
0.37
-0.13
0.39

PLS
0.37
0.01
0.01
0.46

C. Kendall Rank Corr of EEG vs.
MEG LMSS NMSS
All
0.21
0.21
0.24
0.29
0.23
0.21
FR ROI
VX ROI -0.03
0.04
-0.04
0.23
0.23
0.26
PT ROI

WF
0.25
0.27
-0.03
0.26

PLS
0.29
-0.06
0.07
0.30

LMSS
-1.24 ± 0.28
-0.96 ± 0.11
-1.36 ± 0.10
-1.31 ± 0.32
ES
-0.20 ± 0.23
-0.00 ± 0.09
-0.26 ± 0.08
-0.22 ± 0.26

ES
0.35
0.17
-0.28
0.41
ES
0.23
0.12
-0.09
0.27

Table 2 ROI statistical comparison for different noise correction
methods. A. mean and std of frequency scale exponent for all regions
and individual ROI. B. numerical values of linear Pearson correlation.
C. rank-based Kendall correlation.

Figure S1: Frequency spectra of magnetometers and gradiometers.
Comparison of awake (blue) vs empty-room (red) recordings
between Magnetometers (MAG) and Gradiometers (GRAD1,
GRAD2) in a sample subject. As for the EEG, the MEG signal is
characterized by a peak at around 10 Hz, which is presumably due
to residual alpha rhythm (although the subject had eyes open). This
is also visible from the MEG signals (Fig. 1) as well as from their
PSD (Fig. 3 and MAG panel here). The power spectrum from the
empty-room signals also show a peak at around 10 Hz, but this
peak disappears from the gradiometer empty-room signals, while the
10 Hz peak of MEG still persists for gradiometers awake recordings.
This suggests that these two 10 Hz peaks are different oscillation
phenomena. All other subjects showed a similar pattern.

19

Figure S2: Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of Magnetometers (MAG) for
multiple frequency bands: 0-10 Hz (Slow, Delta and Theta), 11-30
Hz (Beta), 30-80 Hz (Gamma), 80-200 Hz (Fast oscillation), 200500 Hz (Ultra-fast oscillation). In the scatterplots, red astrisks relate
to individual sensors and the blue line is the band-specific mean
across the sensors. In boxplots, the box has lines at the lower quartile,
median (red), and upper quartile values. Smallest and biggest nonoutlier observations (1.5 times the interquartile range IRQ) are shown
as whiskers. Outliers are data with values beyond the ends of the
whiskers and are displayed with a red + sign. In all subjects, the
SNR shows a band-specific trend and has the highest value for lower
frequencies and gradually drops down as band frequency goes up. As
the frequency drops, the variability of SNR (among sensors) rises;
therefore, the SNR of the lowest band (1-10 Hz) shows the highest
sensors-to-sensor variability and the highest SNR in comparison to
other frequency bands.

Figure S3: Noise correction comparison. Every horizontal line
showes a voxel of the topographical maps shown in Fig. 4 sorted
based on the scaling exponent values of awake MEG (left stripe).
Using a continuous color spectrum, these stripes show that minimal
correction is achived by LMSS. As indicated in the text, the
performance of this method is not reliable due to the nonlinear
nature of SNR (see Suppl. Fig. S2). NMSS yields higher degree of
correction. WF performs almost identical to NMSS (not shown here).
Exponent subtraction almost abolishes the sacling all together (far
right stripe). PLS results in values between NMSS and ”Exponent
subtraction”. For details of each of these correction procedures, see
Methods. LMSS, NMSS and WF rely on additive uncorrelated nature
of noise. “Exponent subtraction” assumes that the noise is intrinsic to
SQUID. PLS ascertains the characteristics of noise to the collective
obeserved pattern of spectral domain across all frequencies. See text
for more details.

