1

arXiv:1004.0336v2 [q-bio.MN] 12 Sep 2011

The role of incoherent microRNA-mediated feedforward loops
in noise buffering
Matteo Osella1,2,†,∗ , Carla Bosia1,2,† , Davide Corá2,3 , Michele Caselle1,2
1 Dipartimento di Fisica Teorica and INFN University of Torino, V. Pietro Giuria 1,
I-10125 Torino Italy.
2 Center for Complex Systems in Molecular Biology and Medicine, University of Torino,
V. Accademia Albertina 13, I-10100 Torino, Italy.
3 Systems Biology Lab, Institute for Cancer Research and Treatment (IRCC), School of
Medicine, University of Torino, Str. Prov. 142, Km. 3.95, Candiolo I-10060 Torino, Italy
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
∗ E-mail:mosella@to.infn.it

Abstract
MicroRNAs are endogenous non-coding RNAs which negatively regulate the expression of protein-coding
genes in plants and animals. They are known to play an important role in several biological processes
and, together with transcription factors, form a complex and highly interconnected regulatory network.
Looking at the structure of this network it is possible to recognize a few overrepresented motifs which are
expected to perform important elementary regulatory functions. Among them a special role is played by
the microRNA-mediated feedforward loop in which a master transcription factor regulates a microRNA
and, together with it, a set of target genes. In this paper we show analytically and through simulations
that the incoherent version of this motif can couple the fine-tuning of a target protein level with an
efficient noise control, thus conferring precision and stability to the overall gene expression program,
especially in the presence of fluctuations in upstream regulators. Among the other results, a nontrivial
prediction of our model is that the optimal attenuation of fluctuations coincides with a modest repression
of the target expression. This feature is coherent with the expected fine-tuning function and in agreement
with experimental observations of the actual impact of a wide class of microRNAs on the protein output
of their targets. Finally we describe the impact on noise-buffering efficiency of the cross-talk between
microRNA targets that can naturally arise if the microRNA-mediated circuit is not considered as isolated,
but embedded in a larger network of regulations.

Author Summary
The expression of protein-coding genes is controlled by a complex network of regulatory interactions. It
is becoming increasingly appreciated that the post-transcriptional repression by microRNAs, a class of
small non-coding RNAs, is a key layer of regulation in several biological processes. Since gene expression
is a fundamentally stochastic process, the mixed network (comprising transcriptional and microRNAmediated regulations) has to reliably perform its functions in the presence of noise. In this paper we
investigate the function of one of the recurrent architectures of this network, the microRNA-mediated
feedforward loops, using a detailed analytical model and simulations. With this approach we show that
these regulatory circuits are appropriately designed so as to control noise, giving a rigorous mathematical
proof of a previously proposed biological intuition. Moreover the theoretical framework introduced in this
paper allows us to make nontrivial predictions that are presently in agreement with observed features of
microRNA regulation and that could be more specifically tested experimentally in the future.

2

Introduction
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous small non-coding RNAs which negatively regulate the protein
production of their targets in metazoans and plants. They are expected to target a substantial portion
of the human genome [1] and have been shown to play key roles in several biological processes ranging
from development and metabolism to apoptosis and signaling pathways [2–6]. Moreover their profiles are
altered in several human diseases [7,8], making miRNAs a major focus of research in nowadays molecular
biology.
Recent work, reviewed in [9], has shown that the actions of miRNAs and transcription factors (TFs)
are often highly coordinated, suggesting that the transcriptional and post-transcriptional layers of regulation are strongly correlated and that miRNA functions can be fully understood only by addressing
TF and miRNA regulatory interactions together in a single “mixed” network. As in the case of purely
transcriptional networks [10], in this mixed network several recurrent wiring patterns can be detected,
called network motifs [11–14]. The common lore is that network motifs were selected by evolution (and
are thus overrepresented in the network) to perform elementary regulatory functions. Among these motifs one of the most interesting is the miRNA-mediated feedforward loop (FFL) in which a master TF
regulates a miRNA and, together with it, a set of target genes (see Figure 1). This motif, which shall
be the main interest of our paper, was recently discussed in [11–13]. In all these papers, despite the fact
that the authors used very different computational approaches, the FFL was shown to be remarkably
overrepresented in the network, thus supporting the idea that it should play an important regulatory role.
Depending on the sign of the transcriptional regulations, FFLs can be divided into two classes: coherent
and incoherent [11,13,15]. In the coherent FFLs both pathways from the TF to the target have the same
effect (both repressing or activating target expression), while in the incoherent ones the two pathways
have opposite effects. Correspondingly one finds different expression patterns in the two cases: coexpression of miRNA and its target for incoherent FFLs and mutually exclusive expression for the coherent ones
(Figure 1). This dual picture allows to better understand the complex patterns of correlated expression
of miRNAs and their targets observed in experiments [1, 13, 16]. In many cases the targets show low
expression in miRNA-expressing cells, suggesting coherent regulation. On the other hand, several other
cases present an opposite trend, showing that miRNA repression can act in opposition to transcriptional
regulation. Indeed, different degrees of expression overlap, due to different regulatory circuitries, have
been related to different miRNA functions in several recent papers [1, 3, 4, 15, 17]. For example, in a
coherent FFL as the one in Figure 1D, the miRNA expression is induced by an upstream TF that at the
same time represses the target transcription, with the effect of enforcing mutually exclusive domains of
expression as the ones observed in the fruit fly [18] or for miR-196 and its target Hoxb8 in mouse [19]
and chicken [20]. In this cases the miRNA can help the transcriptional repression of a target protein
that should not be expressed in a particular cell type, acting as a post-transcriptional failsafe control.
Instead, an incoherent FFL (Figure 1C) can promote high target expression in miRNA-expressing cells,
suggesting that miRNAs may have in this case a fine-tuning function, keeping the protein level in the
correct functional range. A typical example is the regulation of the atrophin gene by the miRNA miR-8
in Drosophila. It was shown [21] that both a too high and a too low level of expression of the atrophin
gene could be detrimental for the organism and that miR-8 is mandatory to keep the expression level
exactly in the correct range.
It is by now well understood that gene espression is inherently a stochastic process [22–24]. This has
particularly relevant effects when the number of proteins and/or messenger RNAs (mRNAs) involved is
small and stochastic fluctuations may give sizeable deviations from the mean value of the final protein
product. Thus, the question that naturally arises is how the cell can reconcile the fine-tuning function
described above with these fluctuations. If there is only a relatively narrow protein level which is optimal, the tuning regulation must also prevent protein fluctuations outside the functional range. In fact,
it has been conjectured that the incoherent FFLs that enable tuning interaction, can also have a role in
buffering noise in the target expression [13, 15, 25].

3

The main goal of our paper is to introduce and solve analytically a stochastic model describing
these incoherent FFLs in order to give a proof to this conjecture. Our results show that with respect
to the simple gene activation by a TF, the introduction of a miRNA-mediated repressing pathway can
significantly dampen fluctuations in the target protein output for essentially all the choices of input
parameters and initial conditions. As a test of our analysis we also performed extensive numerical
simulations which nicely agree with our analytical results. It is important to stress (and we shall discuss
this issue in detail in the following) that this noise buffering function is actually a precise consequence
of the peculiar topolgy of the FFL. In fact, in order to fine-tune the level of a target protein one would
not necessarily need a FFL topology. The same result could well be obtained with an independent
miRNA (not under the control of the master TF which activates the target), but this choice would lead
to strong fluctuations in the target expression. In the same theoretical framework we can show that the
construction of an optimal noise filter does not necessarily imply a strong repression, in agreement with
the observation that the miRNA down-regulation of a target is often modest [26, 27].

Results
The theoretical framework
Here we focus on the incoherent FFL in Figure 2A to present our modeling strategy. For each gene
in the circuit we take into account the essential features of transcription, translation, degradation and
interactions between genes in the regulatory network (detailed scheme in Figure 2A’). Accordingly, the
state of the system is described by five variables (w, q, s, r, p) representing: w the number of mRNAs
transcribed from the TF gene, q the number of TF molecules, s the number of miRNAs, r the number
of mRNAs transcribed from the target gene and p the number of target proteins. We want to explore
the mean (< xi >) and the standard deviation ( σxi ) of each molecular species xi ∈ (w, q, s, r, p) and we
will show that these quantities can be obtained analitically at the steady-state. The noise strength of
the species xi will be expressed by the coefficient of variation defined as CVxi = σxi / < xi >. As usual
in this type of models, transcriptional activation is introduced by choosing the rate of transcription of
the regulated gene (ks (q), kr (q) in our case) as a nonlinear increasing function of the number of TFs (q)
present in the cell [28–31]:

kr (q)

=

ks (q)

=

kr q c
hcr + q c
ks q c
,
c
hs + q c

(1)

where hr and hs are dissociation constants, specifying the amount of TFs at which the transcription
rate is half of its maximum value (kr and ks respectively). c is the Hill coefficient and fixes the steepness
of the activation curve.
The miRNA action can direct translational repression or destabilization of target mRNAs [32], i.e. it
decreases the rate of translation or increases the rate of degradation of target mRNAs. We choose to
model the effect of miRNA regulation by taking the translation rate of the target (kp (s)) to be a repressive
Hill function of the number of miRNAs (s):
kp (s) =

kp
.
1 + ( hs )c

(2)

The parameter h specifies the quantity of miRNAs that determines a rate of translation kp /2, and c
is again the Hill coefficient. For simplicity we use the same Hill coefficient c for each Hill function, but
the analysis can be straigthforwardly generalized to the case of different steepnesses.

4

The alternative choice of a degradation rate of mRNAs as a function of miRNA concentration does not
yield significantly different results, as reported in Text S1. The use of Hill functions to model regulations
by miRNAs is coherent with their established catalytic action in animals [33]. A stoichiometric model
has been studied in the context of sRNA regulation in bacteria [34–36], in which each sRNA can pair
with one messenger and drive its sequestration or degradation in an irreversible fashion. A comparison
with a possible stoichiometric action is shown in Text S1.
The probability of finding in our cell exactly (w, q, s, r, p) molecules at time t satisfies the master equation:
∂t Pw,q,s,r,p = kw (Pw−1,q,s,r,p − Pw,q,s,r,p ) + kq w(Pw,q−1,s,r,p − Pw,q,s,r,p )
+kr (q)(Pw,q,s,r−1,p − Pw,q,s,r,p ) + ks (q)(Pw,q,s−1,r,p − Pw,q,s,r,p )
h
i
+kp (s)r(Pw,q,s,r,p−1 − Pw,q,s,r,p ) + gw (w + 1)Pw+1,q,s,r,p − wPw,q,s,r,p
h
i
h
i
+gq (q + 1)Pw,q+1,s,r,p − qPw,q,s,r,p + gr (r + 1)Pw,q,s,r+1,p − rPw,q,s,r,p
h
i
h
i
+gs (s + 1)Pw,q,s+1,r,p − sPw,q,s,r,p + gp (p + 1)Pw,q,s,r,p+1 − pPw,q,s,r,p ,

(3)

where kw , kr (q), ks (q) are transcription rates, kq , kp (s) are translation rates, and gxi represents the
degradation rate of the species xi .
In order to solve the master equation for < xi > and σxi for all xi ∈ (w, q, s, r, p) at the steady state we
have to linearize Hill functions. This is by now a standard procedure [29, 30]. The idea is that at the
steady state the distributions of regulators (TFs or miRNAs) have a finite width and sample only small
regions of the domains of the corresponding Hill functions. We may therefore approximate Hill functions
by their linearizations around the mean values of the regulators q or s (see Text S1 for details of the
linearization), ending up with:
kr (q) ∼

kr0 + kr1 q

ks (q) ∼

ks0 + ks1 q

kp (s) ∼

kp0 − kp1 s.

(4)

We would like to emphasize that linearizing the Hill functions does not mean to linearize the model.
In fact, even with a linearized dependence on the miRNA copy number, our model keeps a nonlinear
contribution in the term encoding the target translation (due to the fact that it depends on both the
number of miRNAs and mRNAs). As we will see later, this nonlinearity leads to non trivial consequences.
Despite this nonlinearity, the moment generating function approach [29, 30, 37] can be succesfully used.
By defining the generating function:
X
F (z1 , z2 , z3 , z4 , z5 ) =
z1w z2q z3s z4r z5p Pw,q,s,r,p ,
(5)
w,q,s,r,p

and using the linearization in equation 4 we can convert equation 3 into a second-order partial differential equation:
∂t F

= kw (z1 F − F ) + kq z1 (z2 ∂z1 F − ∂z1 F ) + kr0 (z4 F − F )
+kr1 z2 (z4 ∂z2 F − ∂z2 F ) + ks0 (z3 F − F ) + ks1 z2 (z3 ∂z2 F − ∂z2 F )
+kp0 z4 (z5 ∂z4 F − ∂z4 F ) − kp1 z3 z4 (z5 ∂z3 ,z4 F − ∂z3 ,z4 F )
+gw (∂z1 F − z1 ∂z1 F ) + gq (∂z2 F − z2 ∂z2 F ) + gs (∂z3 F − z3 ∂z3 F )
+gr (∂z4 F − z4 ∂z4 F ) + gp (∂z5 F − z5 ∂z5 F ).

(6)

5

We now use the following properties of the moment generating function: F |1 = 1; ∂zi F =< xi >;
∂z2i F =< x2i > − < xi > where |1 means evaluation of F at xi = 1 for all i. At the steady state (∂t F = 0)
differentiation of equation 6 generates equations for successively higher moments. In particular, we
are interested in < p > and σp and differentiating up to the fourth moments leads to their analytical
expressions (see Text S1 for details of the calculation).
Noise in protein expression is originated by the combination of two types of fluctuations: intrinsic and
extrinsic ones. Intrinsic fluctuations are essentially due to the stochasticity of the gene expression process.
Extrinsic ones, instead, are due to the environment. In the latter case a prominent role is played by the
noise transmitted by upstream genes [38,39]. As a matter of fact there is a certain degree of arbitrariness
in the definition of extrinsic and intrinsic noise [40]. Since we focus on the target production we define
“intrinsic” the noise derived from the stochastic steps of its expression (transcription, translation and
degradation) and “extrinsic” the noise propagating from its regulators (s, q) that makes the parameters
(kr (q), kp (s)) fluctuate through the Hill functions. Therefore in our model we do not have to include
extrinsic noise with an arbitrary distribution as it naturally arises from the stochastic steps of production
of regulators and propagates to the target gene.

Comparison with a TF transcriptional control
To show the noise buffering role of the miRNA-mediated incoherent FFL (Figure 2A) we first compare it
to a simpler process: a gene activated by a TF (Figure 2B), without any post-transcriptional regulation.
The strategy used to model this linear network is equivalent to the one explained in the previous section
for the FFL (see Text S1 for more details) and it is presented schematically in Figure 2B’. Starting from a
gene activated by a TF, in principle the gain of a new regulator implies also a new source of extrinsic noise
for the target, given that the fluctuations in the number of regulators propagate to downstream genes
and, as discussed in [41], the addition of extrinsic fluctuations generally increases the noise of a system.
However, the peculiar structure of the FFL can overcome this problem, actually reducing noise, as was
previously shown in the case of negative transcriptional auto-regulation [42]. Given that the two circuits
lead to different mean values, the comparison of noise strengths in target protein will be done in terms
of the coefficient of variation (CVp = σp / < p >). With the parameter choice explained in the caption
of Figure 3, the predicted CVp are 0.147 and 0.1 for the TF-gene cascade and the FFL respectively.
Therefore the introduction of the miRNA pathway not only controls the mean value but also reduces the
relative fluctuations. This effect can be clearly seen looking at the shape of the probability distributions
in Figure 3C. It is rather easy to understand the origin of this noise buffering effect: any fluctuation in
the concentration of TFs affects the rate of mRNA transcription, driving consequently the target protein
away from its steady state, but mRNA and miRNA concentrations tend to vary in the same direction in
the FFL. In this way, miRNAs can always tune the protein production against TF fluctuations. As can
be seen in Figure 3A and B, there is a certain degree of correlation in the time evolution of q, r, p due to
noise propagation, despite the overimposed higher-frequency intrinsic noise of each molecular species, but
in the case of the FFL the p trajectory is less sensitive to q fluctuations thanks to the action of miRNAs
(s). It is important to stress that this result is not affected by the Hill function linearization discussed
above. In fact, the predictions of the model are in good agreement with Gillespie simulations (which keep
into account the full nonlinear repressing and activating Hill functions). Moreover our results turn out
to be robust with respect to parameter choice, showing a rather stable noise reduction essentially for any
choice of expression and degradation constants (see Text S1 for details).

Comparison with an open regulatory circuit
The same fine-tuning of the mean target concentration achieved with a FFL could be equally obtained
with an open circuit like the one in Figure 2C, where the miRNA gene is controlled by an independent TF.
If the two TFs, activating the miRNA and target gene expression, have the same rate of transcription,

6

translation and degradation of the single master TF in the FFL -as well as the other model parameters
as in Figure 2A’ and C’- the stationary mean levels of the various molecular species are the same in
both circuits. In particular, the mean concentration of the target protein can be fine-tuned to the same
desired value by both circuits. However, while the deterministic description at the steady state is the
same in the two cases (see Text S1 for details) the behaviour of fluctuations is completely different. As
we shall see below, the open circuit leads to much larger fluctuations in the final product than the FFL.
It is well possible that this is the reason for which FFLs have been positively selected by evolution and
are presently overrepresented in the mixed TF-miRNA regulatory network. In fact, fine-tuning can be
implemented advantageously only together with a fluctuation control: a precise setting of the mean value
of a target protein is useless without a simultaneous damping of the stochastic fluctuations. To assess
this result we used the same strategy discussed above: we solved analitically for both circuits the master
equation and tested our results with a set of Gillespie simulations. Our results are shown in Figure 4: the
lack of correlation between the miRNA and mRNA trajectories in the open circuit (Figure 4B) leads to
much larger deviations from the mean number of proteins with respect to the FFL case. Using the same
parameter values of Figure 3, the predicted CVp for the open circuit is CVp = 0.175, to be compared
with the value CVp = 0.1 of the FFL. Different cell-to-cell variability can be clearly seen comparing
the distributions of the number of target proteins for the two circuits (Figure 4C). Note that a target
embedded in an open circuit has an even more noisy expression than a gene simply regulated by a TF,
for which CVp = 0.147.
Deviant effects
Stochastic equations are the natural formalism to describe a set of biochemical reactions when the number
of molecules involved is small and thus fluctuations are important. As the number of molecules increases,
the stochastic description smoothly converges, at least for linear systems, toward a deterministic one and
stochastic equations can be substituited by ordinary differential equations (ODE). It is usually expected
that even in the regime in which fluctuations cannot be neglected one could use ODE if interested only
in the time evolution of the mean values. This approximation can be thought as a sort of “mean field”
approach (by analogy with statistical mechanics where the mean field approximation is implemented by
neglecting fluctuations). However, similarly to what happens in statistical mechanics in the proximity of a
critical point, it may happen that, even at the level of mean values, the ODE description does not coincide
with the (more rigorous) stochastic one. These breakdowns between the two descriptions are known as
“deviant effects” [43] and are typically a consequence of nonlinear terms in the equations or of strong
extrinsic fluctuations [41, 44]. In some cases these deviant effects can have relevant phenomenological
consequences. This is the case of our system: although the FFL (Figure 2A,A’) and the open circuit
(Figure 2C,C’) have the same deterministic description at the steady state (see Text S1 for details), the
master equation approach gives a mean value of the target protein systematically lower in the FFL circuit,
with respect to the same quantity in the open circuit. This is a non trivial consequence of the correlated
fluctuations in the number of mRNAs and miRNAs in the FFL. This correlation between fluctuations
obviously cannot be taken into account in the deterministic description and as a consequence the ODE
analysis correctly describes the steady state mean number of target proteins only for the open circuit.
This result can be understood by looking at the analytical expression of the mean value of p:
< p >= kp0 < r > −kp1 < rs > .

(7)

In a FFL, fluctuations of r and s are highly correlated (Figure 3A), because the transcription rates of
messengers and miRNAs depend on a shared TF. The result is that in this case < rs > > < r >< s >.
On the other hand, the production of s and r is independently regulated in an open circuit, implying
that < rs > ∼ < r >< s >. A deterministic description does not take into account fluctuations so
correctly describes < p > only when uncorrelated noise is averaged out without affecting mean values.
In conclusion, the correlation in fluctuations introduced by the FFL topology affects the target protein

7

mean value, establishing a systematic decrease with respect to the deterministic description. This deviant
effect can be substantial and underlines the necessity of a stochastic nonlinear modeling. A fully linearized
description, as for example the one proposed by [29] for post-transcriptional regulation, would not be
able to show this type of effects.

The incoherent feedforward loop is effective in reducing extrinsic fluctuations
In the previous sections we compared different regulatory circuits keeping the same amount of input
noise, i.e. the same amount of fluctuations in the copy number of master TFs. Since the topology of a
regulatory motif can have stronger effects on extrinsic rather than intrinsic noise [41], it would be very
interesting to study how the mixed incoherent FFL behaves as a function of such extrinsic noise. As a
matter of fact extrinsic and intrinsic fluctuations are generally coupled in a non-trivial way in biochemical
networks [45], but we developed a strategy to control fluctuations in upstream TF expression, known to
be one of the major sources of extrinsic noise in eukaryotes [39], without affecting the copy number of
the molecular species in the circuit. From equation 6 we can calculate < q > (which denotes the mean
number of TFs) and its noise strength CVq :

<q>
CVq

=

kq kw
gq gw

=

1
<q>

s
<q>

gq + gw + kq
,
gq + gw

(8)

where, as above, the parameters kw and kq denote the rate of transcription and translation of the TF
respectively, and gw and gq the corresponding degradation constants.
Setting the rates of degradationp(kq and kw ) and the product kw kq to constant values, we end up with:
< q >∼ constant and CVq ∼ kq . This is a well known result: fluctuations in the protein level are
stronger when the rate of translation is higher [23] and can be tuned (while keeping the mean value < q >
fixed) by changing the ratio kw /kq with kw kq = constant. This represents a perfect theoretical setting
to test the dependence of the target noise CVp on the input noise CVq , while maintaining unchanged the
mean value of all the molecular species involved in the circuit.
We report in Figure 5 the results of such analysis for the three circuits discussed in the previous sections.
While extrinsic fluctuations increase, so does the FFL’s performance in filtering out noise, compared to
the other circuits. Once again it is easy to understand the reason of this behaviour: the FFL architecture channels fluctuations of an upstream factor into parameters with opposite effect on the target
protein, forcing them to combine destructively. Therefore the specific FFL topology seems effective in
the maintenance of gene expression robustness despite noisy upstream regulators. The introduction of
a miRNA pathway, building a FFL from a TF-gene cascade, really makes the difference in situations of
strong upstream noise. This feature can explain why miRNAs can often be deleted without observable
consequences [25], since experiments usually do not measure fluctuations and are typically performed in
controlled environments, where noise is kept at minimal levels.

Noise filtering optimization
The efficiency of the FFL in controlling the fluctuations of the target protein is a function of three main
parameters: the number of master TFs (which in turn is a function of kw and kq ), the number of miRNA
copies (function of ks and hs ) and the strength of miRNA repression (defined as 1/h). In this section we
shall study the efficiency of the FFL in buffering noise as a function of each one of these three quantities,
changing a corresponding parameter while keeping fixed all others. As we shall see, in all three cases

8

the noise reduction with respect to a simple TF-target interaction (i.e. without the miRNA) shows a Ushaped profile with a well defined minimum which allows us to identify the values of the parameters which
optimize the noise reduction property of the FFL. This pattern is rather robust, and only marginally
depends on the way the variable of interest is tuned (for instance, by changing ks or hs in the case of
miRNA concentration). It is important to stress that in all three cases optimal noise filtering does not
imply strong repression, a result which well agrees with the observation that miRNAs embedded in an
incoherent FFL usually have a fine-tuning effect on the targets instead of switching them off completely.
It is exactly in the intermediate region of the parameters, in which fine-tuning occurs, that we also have
optimal noise reduction.
Optimal repression strength
The repression strength is defined as 1/h (inverse of the dissociation constant in the Hill function of
equation 2). As it can be seen in Figure 6A, the FFL exhibits a noise profile with a typical U-shape
and reaches an optimal value of noise reduction (measured as the difference in the noise strength CVp
with respect to the simple TF-gene circuit) for intermediate values of repression strength. The open
circuit, constrained to give the same mean value < p >, always introduces larger target fluctuations. As
mentioned above, optimal noise filtering is reached for intermediate values of the repression strength and
does not require strong target repression. For instance with the choice of parameter values of Figure 6,
optimal noise reduction is obtained for a mean value of the target protein which is about 66% of the
value obtained without the miRNA, i.e. with a simple TF-target interaction. This prediction could be
experimentally tested via manipulation of the repression strength, in analogy to the work of [46] on the
transcriptional autoregulatory motif. It is instructive to notice the analogies between the behaviour of
the mixed FFL and that of the negative transcriptional autoregulation loop. This purely transcriptional
network motif occurs ubiquitously in transcriptional regulatory networks and was recently studied in
great detail [41, 47]. Also in this case, optimal noise filtering is obtained for a well defined value of the
repression stength. It is easy to understand the reason of this behaviour. In a negative transcriptional
autoregulation, the protein expressed from a gene inhibits its own transcription by increasing expression
when protein numbers are low, while decreasing expression when protein numbers are high. Increasing the
repression strength improves the circuit potential to reduce stochasticity, but at the same time decreases
the copy number of mRNAs and proteins, with a rise in intrinsic fluctuations that can overcome any
attenuation. Consistently, experiments show a well defined range of repression strength for which noise
minimization is optimal [46].
Optimal miRNA concentration
Another variable which can be tuned in order to achieve optimal noise reduction is the miRNA concentration. If we keep the number of TFs constant then the miRNA concentration < s > can only depend
on the maximum rate of transcription of the miRNA gene (ks ) and on the affinity of its promoter to the
TF (proportional to 1/hs , where hs is the dissociation constant in equation 1). In Figures 6B and 6C we
analyze the noise strength CVp of the target protein in the FFL for different miRNA concentrations and
compare it to the CVp obtained with the simple TF-gene interaction and with the open circuit. Changing
the miRNA concentration by varying ks (Figure 6B) or hs (Figure 6C) we find very similar U-shaped
profiles for CVp . As for the previous analysis, also in this case it is possible to find an optimal miRNA
concentration, and again it is such that the effect on the protein target is only a modest reduction (in
this case ∼ 60% of the value obtained without the miRNA). Apart from the conserved U-shaped profile,
there are rather deep differences in the noise behaviour depending on the choice of the tuning parameter.
In fact, while an increase of ks always induces an increase of < s >, this quantity becomes insensitive
to hs above a certain threshold. Since the number of TFs is constant in this analysis, it is clear that
increasing 1/hs (Figure 6C) the system can reach at best the value of < s > consistent with the maxi-

9

mum rate of transcription. At the same time a large value of 1/hs means that very few TFs are enough
to support the maximum transcription rate for the miRNA gene, so fluctuations in the number of TFs
become irrelevant despite the topology of the circuit. As a consequence the CVp curves for the FFL and
the open circuit converge to a commom value (Figure 6C). A refined experimental control of miRNA
concentration through graded miRNA overexpression or silencing would permit a test of the U-shaped
profile of CVp in a FFL.
Optimal TF concentration
The last case that we consider in this section is the effect of different TF concentrations on the noise
buffering properties of the FFL. It is expected that for high TF concentrations (i.e. high values of < q >)
the activation functions in equations 1 reach the saturation point, making the system insensitive to
variations in TF concentration. As long as the number of TFs does not fluctuates below the saturation
point, the miRNA and the target gene are maximally transcribed, with no reference to the exact number
of TFs. Accordingly, CVp becomes asymptotically constant for large < q > for each circuit topology
(Figure 6D). The gap between the asymptotic values of the direct TF regulation and the two other
circuits is due to the fact that the former does not suffer for the additional external noise due to the
fluctuations in the miRNA number. On the other hand, for small values of < q > also the number of
target proteins is very small as its expression is hardly activated regardless of the circuit type, with a
consequent increase of the noise strength (Figure 6D). The central region is the most interesting one:
this is the region in which the system is maximally sensitive to changes in TF concentration. In this
regime the FFL outperforms both the simple direct regulation and the open circuit in buffering noise.
Also in this case the optimal TF concentration is placed in a region corresponding to a modest reduction
of < p >, despite the miRNA repression.
Exploring the parameter space
To give a more comprehensive insight into the relation between noise control and target repression, we
finally evaluate the buffering of fluctuations ( CVp /CVp0 ) for each average number of TFs < q > and each
degree of target suppression (< p > / < p0 >), where < p0 > and CVp0 represent here the constitutive
mean expression and fluctuations in absence of miRNA regulation. Results of this analysis are reported
in Figure 7A. As discussed above, noise reduction can be implemented successfully in the parameter
region where the target activation function (in Figure 7B) is not saturated, since this is the region where
the target is sensitive to changes in TF concentration and therefore also to its fluctuations, regardless
of the presence or absence of miRNA regulation. It is exactly in this region that noise buffering can be
observed (compare Figures 7A and B). In particular, for each TF concentration the best noise reduction
appears for a target level around 60% of its constitutive expression. In the optimal setting, noise can
be remarkably reduced to about one half of its constitutive value, but the reduction remains substantial
also for weaker repressions, further confirming that a strong miRNA repression is not required for noise
control.
We consider the characterization of the optimal setting of miRNA-mediated incoherent FFLs for noise
buffering, and the resulting U-shaped profile predicted for the noise reduction factor, as one of the major
results of our analysis which, we expect, should be amenable of direct experimental validation. The fact
that an optimal noise filtering is obtained with a rather modest reduction in the amount of the target
protein also agrees with the recent experimental observation that miRNA down-regulation of targets is
often modest [26, 27] and apparently dispensable from a functional point of view. In this respect it is
tempting to conjecture that, at least for some targets of incoherent FFLs, the down-regulation could only
be the side effect of an evolutionary design aiming instead to optimize noise reduction.

10

Comparison with purely transcriptional incoherent feedforward loops
The capability of incoherent FFLs to reduce fluctuations was previously studied with simulations in the
contest of purely transcriptional networks [41]. In this section we present a comparison of the noise
properties of microRNA-mediated FFLs (scheme in Figure 1A’) and purely transcriptional ones (detailed
scheme of reactions in Figure 8A), where the miRNA is replaced by a protein that inhibits transcription
(rather than translation, as miRNAs do). The transcriptional FFL can be modeled with the same
strategy explained previously for the miRNA-mediated version and analogously mean values and standard
deviations of the various molecular species can be calculated analytically with the moment generating
function method (see Text S1 for more details on calculations and model assumptions). In order to make
an unbiased comparison of the noise properties of these two circuits, the corresponding models must be
constrained to produce the same amount of target proteins. Although there is no unambiguous way to put
this constraint, due to the presence of more free parameters (kj and gj ) in the purely transcriptional case,
a reasonable choice is to keep the shared parameters to same values (i.e repression/activation efficiencies
and production/degradation rates) and choose the two additional ones to make the amount of repressor
proteins j in the transcriptional case equal to the amount of miRNAs s in the mixed circuit. With this
choice we can evaluate the target noise CVp as a function of the repression strength (1/h) for both circuits
(Figure 8B). Even though the transcriptional version can potentially reduce target fluctutions, buffering
efficiency appears clearly increased by the use of miRNAs as regulators. Furthermore, a comparison of
Figure 8C and Figure 7B points out that a miRNA-mediated FFL can buffer fluctuations over a wider
range of conditions as well as to a greater extent. This is mainly due to the additional step of translation
required for the production of proteins j which unavoidably adds noise to the system. We would like to
emphasize that the shown efficiency in noise reduction, achieved with the transcriptional FFL, should be
considered as an upper bound. In fact, the constraints imposed on kj and gj limit the translational burst
size, i.e. the average number of proteins produced from a single mRNA, and this parameter crucially
influences the intrinsic fluctuation amplitude of proteins j [22] (see Text S1 for details on parameter
constraints). With the parameter values used in Figure 8, the translational burst size is ∼ 0.3, while
in eukaryotes it is expected to be larger (certainly larger than one) because of the long average half-life
of messenger RNAs compared to the time required for one translation round [48]. Therefore the noise
added by the step of translation of proteins j should realistically be more substantial than reported for this
model setting, with harmful consequences on the noise buffering efficiency of the purely transcriptional
circuit.
Moreover some peculiarities (not currently included in our model) of the mixed-motif can further explain
why it can be better suited for noise buffering. Firstly, fluctuations in RNA polymerase and ribosome
abundance are possible sources of extrinsic noise in gene expression [49]. These fluctuations are expected
to influence unspecifically the rate of transcription and translation respectively of each gene. In a miRNAmediated FFL the correlation between target mRNA and miRNA production, which is crucial for noise
reduction, is robust to these additional sources of noise as mRNAs and miRNAs are identically affected
only by global RNA polymerase fluctuations. On the other hand, in purely transcriptional FFLs the
number of repressor proteins j is exposed to the independent fluctuations in ribosome concentration, so
the regulator-regulated correlation can be compromised with potentially negative consequences on the
circuit’s noise reduction efficiency.
Secondly, delays in the action of regulators (miRNA or proteins) in the indirect pathway from the master
TF to the target can damage the noise buffering function (see Text S1 for a more detailed study of the
impact of time delays on noise control). However, the biogenesis of miRNAs is thougth to be faster than
the one of proteins, and thus miRNAs may affect the target expression with a shorter delay with respect
to factors regulating nuclear events like a TF [50]. This feature should enable miRNAs to produce rapid
responses, as required to counteract fluctuations.
Finally, the presence of a nucleus makes the eukaryotic cell a two-compartment system with stochastic
transport channels, with consequences on gene expression noise [51]. In fact, transcriptional regulation

11

requires an additional transport step with respect to the post-transcriptional one. In a transcriptional
FFL, the repressor protein (replacing the miRNA) must return into the nucleus to act on the target.
This again potentially reduces the correlation of its fluctuations with the target ones, affecting the noise
buffering ability.

Cross-talk between microRNA targets
A recent study pointed out that the action of a miRNA on a specific target gene expression is affected
by the total number of miRNA targets and their mRNA abundance [52], a phenomenon called “dilution
effect”. This is presumably a consequence of target competition for a finite intracellular pool of miRNAs.
In particular, the degree of downregulation of an individual target expression is generally reduced by the
presence of other transcribed target genes. A similar cross-talk between targets has been previously shown
for sRNA regulation in bacteria [34] both theoretically and experimentally. Therefore, the functionality
of a genetic circuit that involves miRNA regulations, as the one studied in this paper, can be influenced
by the expression level of miRNA targets not embedded in the circuit. To address this issue we evaluate
in this section the impact of an additional miRNA target independently transcribed (a situation depicted
in Figure 9A) on the circuit ability in noise buffering.
Stoichiometric versus catalytic models of miRNA action
The model used so far for miRNA regulation was based on the hypothesis of perfectly catalytic action.
The rate of translation of target mRNAs was assumed to be a nonlinear decreasing function of miRNA
concentration, neglecting the details of mRNA-miRNA physical coupling with the implicit assumption
that the downregulation process does not affect the available miRNA pool. A perfectly catalytic action
does not predict any competition effect among multiple targets at equilibrium, since each target can only
sense the available number of miRNAs without altering it. On the other hand, a stoichiometric model
has been proposed in the context of sRNA regulation in bacteria [34–36], in which each sRNA can pair
with one messenger leading to mutual degradation. In this latter case the expression of a secondary
target can capture a significant portion of the sRNAs, with a resulting decrease in the average repression
acting on the first target. The nature of miRNA regulation is presumably somewhere in between these
two extreme possibilities, although usually generically referred to as catalytic. In this view, in order
to address the effect of target cross-talk on miRNA-mediated FFLs, we consider a deterministic model
(introduced previously in [34]) that explicitely takes into account the physical coupling of miRNAs and
target mRNAs and the catalytic/stoichiometric nature of this coupling. While the full detailed model is
presented in Text S1, the effective equations describing the dynamics of the mean number of miRNAs
< s >, mRNAs < r > of the target in the FFL and mRNAs < r2 > of the secondary miRNA target are:
d< s >
dt
d< r >
dt
d< r2 >
dt

= ks (< q >) − gs < s > −α (γ1 < r >< s > + γ2 < r2 >< s >)
= kr (< q >) − gr < r > −γ1 < r >< s >
= kr2 − gr2 < r2 > −γ2 < r2 >< s >,

(9)

where γ1 and γ2 describe the probability of miRNA-mRNA coupling for the target in the FFL and
the secondary target respectively, while α is the probability (assumed equal for both targets) that a
degradation event of a mRNA, induced by a miRNA, is accompained by the degradation of the miRNA
itself. The limit α = 1 describes a stoichiometric mode of action, while the opposite situation of α = 0
represents a perfectly catalytic mode in which the rate of mRNA degradation is a linear function of the
number of miRNAs.

12

The corresponding stochastic model, of which equations 9 describe the mean-field limit, cannot be solved
analytically starting from the master equation, therefore noise properties will be examined in the following
with simulations only.
Dilution effect
In the first place we evaluate the dependence of the target protein downregulation on the expression rate
of the secondary target, starting from the model described by Equations 9. The dilution effect is shown
in Figure 9B for different values of α: the downregulation exerted on the FFL target depends on the
rate of expression of the secondary target, in line with the observed inverse correlation between target
abundance and mean downregulation in higher eukaryotes [52] and in bacteria [34]. Similar results can
be obtained by varying the coupling constant γ2 with respect to γ1 (as reported in [34]). Therefore, the
noise buffering function and the optimality criteria discussed in previous sections could be compromised
in the presence of many or highly transcribed independent miRNA targets. This issue will be addressed
in details in the following section.
As expected, a perfectly catalytic mode does not feel the effect of secondary mRNA targets (red line
in Figure 9B), while the stoichiometric mechanism is the most sensitive (green line in Figure 9B). This
result suggests that a catalytic mode (at least approximately), like the miRNA one, can allow a larger
proliferation of the number of targets while limiting the effects of their cross-talk.
Consequences of dilution effect and secondary target fluctuations on noise buffering
Since a high level of expression of secondary targets can determine a decrease of the average downregulation, it can potentially reduce the FFL ability in filtering out target fluctuations. In fact, also the noise
reduction CVp /CVp0 (where CVp0 is the constitutive noise in absence of miRNA) is a function of the additional target expression, as shown in Figure 9C. As the expression of the out-of-circuit target increases,
its messengers are able to capture more and more miRNAs and the efficiency in noise reduction is gradually compromised. Finally the FFL target fluctuations CVp approach the constitutive ones CVp0 when
the messengers of the FFL target become a small fraction of the total miRNA targets. The robustness
of the circuit functioning with respect to the dilution effect is again dependent on the repression mode
(that changes with α). Moreover, as discussed in Text S1, different modes (stoichiometric/catalytic) of
miRNA action have a different potential in reducing fluctuations: even in absence of secondary targets,
where models with different α have been constrained to produce the same amount of target protein,
the noise buffering efficiency decreases with α (Figure 9C). This observation highlights that the level of
miRNA ability to avoid mutual degradation while targeting a mRNA can play a role in the optimization
of fluctuation counteracting, besides conferring stability with respect to target cross-talk.
While the corruption of the noise-buffering ability seems mainly due to the increase in the mean level
of secondary messengers, there is another more subtle cause that gives a contribution: the uncorrelated
fluctuations of secondary messengers. Since the secondary target is independently transcribed (not under
the control of the master TF activating the miRNA gene) its fluctuations are expected to be completely
uncorrelated with the miRNA ones, implying a random sequestration of miRNAs. To disentagle this
contribution from the dilution effect, we studied the case of a secondary target transcribed at the same
effective rate of the FFL target, but with different levels of fluctuations (see Figure 9D). In the case
of equal transcription rates the dilution effect has a negligible impact on the noise buffering activity of
the circuit (see Figure 9C), nevertheless the level of noise reduction (CVp /CVp0 ) is progressively reduced
as the second target concentration becomes more and more noisy, as reported in Figure 9D. This effect
seems especially relevant for a hypothetically stoichiometric miRNA repression. Therefore, the noise level
of additional targets is a variable that must be taken into account in evaluating the cross-talk effect on
the noise-buffering efficiency of the circuit. Although the FFLs are overrepresented in the mixed network [11–14], a single microRNAs can downregulate hundreds of target genes and consequently not every

13

target is expected to be under the control of the same TF regulating the miRNA gene (see Text S1 for
a more detailed discussion). Therefore, even though most motif function analysis are carried out looking
at the motif operating in isolation, we have shown that the presence of additional miRNA targets in the
network can alter the functioning of a miRNA-mediated motif. In fact, the efficiency of miRNA-mediated
FFLs as noise controllers should be considered contest-dependent. While this circuit seems properly designed to filter out fluctuations when the miRNA-target interaction is specific or secondary targets are
poorly transcribed, cell types or conditions that require a high expression of out-of-circuit miRNA targets
can significantly corrupt this circuit property. Besides the understanding of the function of endogenous
miRNA-mediated FFLs, this analysis of target cross-talk effects can be a useful warning for the growing
field of synthetic biology [53]: the implementation of genetic circuits incorporating small RNA regulations for specific scopes must take into account the sRNA specificity and the level of expression (and
fluctuations) of eventual other targets.

Discussion
Experimental and bioinformatic evidences of the relevance of miRNA mediated FFLs in gene regulation.
Few cases of incoherent miRNA-mediated FFLs have been experimentally verified until now: a case
involving c-Myc/E2F1 regulation [54] and more recently a miR-7 mediated FFL in Drosophila [50]. As
a matter of fact, miR-7 has indeed been found to be essential to buffer external fluctuations, providing
robustness to the eye developmental program. The fact that miR-7 is interlocked in an incoherent FFL
provides a first hint that our model can be biologically relevant.
On the purely computational side, it is interesting to notice that in [11] it was shown that the typical
targets of these FFLs are not randomly distributed but are instead remarkably enriched in TFs. These
are the typical genes for which a control of stochastic fluctuations should be expected: the noise in a
regulator expression propagates to all its targets, affecting the reliability of signal transmission in the
downstream network.
Finally, a significant enrichment in oncogenes within the components of the FFLs was also observed [11].
The mentioned FFL containing c-Myc/E2F1 is just an example [8]. In view of the emerging idea that
non-genetic heterogenetity, due to stochastic noise, contributes to tumor progression [55] and affects
apoptotic signal response [56], the role of miRNA-mediated FFLs in reducing fluctuations can explain
why they are often involved in cancer-related pathways.

Concluding remarks
The type of regulatory action which a miRNA exerts on its targets can be rather well understood looking
at the degree of coexpression with the targets [1, 3, 4, 15, 17]. In particular, an incoherent mixed-FFL
implies a high level of miRNA-target coexpression, so it is suitable to implement a fine-tuning interaction.
The target is not switched off by miRNA repression, rather its mean level is adjusted post-transcriptionally
to the desired value. However, many cells can have a protein concentration far from the finely controlled
mean value, if strong fluctuations are allowed. Hence, a noise buffering mechanism can be crucial at the
level of single cells, and a fine-tuning interaction will be effective for a large part of the cell population
only if coupled with a noise control. Some authors proposed the conjecture that the incoherent mixedFFL can actually have a role in noise buffering [13, 15, 25] and biological evidences that miRNAs can
effectively be used as expression-buffers have been recently found [25, 50]. From this point of view the
miRNA-target interactions classified as neutral [17], as the mean level of the target only changes inside its
functional range by the presence/absence of miRNAs, actually could have been selected by evolution to
prevent potentially harmful fluctuations. In this paper we demonstrated, through stochastic modeling and

14

simulations, that the incoherent mixed-FFL has the right characteristics to reduce fluctuations, giving a
proof to the previously proposed intuitive conjecture and supplying the lacking quantitative description.
In particular, we showed that this circuit filters out the noise that is propagating from the master TF,
giving robustness to the target gene expression in presence of noisy upstream factors. Furthermore, our
theoretical description led to the prediction that there is a value of the miRNA repression strength for
which the noise filtering is optimal. A maximum of target-noise attenuation appears likewise varying the
miRNA concentration or the TF concentration and this robust prediction could be tested experimentally.
In all cases the implementation of the best noise filter does not imply a strong suppression of the target
protein expression, coherently with a fine-tuning function and in agreement with the observation that
the miRNA down-regulation of a target is often modest [26, 27].
Our paper presents the first model explicitly built on the mixed version of the FFL. From a theoretical
point of view, we addressed the detailed master equation describing the system (without neglecting the
dynamics of mRNA), instead of the approximate Langevin description, and we were able to apply the
moment generating function approach despite the presence of nonlinear terms that can give rise to deviant
effects. This approach allowed us to take into account extrinsic fluctuations as the noise propagating from
upstream genes, without an arbitrary definition of the extrinsic noise distribution. This strategy can be
naturally extended to other circuits in the mixed network to test their potential role in the control of
stochasticity.
Furthermore, we compared, in terms of noise buffering ability, miRNA-mediated FFLs with their purely
transcriptional counterparts, where the miRNA is replaced by a protein that inhibits transcription rather
than translation. This comparison shows that a miRNA regulator can be better suited for the noise
buffering purpose.
Finally, we tryed to overcome the limitations in the analysis that can arise from considering a genetic
circuit as operating in isolation. In this perspective, we evaluated the impact that the recently discovered
dilution effect [34, 52] can have on the noise buffering function of miRNA-mediated incoherent FFLs.
More specifically, we showed than an efficient noise control requires the minimization of the number of
miRNA target sites on out-of-circuit genes, especially if highly expressed or strongly fluctuating in the
mRNA level.
The hypothesis of a role of miRNAs in noise buffering can shed new light on peculiar characteristics of
miRNA regulation. As discussed in [25] and [50], it can explain why miRNAs are often highly conserved,
controlling key steps in development, but in many cases they can be deleted with little phenotypic
consequences. On the evolutionary side, the origin of vertebrate complexity seems to correspond to
the huge expansion of non-coding RNA inventory (including miRNAs) [57]. This can suggest a further
reasoning: the morphological complexity requires a high degree of signaling precision, with a strict control
of stochasticity, and miRNA regulation can satisfy these requirements if embedded in an appropriate
circuit, as we showed for the ubiquitous miRNA-mediated FFL.

Methods
Simulations were implemented by using Gillespie’s first reaction algorithm [58]. The reactions simulated
were those presented in schemes 2A’,B’,C’ and 8A. Reactions that depend on a regulator were allowed to
have as rates the corresponding full nonlinear Hill functions. All the results are at steady state, which is
assumed to be reached when the deterministic evolution of the system in analysis is at a distance from the
steady state (its asymptotic value) smaller than its 0.05% (see Text S1 for details). For the parameter set
used for Figures 3-9 the steady state was assumed at 5000 seconds, around 14 times the protein half-life.
Each data point or histogram is the result of 100000 trials.

15

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Mariama El Baroudi and Antonio Celani for useful discussions.

References
1. Flynt AS and Lai EC (2008) Biological principles of microRNA-mediated regulation: shared themes
amid diversity. Nat Rev Genet 9: 831-842
2. Ambros V (2004) The functions of animal microRNAs. Nature 431: 350-355.
3. Bartel DP (2004) MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, and function. Cell 116: 281-297.
4. Bushati N and Cohen SN (2007) microRNA functions. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 23: 175-205.
5. Pillai RS, Bhattacharyya SN and Filipowicz W (2007) Repression of protein synthesis by miRNAs:
how many mechanisms? Trends Cell Biol 17: 118-126.
6. Stefani G and Slack FJ (2008) Small non-coding RNAs in animal development. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol 9: 219-230.
7. Alvarez-Garcia I and Miska E (2005) MicroRNA function in animal development and human disease. Development 132: 4653-4662.
8. Esquela-Kerscher A, Slack FJ (2006) Oncomirs- microRNAs with a role in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer
6: 259-269.
9. Martinez NJ and Walhout AJM (2009) The interplay between transcripton factors and microRNAs
in genome-scale regulatory networks. BioEssays 31: 435-445.
10. Milo R, Shen-Orr S, Itzkovitz S, Kashtan N, Chklovskii D et al. (2002) Network motifs: simple
building blocks of complex networks. Science 303: 1538-1542.
11. Re A, Corá D, Taverna D and Caselle M (2009) Genome-wide survey of microRNA-transcription
factor feed-forward regulatory circuits in human. Mol BioSyst 5: 854-867.
12. Shalgi R, Lieber D, Oren M and Pilpel Y (2007) Global and local architecture of the mammalian
microRNA-transcription factor regulatory network. PLoS Comput Biol 3(7): e131.
13. Tsang J, Zhu J and van Oudenaarden A (2007) MicroRNA-mediated feedback and feedforward
loops are recurrent network motifs in mammals. Mol Cell 26: 753-767.
14. Yu X, lin J, Zack DJ, Mendell JT and Qian J (2008) Analysis of regulatory network topology
reveals functionally distinct classes of microRNAs. Nucleic Acids Res 36: 6494-6503.
15. Hornstein E and Shomron N (2006) Canalization of development by microRNAs. Nat Genet 38:
S20-S2410.1038/ng1803.
16. Shkumatava A, Stark A, Sive H and Bartel DP (2009) Coherent but overlapping expression of
microRNAs and their targets during vertebrate development. GenesDev 23: 466-481.
17. Bartel DP (2009) MicroRNAs: target recognition and regulatory functions. Cell 136: 215-233.
18. Stark A, Brennecke J, Bushati N, Russell RB and Cohen SM (2005) Animal microRNAs confer
robustness to gene expression and have a significant impact on 3’UTR evolution. Cell 123: 11331146.

16

19. Mansfield JH, Harfe BD, Nissen R, Obenauer J, Srineel J, et al. (2004) MicroRNA-responsive
‘sensor’ transgenes uncover hox-like and other developmentally regulated patterns of vertebrate
microRNA expression. Nat Genet 36: 1079-1083.
20. Hornstein E, Mansfield JH, Yekta S, Hu JKH, Harfe BD, et al. (2005) The microRNA mir-196 acts
upstream of hoxb8 and shh in limb development. Nature 438: 671-674.
21. Karres JS, Hilgers V, Carrera I, Treisman J and Cohen SM (2007) The conserved microRNA mir-8
tunes atrophin levels to prevent neurodegeneration in Drosophila. Cell 131: 136-145.
22. Kaern M, Elston TC, Blake WJ and Collins JJ (2005) Stochasticity in gene expression: from
theories to phenotypes. Nat Rev Genet 6(6): 451-64.
23. Raj A and van Oudenaarden A (2008) Nature, nurture, or chance: stochastic gene expression and
its consequences. Cell 135: 216-226.
24. Maheshri N and O’Shea EK (2007) Living with noisy genes: how cells function reliably with
inherent variability in gene expression. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 36: 413-434.
25. Wu C, Shen Y and Tang T (2009) Evolution under canalization and the dual roles of microRNAs-A
hypothesis. Genome Res 19: 734-743.
26. Baek D, Villen J, Shin C, Camargo FD, Gygi Sp et al. (2008) The impact of microRNAs on protein
output. Nature 455: 64-71.
27. Selbach M, Schwanhausser B, Thierfelder N, Fang Z, Khanin R et al. (2008) Widespread changes
in protein synthesis induced by microRNAs. Nature 455: 58-63.
28. Alon U (2006) An Introduction to Systems Biology: Design Principles of Biological Circuits. Chapman & Hall/CRC Mathematical & Computational Biology. 320 p.
29. Komorowski M, Miekisz J and Kierzek AM (2009) Translational repression contributes grater noise
to gene expression than transcriptional repression. Biophys J 96(2): 372-84.
30. Thattai M and van Oudenaarden A (2001) Intrinsic noise in gene regulatory networks. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 98: 8614-8619.
31. Bintu L, Buchler NE, Garcia HG, Gerland U, Hwa T et al. (2005) Transcriptional regulation by
the numbers: models. Curr Opin Genet Dev 15: 116-24.
32. Valencia-Sanchez MA, Liu J, Hannon GJ and Parker R (2006) Control of translation and mRNA
degradation by miRNAs and siRNAs. Genes Dev 20: 515-524.
33. Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K et al. (2008) Molecular Biology of the Cell 5th
ed. New York: Garland Science. 1392 p.
34. Levine E, Kuhlman T, Zhang Z, Hwa T (2007) Quantitative characteristics of gene regulation by
small RNA. PLoS Biology 9: 229.
35. Metha P, Goyal S and Wingreen NS (2008) A quantitative comparison of sRNA-based and proteinbased gene regulation. Mol Syst Biol 4: 221.
36. Shimoni Y, Friedlander G, Hetzroni G, Niv G, Altuvia S et al. (2007) Regulation of gene expression
by small non-coding RNAs: a quantitative view. Mol Syst Biol 3: 138.

17

37. Shahrezaei V and Swain PS (2008) Analytical distributions for stochastic gene expression. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 105: 17256-17261.
38. Pedraza JM and van Oudenaarden A (2005) Noise propagation in gene networks. Science 307:
1965-1969.
39. Volfson D, Marciniak J, Blake WJ, Ostroff N, Tsimring LS et al. (2006) Origins of extrinsic variability in eukaryotic gene expression. Nature 439: 861-864.
40. Paulsson J (2005) Models of stochastic gene expression. Phys Life Rev 2: 157-175.
41. Shahrezaei V, Ollivier JF and Swain PS (2008) Colored extrinsic fluctuations and stochastic gene
expression. Mol Syst Biol 4: 196
42. Becksei A and Serrano L (2000) Engineering stability in gene networks by autoregulation. Nature
405: 590-593.
43. Samoilov MS and Arkin AP (2006) Deviant effects in molecular reaction pathways. Nat Biotechnol
24: 1235-1240.
44. Shahrezaei V and Swain PS (2008) The stochastic nature of biochemical networks. Curr Opin
Biotechnol 19: 369-374.
45. Tanase-Nicola S, Warren PB and ten Wolde PR (2005) Signal detection, modularity, and the
correlation between extrinsic and intrinsic noise in biochemical networks. Phys Rev Lett 97: 068102
46. Dublanche Y, Michalodimitralis K, Kummerer N, Foglierini M, Serrano L (2006) Noise in transcription negative feedback loops: simulation and experimental analysis. Mol Syst biol 2: 41.
47. Singh A and Hespanha JP (2009) Optimal feedback strength for noise suppression in autoregulatory
gene networks. Biophys J 96: 4013-4023.
48. Larson DR, Singer RH, Zenklusen D (2009) A single molecule view of gene expression. Trends Cell
Biol 19: 630-7.
49. Swain PS, Elowitz MB, Siggia ED (2002) Intrinsic and extrinsic contributions to stochasticity in
gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99: 12795-800
50. Li X, Cassidy JJ, Reinke CA, Fischboeck S and Carthew RW (2009) A microRNA imparts robustness against environmental fluctuation during development. Cell 137: 273-282.
51. Xiong L, Ma Y and Tang L (2010) Attenuation of transcriptional bursting in mRNA transport.
Phys Biol 7: 016005.
52. Arvey A, Larsson E, Sander C, Leslie CS and Marks DS (2010) Target mRNA abundance dilutes
microRNA and siRNA activity. Mol Syst Biol 6: 363.
53. Mukherji S and van Oudenaarden (2009) A Synthetic biology: understanding biological design
from synthetic circuits. Nat Rev Genet 10: 859-71.
54. O’Donnell KA, Wentzel EA, Zeller KI, Dang CV and Mendell JT (2005) c-Myc-regulated microRNAs modulate E2F1 expression. Nature 435: 839-843
55. Brock A, Chang H and Huang S (2009) Non-genetic heterogeneity – a mutation-independent driving
force for the somatic evolution of tumours. Nature Rev Genet 10: 336-342.

18

56. Spencer SL, Gaudet S, Albeck JG, Burke JM and Sorger PK (2009) Non-genetic origins of cell-tocell variability in TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Nature 459: 428-433.
57. Heimberg AM, Sempere LF, Moy VN, Donoghue PCJ and Peterson KJ (2008) MicroRNAs and
the advent of vertebrate morphological complexity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105: 2946-2950.
58. Gillespie DT (1976) A general method for numerically simulating the stochastic time evolution of
coupled chemmical reactions. J Comput Phys 22: 403-434.

19

Figures

Figure 1. Overview of the connections between miRNA-target expression, miRNA
function and regulatory circuitry. (A) MiRNAs and corresponding targets can present different
degrees of coexpression between the two extremes of concurrent expression (high correlation) and
exclusive domains (high anticorrelation). These two opposite situations are expected to correspond to
different functional roles (B) for the miRNA repression. A peculiar expression pattern, evidence of a
functional aim, is a consequence of the network structure in which miRNAs are embedded. A high
miRNA-target correlation can be achieved through the incoherent FFL (C), where the miRNA
repression is opposite to the TF action. Whereas a failsafe control can be performed by a coherent FFL
(D), in which the miRNA reinforces the TF action leading to mutually exclusive domains of
miRNA-target expression.

20

Figure 2. Representation of the incoherent FFL and the two circuits used for comparison.
(A) A miRNA-mediated incoherent FFL that can be responsible for miRNA-target coexpression; (B) a
gene activated by a TF; (C) an open circuit that leads to the same mean concentrations of the
molecular species of the FFL in scheme A. (A’)(B’)(C’) Detailed representation of the modelization of
the corresponding circuits. Rectangles represent DNA-genes, from which RNAs (w, s, r) are transcribed
and eventually degraded (broken lines). RNAs can be translated into proteins (q is the TF while p is
the target protein) symbolized by circles, and proteins can be degraded (broken circles). Rates of each
process (transcription, translation or degradation) are depicted along the corresponding black arrows.
Regulations are represented in red, with arrows in the case of activation by TFs while rounded end lines
in the case of miRNA repression. TF regulations act on rates of transcription that become functions of
the amount of regulators. MiRNA regulation makes the rate of translation of the target a function of
miRNA concentration.

21

Figure 3. Noise properties of the FFL compared with a TF-gene linear circuit. (A) An
example of simulation results for the FFL (scheme on the right or more detailed in Figure 2A’). The
normalized trajectory of each molecular species is shown as a function of time after reaching the steady
state. The rate of transcription of the TF is kw = 0.06 s−1 and of translation kq = 0.04 s−1 . Proteins
degrade with a rate gq = gp = 0.002 s−1 , while mRNAs and miRNAs with gw = gr = gs = 0.006 s−1 .
The parameters in the Hill functions of regulation (equations 1,2) are the following: the maximum rate
of transcription for mRNAs is kr = 0.8 s−1 , while for miRNAs is ks = 0.5 s−1 ; the maximum rate of
translation of the target is kp = 0.04 s−1 ; dissociation constants are hs = 200, hr = 200, h = 60; Hill
coefficients are all c = 2, as typical biological values range from 1 (hyperbolic control) to 30 (sharp
switching) [30]. (B) Time evolution in a simulation for the molecular players in the linear TF-gene
cascade (scheme on the right or more detailed in Figure 2B’). Compared to the FFL case, the p
evolution is more sensitive to TF fluctuations. (C) The probability distribution of protein number for
the two circuits. Histograms are the result of Gillespie simulations while continuous lines are empirical
distributions (gaussian for the FFL and gamma for the TF-gene) with mean and variance predicted by
the analytical model.

22

Figure 4. Noise properties of the FFL compared with an analogous open circuit. (A) An
example of simulation results for the FFL (scheme on the right or more detailed in Figure 2A’). The
parameter values are the same of Figure 3.(B) Time evolution in a simulation for the molecular players
in the open circuit (scheme on the right or more detailed in Figure 2C’). The correlation between the s
and r trajectories that is present in the FFL (A) is completely lost in the open circuit. As a consequence
while the mean value of p is approximately the same, its fluctuations are appreciably greater in the
open circuit case.(C) The probability distribution of protein number for the two circuits. Histograms
are the result of Gillespie simulations while continuous lines are empirical distributions (gaussian for the
FFL and gamma for the open circuit) with mean and variance predicted by the analytical model.

23

Figure 5. The effect of fluctuations in an upstream TF. We maintain constant the number of
TFs < q >, while we vary its relative fluctuations CVq , tuning the relative contribution of transcription
(rate kw ) and translation (rate kq ). All the other parameters have the values reported in caption of
Figure 3. The incoherent FFL makes the target less sensitive to fluctuations in the upstream TF. The
extent of the noise reduction, with respect to the other circuits, depends on the magnitude of the TF
noise, pointing out that the FFL topology is particularly effective in filtering out extrinsic fluctuations.
Dots are the result of Gillespie simulations with the full nonlinear dynamics while continuous lines are
analytical predictions.

24

Figure 6. How an optimal noise filter can be built. (A) The coefficient of variation of the target
protein CVp as a function of the repression strength 1/h. The Figure shows the presence of an optimal
repression strength for which the introduction of a miRNA regulation in a FFL minimizes noise. (B)
CVp as a function of the mean number of miRNAs < s >. In this case < s > is changed through the
maximum rate of transcription ks (see equation 1). (C) CVp as a function of < s >, varying the
dissociation constant hs . In both cases (B and C) is evident a U-shaped profile, implying an optimal
noise buffering for intermediate miRNA concentrations. (D) CVp as a function of the mean number of
TFs < q >. The number of TFs depends on the rate of their transcription kw and of their translation
kq . The Figure is obtained manipulating kq , but the alternative choice of kw leads to equivalent results
(see Text S1). For intermediate concentration of the TF, the noise control by the FFL outperforms the
one of the other circuits. In each plot, dots are the result of Gillespie simulations while continuous lines
are analytical predictions. The values of parameters kept constant are the same of Figure 3, however
the results are quite robust with respect to their choice (see Text S1 for details).

25

Figure 7. Exploring the parameter space. (A) The target noise CVp , achieved with the FFL, is
evaluated with respect to noise deriving from constitutive expression CVp0 (i.e. in absence of miRNA
regulation) for different mean levels of the TF < q > and different degrees of reduction of the target
protein level < p > / < p0 > (where < p0 > is the mean constitutive expression). The TF level is
changed through its rate of translation kq (equivalent results can be obtained changing the rate of
transcription kw ), while the target level is tuned varying the repression strength. All the other
parameters have the values reported in caption of Figure 3 except kw = 0.01263 (lower than in Figure 3
to explore a more noisy situation). The region where miRNA repression leads to larger fluctuations
with respect to constitutive ones is shown in white. When a noise reduction is gained the value of
CVp /CVp0 is reported with the color code explained in the legend. The best noise control is achieved
with a modest suppression of target expression, around the 60% of its constitutive value. (B) The rate
of transcription of the target mRNA as a function of the mean number of TFs. The noise reduction
shown in the above plot can be obtained outside the saturation regime (where the slope of the
activation curve tends to zero).

26

Figure 8. Comparison with a purely transcriptional incoherent FFL. (A) Detailed scheme of a
purely transcriptional incoherent FFL. (B) The coefficient of variation of the target protein CVp as a
function of the repression strength 1/h for a miRNA-mediated FFL and for its transcriptional
counterpart. Thanks to the constraints imposed on parameters we can directly compare their
noise-buffering efficiency with respect to a gene only activated by a TF. Both circuitries lead to a CVp
curve with a minimum for an intermediate repression strength, but the miRNA-mediated circuit
appears more efficient in filtering out fluctuations. The values of parameters kept constant are the same
of Figure 3. Dots are the result of Gillespie simulations with the full nonlinear dynamics while
continuous lines are analytical predictions. Also in this case, analytical solutions fit nicely with
simulation results. (C) The noise reduction CVp /CVp0 , achieved with a purely transcriptional
incoherent FFL, evaluated for different mean levels of the TF < q > and different degrees of reduction
of the target protein level < p > / < p0 >. The parameter values and the color code are the same of
Figure 7 so as to allow a direct comparison.

27

Figure 9. Effects of cross-talk between miRNA targets. (A) Scheme of a miRNA-mediated FFL
with an additional independently transcribed target gene (second target). (B) The degree of protein
downregulation < p > / < p0 > is depicted as a function of the ratio of effective transcription rates of
the secondary target (kr2 ) and of the FFL joint target (kr (< q >)), for different values of α. Since the
rate of transcription of the joint target is a function of the TF concentration, we consider for this
analysis the effective mean rate kr (< q >) as a reference (where < q > is constant as we are not tuning
the TF concentration). The transcription of the second target is modeled as an independent birth-death
process with birth rate kr2 . In this plot the coupling constants between targets and miRNAs are
assumed equal (γ1 = γ2 = γ) and for each α value the coupling constant γ is chosen so as to start with
the same amount of target proteins (< p >) in absence of secondary targets (the complete set of
parameters values is presented in Text S1). In the limit of infinite out-of-circuit target expression, the
joint target protein level approaches its constitutive value if α > 0, while remains constant in the ideal
case of perfectly catalytic miRNA repression (red curve). Continuous lines are analytical solutions of
the deterministic model (Equations 9), while dots are the result of stochastic simulations. (C) With the
parameter setting of Figure 9B, the noise reduction CVp /CVp0 is evaluated in the same kr2 /kr (< q >)
range. Dots are the result of Gillespie simulations while continuous lines come from trivial
interpolations. (D) The noise reduction is evaluated as a function of the out-of-circuit mRNA
fluctuations CVr2 , relative to the joint target fluctuations CVr . The fluctuations of the second target
are modulated considering its rate of transcription as a function of an independent TF and changing the
TF noise with the same strategy used for Figure 5 (see Text S1 for more details). The concentrations of
the TFs activating the two targets are constrained to be equal so as to study the situation of two
independent targets with the same effective transcription rate. Dots are the result of Gillespie
simulations, simply interpolated with continuous lines.

Text S1: Supporting Information for the article “The role of
incoherent microRNA-mediated feedforward loops in noise
buffering”
M Osella, C Bosia, D Corá and M Caselle

Contents
1 Deterministic models
1.1 The TF-gene linear circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 The FFL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3 The open circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

30
30
31
33

2 Stochastic Models
2.1 Linearization of Hill functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 The TF-gene linear circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.1 Moments of the distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 The FFL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4 The open circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5 Numerical definition of the steady-state time-threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.6 Robustness of our results with respect to changes in the values of the input parameters .
2.6.1 Constraints imposed on the FFLs by the requirement of sensitivity to changes in
the master TF concentration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.6.2 Target and miRNA genes differentially expressed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.6.3 mRNAs and miRNAs with different stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.6.4 Optimal TF concentration tuning kw instead of kq . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.6.5 Results for another set of parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.7 Testing the effect of Hill function linearization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34
34
35
36
36
37
38
39

3 MiRNA-mediated promotion of mRNA degradation
3.1 Deterministic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Comparison with miRNA-mediated repression of mRNA translation . . . . . . . . . . . .

44
45
45

4 Stoichiometric mechanism of repression
4.1 Deterministic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Comparison with catalytic repression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

46
47
48

5 Purely transcriptional incoherent FFLs
5.1 Stochastic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Constraints on parameters for a comparison with miRNA-mediated FFLs . . . . . . . . .

50
50
51

28

39
40
40
40
41
41

29

6 Cross-talk between miRNA targets
6.1 Stoichiometric vs catalytic model of miRNA
6.2 Details on the model setting . . . . . . . . .
6.2.1 Setting for Figure 9 B . . . . . . . .
6.2.2 Setting for Figure 9 C . . . . . . . .
6.2.3 Setting for Figure 9 D . . . . . . . .

action
. . . .
. . . .
. . . .
. . . .

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

52
52
53
54
54
54

7 Noise reduction and signaling sensitivity

54

8 Effects of possible delays in miRNA production.

56

9 Bioinformatical analysis of miRNAs involved in FFLs in the human mixed network. 57

30

1

Deterministic models

In this section we consider the mean field descriptions at the steady state of the three networks in analysis:
a TF-gene linear circuit without any post-transcriptional control, an incoherent miRNA-mediated FFL
and an open circuit. As we will show the open circuit is built in order to have the same mean levels of
molecular species (in particular of target proteins) that are obtained with the FFL. This feature makes the
open circuit a suitable null model in order to disentangle the topology contribution to noise buffering. In
this section the variables that describe the state of the system ( {w, q, r, s, p} for the FFL) are continuous
variables.

1.1

The TF-gene linear circuit

Figure 10. Scheme of a TF-gene linear circuit. Rectangles represent DNA-genes, from which RNAs
(w, r) are transcribed and eventually degraded (broken lines). RNAs can be translated into proteins (q
is the copy number of TFs while p of target proteins) symbolized by circles, and proteins can be
degraded (broken circles). Rates of each process (transcription, translation or degradation) are depicted
along the corresponding black arrows. Regulations are represented in red, with arrows indicating
activation by TFs.
A deterministic description of the scheme in Fig.10 is given by the equations:
dw
dt
dq
dt
dr
dt
dp
dt

=

kw − gw w

=

kq w − gq q

=

kr (q) − gr r

=

kp r − gp p,

(10)

where the rate of transcription of the target mRNAs (r) is a Hill function of the number of TFs (q):

31

kr (q) =

kr q c
.
hcr + q c

(11)

At the steady state, where dxi /dt = 0 ∀xi ∈ {w, q, r, p}, the system of equations can be solved, ending
up with:
kw
gw
kq kw
gq gw

wss

=

qss

=

rss

=

2
kq2 kr kw
2 h2 + k 2 k 2 )
gr (gq2 gw
r
q w

pss

=

2
kp kq2 krkw
,
2 h2 + k 2 k 2 )
gp gr (gq2 gw
r
q w

(12)

where the subscript ss indicates the evaluation at the steady state and we assumed c = 2.

1.2

The FFL

Figure 11. Scheme of a miRNA-mediated incoherent FFL. Notations are the same of Fig.10. The only
difference with respect to Fig.10 is the presence of the miRNA gene, activated by the TF (red arrow).
MiRNA regulation of the target (red rounded end line) makes its rate of translation a function of
miRNA concentration.
A deterministic description of the scheme in Fig.11 is given by the equations:

32

dw
dt
dq
dt
ds
dt
dr
dt
dp
dt

=

kw − gw w

=

kq w − gq q

=

ks (q) − gs s

=

kr (q) − gr r

=

kp (s)r − gp p.

(13)

The transcription rates of the miRNA gene and of the target gene are Hill functions of the number
of TFs (q), while the translation rate of the target gene is a repressive Hill function of the number of
miRNAs (s):

kr (q)

=

ks (q)

=

kp (s)

=

kr q c
+ qc
ks q c
hcs + q c
kp
.
1 + ( hs )c
hcr

(14)

For simplicity we use the same Hill coefficient c for each Hill function, but the analysis can be
straigthforwardly generalized to the case of Hill functions with different steepness.
At the steady state, where dxi /dt = 0 ∀xi ∈ {w, q, s, r, p}, the system of Eqs.13 can be solved (we assume
again c = 2), ending up with:

wss

=

qss

=

sss

=

rss

=

pss

=

kw
gw
kq kw
gq gw
2
kq2 ks kw
2 h2 + k 2 k 2 )
gs (gq2 gw
s
q w
2
kq2 kr kw
2
2
2
2)
gr (gq gw hr + kq2 kw
2

2
h kp kq2 kr kw

.
4
kq4 ks2 kw
2 h2 + k 2 k 2 ) h2 +
gp gr (gq2 gw
r
q w
g 2 (g 2 g 2 h2 +k2 k2 )2
s

q w

s

q

(15)

w

The results for wss , qss , rss coincide with the corresponding ones of the TF-gene linear cascade (see
Eqs.12). sss and rss have the same functional dependence on the input parameters (except for the obvious
substitutions kr ↔ ks , gr ↔ gs and hr ↔ hs ) as their expression depends on the amount of TFs in the
same way. On the contrary p has a different expression with respect to the linear circuit TF-gene, as in
this case additional terms, related to miRNA repression, appear.

33

Figure 12. Scheme of an open circuit that can lead to the same mean concentrations of molecular
species of the FFL. The notation is the same of Fig.10. Unlike the FFL case, here the miRNA and the
target gene are activated by two indipendent TFs, present in copy numbers q and q 0 .

1.3

The open circuit

A deterministic description of the scheme in Fig.12 is given by the equations:
dw
dt
dq
dt
dw0
dt
dq 0
dt
ds
dt
dr
dt
dp
dt

= kw − gw w
= kq w − gq q
= kw − gw w0
= kq w0 − gq q 0
= ks (q) − gs s
= kr (q 0 ) − gr r
= kp (s)r − gp p.

(16)

The presence of two independent TFs (copy numbers q and q 0 ) that regulate respectively the transcription of s and r does not change the expression of pss previously obtained in the FFL case, as long as
their rate of transcription, translation and degradation are the same of that of the single TF in the FFL
and assuming that the Hill functions of activation of the target gene and the miRNA gene are exactly
the same. The solutions of Eqs.16 at equilibrium (with c = 2) are:

34

wss

kw
gw
kq kw
=
gq gw

0
= wss
=

qss

0
= qss

sss

=

rss

=

pss

=

2
kq2 ks kw
2
2
2
2)
gs (gq gw hs + kq2 kw
2
kq2 kr kw
2 h2 + k 2 k 2 )
gr (gq2 gw
r
q w
2

2
h kp kq2 kr kw

.
4
kq4 ks2 kw
2 h2 + k 2 k 2 ) h2 +
gp gr (gq2 gw
r
q w
g 2 (g 2 g 2 h2 +k2 k2 )2
s

q w

s

q

(17)

w

Therefore, this open circuit allows the same setting of the concentration of target proteins. As
mentioned above, this feature makes the open circuit a good null model for comparison with the FFL:
as the mean field description is the same, any difference between the two will be due to stochastic
fluctuations.

2

Stochastic Models

We present the master equations for the three circuits discussed in the previous section (Fig.10,11,12),
keeping into account the discrete and stochastic nature of chemical reactions. The strategy to find the
expression of < p > and CVp at the steady state is the method of the moment generating function (as
discussed in the main text). In this section the variables describing the system ({w, q, r, s, p} for the
FFL) are discrete and represent the actual number of molecules at a specific time. The notation < xi >
indicates the mean value at the steady state for the variable xi .

2.1

Linearization of Hill functions

As a first step, following [1,2] we linearize Hill functions in Eqs.14. This is a commonly used approximation
[1, 2] and it is based on the idea that at the steady state the distributions of regulators (TFs or miRNAs)
have a finite width and sample only small regions of the domains of the corresponding Hill functions. We
may therefore approximate Hill functions by their linearizations about mean values of the regulators q or
s:
kr (q) ∼ kr (q)|<q> + ∂q kr (q)|<q> (q− < q >)
ks (q) ∼ ks (q)|<q> + ∂q ks (q)|<q> (q− < q >)
kp (s) ∼ kp (s)|<s> + ∂s kp (s)|<s> (s− < s >).
Defining:

(18)

35

kr0

=

kr (q)|<q> − ∂q kr (q)|<q> < q >

kr1

=

∂q kr (q)|<q>

ks0

=

ks (q)|<q> − ∂q ks (q)|<q> < q >

ks1
kp0
kp1

=

∂q ks (q)|<q>

=

kp (s)|<s> − ∂s kp (s)|<s> < s >

=

−∂s kp (s)|<s> ,

(19)

and substituting in Eqs.18 we obtain Eqs.4 of the main text:

2.2

kr (q) ∼

kr0 + kr1 q

ks (q) ∼

ks0 + ks1 q

kp (s) ∼

kp0 − kp1 s.

(20)

The TF-gene linear circuit

The master equation that describes the circuit in the scheme of Fig. 10 is:
∂Pw,q,r,p
= kw (Pw−1,q,r,p − Pw,q,r,p ) + kq w(Pw,q−1,r,p − Pw,q,r,p )
∂t
+kr (q)(Pw,q,r−1,p − Pw,q,r,p ) + kp r(Pw,q,r,p−1 − Pw,q,s,r,p )
h
i
h
i
+gw (w + 1)Pw+1,q,r,p − wPw,q,r,p + gq (q + 1)Pw,q+1,r,p − qPw,q,r,p
h
i
h
i
+gr (r + 1)Pw,q,r+1,p − rPw,q,r,p + gp (p + 1)Pw,q,s,r,p+1 − pPw,q,s,r,p .
Introducing the moment generating function as:
X
F (z1 , z2 , z3 , z4 ) =
z1w z2q z3r z4p Pw,q,r,p ,

(21)

(22)

w,q,r,p

and using the linearized form of Hill functions in Eq.20, we can convert Eq.21 into a first order partial
differential equation (PDE):

∂t F

= kw (z1 F − F ) + kq z1 (z2 ∂z1 F − ∂z1 F ) + kr0 (z3 F − F )
+kr1 z2 (z3 ∂z2 F − ∂z2 F ) + kp z3 (z4 ∂z3 F − ∂z3 F )
+gw (∂z1 F − z1 ∂z1 F ) + gq (∂z2 F − z2 ∂z2 F )
+gr (∂z3 F − z3 ∂z3 F ) + gp (∂z4 F − z4 ∂z4 F ).

(23)

This equation cannot be solved exactly but it is not difficult to extract the first two moments of the
probability distributions Pw,q,r,s at the steady state, thus allowing to obtain a close expression for p and
CVp = σp / < p >.

36

2.2.1

Moments of the distribution

These moments can be evaluated by deriving Eq.23 at the steady state (∂t F = 0) and using the following
properties of the moment generating function: F |1 = 1; Fi =< xi >; Fii =< x2i > − < xi > (with the
notation Fi = ∂xi F ), where |1 means evaluation of F at xi = 1 for all i. We only discuss here the
derivatives which are needed to obtain F3 =< p > and F3,3 − F32 + F3 = σp2 .

2.3

F1

=

F2

=

F3

=

< p >= F4

=

F1,1

=

F1,2

=

F1,3

=

F1,4

=

F2,2

=

F2,3

=

F2,4

=

σp2 − < p > + < p >2 = F3,3

=

F3,4

=

F4,4

=

kw /gw
kq F1
gq
kr0 + kr1 F2
gr
kp F3
gp
k w F1
gw
kq F1 + kw F2 + kq F1,1
gq + gw
kr0 F1 + kw F3 + kr1 F1,2
gr + gw
kw F4 + kp F1,3
gp + gw
kq F1,2
gq
kr0 F2 + kr1 F2 + kq F1,3 + kr1 F2,2
gq + gr
kq F1,4 + kp F2,3
gp + gq
kr0 F3 + kr1 F2,3
gr
kp F3 + kr0 F4 + kr1 F2,4 + kp F3,3
gp + gr
kp F3,4
.
gp

The FFL

The master equation describing the circuit in the scheme of Fig. 11 is:

(24)

37

∂Pw,q,s,r,p
= kw (Pw−1,q,s,r,p − Pw,q,s,r,p ) + kq w(Pw,q−1,s,r,p − Pw,q,s,r,p )
∂t
+kr (q)(Pw,q,s,r−1,p − Pw,q,s,r,p ) + ks (q)(Pw,q,s−1,r,p − Pw,q,s,r,p )
h
i
+kp (s)r(Pw,q,s,r,p−1 − Pw,q,s,r,p ) + gw (w + 1)Pw+1,q,s,r,p − wPw,q,s,r,p
h
i
h
i
+gq (q + 1)Pw,q+1,s,r,p − qPw,q,s,r,p + gr (r + 1)Pw,q,s,r+1,p − rPw,q,s,r,p
h
i
h
i
+gs (s + 1)Pw,q,s+1,r,p − sPw,q,s,r,p + gp (p + 1)Pw,q,s,r,p+1 − pPw,q,s,r,p .
Introducing the moment generating function:
X
F (z1 , z2 , z3 , z4 , z5 ) =
z1w z2q z3s z4r z5p Pw,q,s,r,p ,

(25)

(26)

w,q,s,r,p

and using the linearization in Eqs.18, we can convert Eq.25 into a PDE that is of second order in this
case:

∂t F

= kw (z1 F − F ) + kq z1 (z2 ∂z1 F − ∂z1 F ) + kr0 (z4 F − F )
+kr1 z2 (z4 ∂z2 F − ∂z2 F ) + ks0 (z3 F − F ) + ks1 z2 (z3 ∂z2 F − ∂z2 F )
+kp0 z4 (z5 ∂z4 F − ∂z4 F ) − kp1 z3 z4 (z5 ∂z3 ,z4 F − ∂z3 ,z4 F )
+gw (∂z1 F − z1 ∂z1 F ) + gq (∂z2 F − z2 ∂z2 F ) + gs (∂z3 F − z3 ∂z3 F )
+gr (∂z4 F − z4 ∂z4 F ) + gp (∂z5 F − z5 ∂z5 F ).

(27)

As mentioned in the main text, even if we linearized the Hill functions in the master equation (Eq.25),
the term related to the translation of the regulated target keeps a nonlinear contribution due to the
product kp1 sr. This has the effect of making Eq.27 a second order PDE.
Remarkably enough one can nevertheless obtain closed analytical expressions for < p > and CVp . The
only additional complication, with respect to TF-gene case discussed in the previous section is that the
calculation of some fourth moments is required. We do not report here the expression of all the moments
for the sake of shortness but they can be easily derived with tedious but straightforward algebra.

2.4

The open circuit

The master equation describing the circuit in the scheme of Fig. 12 is:

38

h
∂Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p
= kw (Pw−1,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p − Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p )
∂t
i

+(Pw,q,w0 −1,q0 ,s,r,p − Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p )
h
+kq w(Pw,q−1,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p − Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p )
i
+w0 (Pw,q,w0 ,q0 −1,s,r,p − Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p )

+kr (q)(Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r−1,p − Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p )
+kp (s)r(Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p−1 − Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p )
+ks (q 0 )(Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s−1,r,p − Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p )
h
i
+gs (s + 1)Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s+1,r,p − sPw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p
h
i
+gw (w + 1)Pw+1,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p − wPw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p
h
i
+gq (q + 1)Pw,q+1,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p − qPw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p
h
i
+gw (w0 + 1)Pw,q,w0 +1,q0 ,s,r,p − w0 Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p
h
i
+gq (q 0 + 1)Pw,q,w0 ,q0 +1,s,r,p − q 0 Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p
h
i
+gr (r + 1)Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r+1,p − rPw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p
h
i
+gp (p + 1)Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p+1 − pPw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p .
Introducing the moment generating function:
X
F (z1 , z2 , z3 , z4 , z5 , z6 , z7 ) =

0

0

z1w z2q z3w z4q z5s z6r z7p Pw,q,w0 ,q0 ,s,r,p ,

(28)

(29)

w,q,w0 ,q 0 ,s,r,p

and using the linearization in Eqs.18 we can convert Eq.28 into a second order PDE analogous to
Eq.27. The expression of < p > and CVp can be obtained as in the FFL case differentiating up to fourth
moments.

2.5

Numerical definition of the steady-state time-threshold

To perform Gillespie simulations in order to check the analytical results, we must define the time tc at
which the system can be considered at the steady state. In previous papers [1, 2] the steady state was
assumed to be reached at a time equal to ten times the protein half-life. We tried to slightly improve this
definition.
For each circuit in analysis, we evaluated numerically the deterministic dynamics for the set of parameter
values chosen for the simulations, assuming the initial conditions xi = 0 ∀i. Then we defined tc as the
value above which the difference between p(tc ) and its asymptotic value pss (in units of pss ) becomes
smaller than a given threshold .
pss − p(tc )
= .
(30)
pss
We report in fig.13 an example of this calculation in the case of the FFL circuit (details on the
parameters and initial conditions are reported in the caption). Setting as threshold  = 0.05 (which,

39

p
800

600

400

200

2000

4000

6000

8000

t

Figure 13. Deterministic evolution toward the steady state. We report in blue the numerical solution
of Eqs.13 for p with initial conditions xi = 0 ∀i. The red line represents the number of protein at
equilibrium given by Eq.15. The dashed orange line represents the time tc that satisfies Eq.30. At time
tc = 5000s, resulting from Eq.30 with  = 0.05, the curves are almost indistinguishable. The rate of
transcription of the TF is kw = 0.06s−1 and of translation kq = 0.04s−1 . Proteins degrade with a
probability gq = gp = 0.002s−1 while mRNAs and miRNAs with probability gw = gr = gs = 0.006s−1 .
The parameters in the Hill functions (Eqs.14) are as follows. Maximum rate of transcription for
mRNAs: kr = 0.8s−1 , while for miRNAs: ks = 0.5s−1 ; maximum rate of translation of the target:
kp = 0.04s−1 ; dissociations constants: hs = 200, hr = 200, h = 60. The Hill coefficients are always c = 2.
given the size of the fluctuations which we are interested in, turns out to be a rather conservative value)
we found for this particular circuit tc ∼ 5000s, which corresponds to about 14 times the protein half-life.
This procedure allows us to treat the different circuits on the same ground and eliminates a possible
source of numerical bias.

2.6
2.6.1

Robustness of our results with respect to changes in the values of the
input parameters
Constraints imposed on the FFLs by the requirement of sensitivity to changes in the
master TF concentration.

Functional FFLs can be defined as those in which a change in the master TF concentration can cause
a change in the concentration of target proteins and miRNAs [3]. While the issue of the trade-off
between sensitivity to signals and noise control is discussed in detail in Section 7, in the following we
shall define more simply the conditions on parameters that ensure a sufficient dependence of miRNA and
target mRNA levels on the TF concentration. Noise propagation requires a target dependence on TF
concentration, therefore only in this case noise buffering can be functional. In our contest this dependence
implies that the Hill functions of activation by the TF and of repression by the miRNA should not be
saturated at the steady state. Indeed, in conditions of complete saturation, signals and fluctuations
cannot propagate from the master TF to the target (even in absence of miRNA regulation), therefore a
noise control lose any functionality. On the other hand, in the unsaturated regime a change in the number

40

of TFs can alter in a significant way the number of target proteins in the cell together with the number
of miRNAs, generating the correlated fluctuations needed for noise buffering. If the TF concentration
is too high (with respect to hr and hs ), the expression rates of the target and miRNA genes become
insensitive to variations in TF concentration (unless they are so large that can escape from the region of
saturation) limiting the sensitivity of the FFL to upstream signals. The same considerations hold for the
target repression. If there are too many miRNAs (with respect to h), the target expression is drastically
shut down and again the system becomes insensitive to changes in the number of TFs. Accordingly
we excluded from our analysis the parameter sets for which: < q > hr (hs ) or < q > hr (hs ) and
< s > h or < s > h. In other words, the circuit functionality imposes that concentrations of
regulators must be placed not far from the linear region of the corresponding Hill functions. A high
sensitivity corresponds also to an overexposure to noise, in fact noise amplification and sensitivity are
correlated quantities [4,12] (see also Section 7). Since the aim of our study is to prove the noise buffering
role of miRNA-mediated incoherent FFL, considering the parameter space that strongly exposes to noise
makes clearly sense and it seems not a limitation.
With the conditon of unsaturated regulations satisfied, the qualitative results in the article apply for
virtually all parameter choices. As a partial proof, in the next two sections we shall discuss a few
different combinations of parameters. As we shall see our results turn out to be remarkably robust with
respect to changes in the allowed (unsaturated) region of parameters.
2.6.2

Target and miRNA genes differentially expressed

In this section we present the target noise strength for the three circuits as a function of the ratio
between the maximum rate of transcription of miRNA gene (ks ) and target gene (kr ), keeping fixed the
TF concentration (< q >) and miRNA repression strength (1/h). The aim is to show that the noise
buffering role of the mixed FFL shows only a weak dependence on the characteristics of miRNA and
target promoters. In the upper part of Fig.14 we plot the target noise strength as a function of kr /ks .
One can see that in the whole range of values the mixed FFL shows the largest noise reduction effect
and in particular that the noise buffering role of the FFL does not require an equal rate of transcription
of miRNAs and mRNAs. Indeed, as discussed in the main text, the noise attenuation is due to the
correlation of fluctuations in the number of mRNAs and miRNAs and not to their absolute values.
Different maximum rates of transcription (kr and ks ) only change the height of peaks in mRNA and
miRNA trajectories, without affecting their correlation.
2.6.3

mRNAs and miRNAs with different stability

Another important robustness test is the dependence of the FFL noise buffering efficiency on the ratio
of decay constants gr /gs . In principle one could expect a reduction in the FFL efficiency when gr 6= gs
due to the fact that with different values of gr and gs the mRNA and miRNA trajectories could start to
fluctuate out of phase due to different relaxation times. To answer this question we calculated the CVp
for the three circuits as a function of the ratio gr /gs . The results are reported in the lower part of Fig.14.
As in the previous case, we find that in the whole range of gr /gs that we studied the mixed FFL gives
the largest noise reduction effect.
These two tests together show that noise buffering is a generic feature of mixed FFLs and that there
is no need to fine tune the half-life and/or the transcription rate of miRNAs and mRNAs to obtain a
mixed FFL that efficiently reduces fluctuations.
2.6.4

Optimal TF concentration tuning kw instead of kq

In the main text we discussed the dependence of the noise strength CVp on the copy number of TFs
present at the steady state (Fig.6C of the main text). The parameter chosen to tune < q > was the

41

A)

CV p
FFL

0.25

æ
æ
æ

0.20

æ
æ

TF-gene
æ
æ

æ

æ

0.15

æ

open circuit

æ

æ

æ
0.10

æ
æ

0

B)

1

2

3

kr ks

4

CV p

0.20
æ

æ

æ

æ

æ

æ

æ

æ

3

4

æ
ææ
æ

0.15

æ
æ

æ

æ
0.10

ææ

0

æ
æ

æ

1

2

5

gr gs

Figure 14. (A) CVp as a function of the transcription rate ratio kr /ks . (B) CVp as a function of gr /gs .
rate of translation kq . For the sake of completeness we report here the same plot obtained by varying kw
instead of kq . Also with this alternative protocol the FFL outperforms the other circuits in noise control
for intermediate concentration of the TF. This is a further proof of the robustness of our results.
2.6.5

Results for another set of parameters

As a final test of robustness we solved the master equations for the three circuits with a choice of input
parameters (reported in the caption of Fig.16A) leading to sizeable fluctuations in the number of master
TFs (CVq ∼ 0.4). This should be compared with the values of the case dicussed in the main text (whose
parameter set is reported in the caption of Fig.13) for which the noise in the number of TFs was only
CVq ∼ 0.17. Also in this case the TF fluctuations are efficiently attenuated by the FFL, leading to a final
value of the noise strength in the target protein of CVp = 0.25 to be compared with CVp = 0.38 for the
direct TF-gene regulation and CVp = 0.46 for the open circuit (see the histograms in Fig.16A). These
values agree with the observation reported in the main text that the noise attenuation effect due to the
FFL circuit becomes larger and larger as the size of TF fluctuations increases. The U-shaped profile of
CVp for the FFL steps out also for this parameter set, further supporting the idea that this property does
not depend on their particular choice but is a generic feature of the model (see Fig.16B).

2.7

Testing the effect of Hill function linearization

Besides the robustness against the choice of input parameters another important issue which one would
like to address is the effect of the linearization of the Hill functions. This can be easily achieved by

42

CV p
FFL

0.35

TF-gene

æ

0.30

open circuit

æ
0.25

æ
æ

0.20

æ
æ æ

0.15

æ

æ

æ
æ

0.10

æ
æ
æ

0.05
0

100

200

300

400

æ
æ

500

600

<q>

Figure 15. CVp as a function of the mean number of TFs < q >. Dots are the result of Gillespie
simulations with the full dynamics while continuous lines are the analytical predictions. The parameter
values are the same of Fig.13
comparing analytical versus numerical (Gillespie) results for the noise reduction. Since this is the only
approximation that we made in our analysis it is important to understand which is the range of parameters
in which we can trust our analytical results not only qualitatively but also quantitatively. It is easy to
guess that the linear approximation should give sizeable errors only when the fluctuations in the variables
become large enough to cover a wide portion of the Hill function thus exploring also its non-linear part.
A good example to discuss this issue is given by the set of input parameters discussed in the previous
section. In this case, even if the analytical solution still captures qualitatively the main features of
the systems, it is less precise in its quantitative predictions. This is clearly visible in Fig.16B where
analytical predictions are compared with the results of Gillespie simulations (which keep into account
the full non linear dynamics of the FFL) as a function of the inverse of repression strength h. While
for the value of h discussed above (h = 30) the agreement is very good, as h decreases the gap between
the two curves becomes larger and larger. This is a consequence of the linearization of Hill functions
and shows that if fluctuations are too large, as it happens in the strong repression regime, the linear
approximation may become too crude. It is interesting to study how the approximation breaks down
since it is a typical example of the subtle effects which the two step nature of gene expression may have
on noise propagation. With the choice of parameters of the figure, the q fluctuations cover a wide region
of the domain of kr (q) and ks (q) (Fig.16C), but the line tangent in < q > still captures quite well the Hill
function trend, with only a slight overestimation (< r >=< s >= 20 from simulations, compared to the
predicted value of 21). On the other hand, the large fluctuations in s (CVs = 0.48) make the linearization
of kp (s) a poor approximation (Fig.16D). The s distribution spreads on a domain region where the Hill
function widely changes its curvature, therefore the tangent line introduces in many trajectories a sizeable
underestimation of the rate of target translation. As a result we have < p >= 43 from simulations while
only < p >= 28 from the analytical model. In a similar way also the standard deviation turns out to
be uncorrectly estimated by the analytical solution. These disagreements explain the displacement of
analytical curves in Fig.16B with respect to simulations. This example shows however that, despite its

43

A) Probability Density

B)

0.014

FFL

0.012

TF-gene

0.010

CV p
0.8

0.6

open circuit

0.008

0.4

0.006

0.2

0.004

0.002

C)

100

200

300

Protein Number

400

kr(q)

0

D)

0.30

20

40

60

80

100

h

kp(s)
0.020

0.25

0.015
0.20

0.15

0.010

0.10

0.005
0.05

0.00
0

200

400

600

800

q

0.000
0

20

40

60

80

100

s

Figure 16. (A)The probability distribution of target protein number for the three circuits in analysis.
The parameter values are: kw = 0.01s−1 ; kq = 0.3s−1 ; gw = gr = gs = 0.006s−1 ; gq = gp = 0.002s−1 ;
kr = ks = 0.3s−1 ; ; hs = hr = 200; c = 2; h = 30. Histograms are the result of Gillespie simulations
with the full nonlinear dynamics, while continuous lines are empirical distributions (gaussian for the
FFL and gamma for the TF-gene and the open circuit) with mean and variance predicted by the
analytical model. (B) The coefficient of variation of the target protein CVp as a function of the inverse
of repression strength h for the three circuits. (C) The Hill function of transcriptional activation of the
target gene (blue line). The red line represents the mean number of TFs < q > at equilibrium, while
the shaded region corresponds to intervals [q − σq , q + σq ] and [q − 2σq , q + 2σq ]. The orange line
represents the linearized function used for the analytical solution. (D) The Hill function of translational
repression of the target gene (blue line) by the miRNA, in the strong repression region (h = 10). The
red line represents the mean number of miRNAs < s > at equilibrium, while the shaded region
corresponds to intervals [s − σs , s + σs ] and [s − 2σs , s + 2σs ]. The orange line represents the linearized
function used for the analytical solution.
quantitative failure, the analytical model describes fairly well the qualitative behaviour of the system
even in presence of large fluctuations and, as mentioned above, it becomes more and more precise when
fluctuations around steady state values cover a domain where the Hill functions are approximately linear
(which is the usual assumption in literature).

44

Figure 17. Scheme of a miRNA-mediated incoherent FFL, where the miRNA performs its repressive
function by promoting mRNA degradation. The notation is the same of Fig.10. The red arrow starting
from s represents the regulation of the rate of degradation gr (s), which in this case is a non-linear
increasing function of miRNA concentration.

3

MiRNA-mediated promotion of mRNA degradation

By base pairing to mRNAs, miRNAs can mediate translational repression or mRNA degradation [5–7].
As discussed in the main text, we developed our model considering the miRNA action as repressing the
target translation, making the rate of mRNA translation a nonlinear decreasing function of the number
of miRNAs. In this section we will prove the validity of our results even in the case of miRNA repression
based on promotion of target mRNA degradation. In this case we can introduce the miRNA action
adding to the basal rate of mRNA degradation gr (in absence of miRNAs) an increasing Hill function of
the copy number of miRNAs:
gr (s) = gr +

gmax sc
,
hcdeg + sc

(31)

where gmax represents the maximum possible increase of the degradation rate in case of high miRNA
concentration (if s → ∞, gr (s) → gr + gmax ); hdeg is the dissociation constant of miRNA-mRNA interaction; c is the Hill coefficient.
The stochastic models built on this assumptions cannot be solved with the same strategy explained in
section 2. The closure of equations for < p > and σp would require further linearizations. However, we
ran simulations for the alternative mechanism of miRNA-mediated promotion of target mRNA degradation to check the robustness of our results. Strikingly enough these simulations can be fit quite well with
the analytical predictions based on the assumption of a miRNA-mediated repression of translation.

45

3.1

Deterministic model

The TF-gene linear circuit is modelled as previously shown. We present here only the deterministic
equations for the FFL, since the open circuit case can be easily obtained from the FFL description
following the same steps discussed above for the translational repression case. The mean field description
of the system in Fig.17 is:
dw
dt
dq
dt
ds
dt
dr
dt
dp
dt

= kw − gw w
= kq w − gq q
= ks (q) − gs s
= kr (q) − gr (s)r
= kp r − gp p,

(32)

where ks (q) and kr (q) are the Hill functions of activation shown in Eqs.14, while the form of gr (s) is
shown in Eq.31.
Assuming c = 2 the expressions at steady state of wss , qss , sss are the same of Eqs.15, as nothing is
changed in their dynamics, while the expressions of rss and pss become:

rss

=

2
4 2
2 2
2
kq2 kr kw
(gq4 gs2 gw
hdeg h4s + 2gq2 gs2 gw
hdeg h2s kq2 kw
..
2
2
2
2
4
2
4
4
2
2
2
2
+ kq kw )(gq gr gs gw hdeg hs + 2gq gr gs gw hdeg h2s kq2 kw

2 h2
(gq2 gw
r

4
)
+kq4 (gs2 h2deg + ks2 )kw
2
4
2
4)
+kq (gr gs hdeg + (gr + gmax )ks2 )kw

pss

3.2

= rss kp /gp .

(33)

Comparison with miRNA-mediated repression of mRNA translation

In order to compare in an unbiased way the noise properties of the mixed FFL with different mechanisms
of miRNA action, we set up the parameters of the two alternative models (Fig.11 and 17) so as to achieve
the same final levels of the target protein pss . This can be obtained by choosing the same parameters for
the two models except those involved in the miRNA regulation. These last may then be fixed by equating
the values of pss in Eq.15 and 33. As show in Fig.18 the result of this comparison is that a mixed FFL
with a degradation-based repression gives essentially the same results of the corresponding circuit with a
translation-based repression.
In particular, we show in Fig.18A the analogous (for the present repression scheme) of the histograms
of Fig.3C and 4C of the main text. As in the translational repression case also in this model the noise
buffering effect of the FFL is clearly visible thus suggesting that the inchoerent FFL loop performs equally
well its noise buffering function with either type of repression mechanism. Superimposing the distributions
with mean and variance calculated analytically for the miRNA-mediated repression of translation we find
again a very good agreement, apart from a slight disagreement in the strong repression regime (small
h). In conclusion, all the results presented in the main paper hold despite the mechanism of miRNA
repression and even if the analytical predictions are based on the assumption of a miRNA-mediated
repression on mRNA translation, they can be applied also to this case.

46

A) Probability

B) Probability
0.012

0.004
0.010

0.003
0.008

0.006

0.002

0.004

0.001
0.002

500

1000

1500

2000

Protein Number

500

1000

1500

2000

Protein Number

C) CV p
0.35
FFL

0.30
TF-gene

0.25
æ
æ

0.20

open circuit

æ
0.15
æ
æ

0.10

æ

æ

æ

æ

æ

æ
æ

æ
æ

æ
æ

æ
æ

æ
æ

0.05

0

50

100

150

200

h

Figure 18. Attenuation of noise by a FFL with a miRNA promoting degradation. (A) The probability
distribution of target protein number for the three circuits in analysis. Histograms are the result of
Gillespie simulations with the nonlinear dynamics depicted in Fig.17. Continuous lines are empirical
distributions (gaussian for the FFL and gamma for the TF-gene and the open circuit) with mean and
variance predicted by the analytical stochastic model shown in section 2.3. The parameter values are
those explained in caption of Fig.13. Even if the analytical model is built on the hypothesis of
repression of mRNA-translations, it fits equally well the distributions resulting from simulations based
on miRNA-mediated promotion of mRNA degradation. (B) Same histograms of A with a stronger
repression (h = 20, all other parameters as stated before). In the regime of strong repression the
analytical model tends to overestimate the variance σp . (C) The coefficient of variation of the target
protein CVp as a function of the inverse of repression strength h for the three circuits. The figure shows
the presence of an optimal repression strength even in the case of a degradation-based miRNA
repression. Dots are the results of Gillespie simulations with the hypothesis of a miRNA-mediated
promotion of mRNA degradation, while thick lines are analytical predictions. Apart from the
mentioned overestimation in the strong repression region the model fits quite well Gillespie simulations.

4

Stoichiometric mechanism of repression

Regulatory small noncoding RNAs (sRNAs) play a crucial role also in prokaryotes gene regulation. In
particular, the class of trans-acting sRNAs has many features in common with miRNAs in eukaryotes:
most of them bind to the UTR of the target mRNAs through base-pairing (often imperfect) recognition
to prevent their translation or to promote their degradation. However, as discussed in [8], unlike their
eukaryotic counterpart they usually act stoichiometrically on their targets, since a given sRNA molecule
is often degraded along with its target, instead of being used to regulate other targets. Different au-

47

thors [8–10] studied the peculiar features of this noncatalytic sRNA-mediated regulation, developing a
simple kinetic model for sRNA gene silencing.
In this section we shall study the noise buffering properties of incoherent FFL motifs assuming a stoichiometric modality of repression, and compare our results with the previously discussed catalytic case.

Figure 19. Scheme of a miRNA-mediated incoherent FFL, where pairing of miRNA and mRNA
exposes both molecules to co-degradation. The coupled degradation of the miRNA-mRNA pair is
described through a second-order kinetic constant krs .

4.1

Deterministic model

The scheme of a mixed FFL in which the coupling between sRNAs (s) and mRNAs (r) is stoichiometric
is depicted in Fig.19. Following [8–10], we assume that both sRNA and mRNA are co-degraded when
paired with a rate that depends on the sRNA-mRNA interaction strength krs . The mean field kinetic of
our system can be described by the equations:
dw
= kw − gw w
dt
dq
= kq w − gq q
dt
ds
= ks (q) − gs s − krs rs
dt
dr
= kr (q) − gr r − krs rs
dt
dp
= kp r − gp p.
dt
The stationary solutions (dt xi = 0 ∀i ∈ {w, q, s, r, p}) can be easily calculated (not reported).

(34)

48

4.2

Comparison with catalytic repression

In this section we will explore the consequences of the nature of sRNA-mRNA interaction (stoichiometric
or catalytic) on the noise properties of the mixed FFL. In analogy to section 3.2, we shall compare the
two models choosing the parameters so as to obtain the same pss with both types of sRNA action. As
can be seen comparing the schemes in Fig.12 and Fig.19, in order to have the same number of target
proteins at equilibrium we set equal rates of production and degradation of each molecular species and
then find the relation between krs in the stoichiometric model and h in the catalytic model by equating
the expression for pss in Eqs.15 and in the solution of Eqs.34.
We ran simulations for the FFL, TF-gene direct regulation and the open circuit for catalytic and
stoichiometric action (Fig.20). The noise filtering effect is robust with respect to the mechanism of
miRNA-mRNA interaction, but a catalytic interaction makes the FFL more efficient in buffering fluctuations (compare the histograms in Fig.20A and B). The U-shaped profile of the noise strength CVp
of a target controlled by a FFL (discussed in the main text for catalytic repression) is recovered also
in the stoichiometric case. We report in Fig.20C and D the CVp as a function of the inverse of repression strength for two different sets of parameter values. The maximum of attenuation is achieved for
approximately the same value of h of the catalytic case but the size of noise reduction is smaller with a
stoichiometric repression.
As reported in [9] and [11], in the stoichiometric model described by Eqs.34 the mean protein number exhibits a threshold linear behaviour as a function of the ratio kr /ks with the threshold in 1 [9].
Following [8], protein expression can be classified into three regimes: repressed (kr /ks  1), crossover
(kr /ks ≈ 1) and expressing (kr /ks  1). A threshold linear behaviour implies ultrasensitivity in the
crossover regime and as a consequence the noise is enhanced near the threshold due to critical fluctuations ( [8] and references therein). However, this threshold-linear response is expected if the mRNA-sRNA
interaction is strong, while for a weaker repression the threshold smoothly disappears (see Fig.21) and
the three regimes become indistinguishable. The analysis presented in Fig.20 shows that the attenuation
of fluctuations by a mixed FFL is observable in a regime of weak repression, corresponding to krs ∼ 10−4
in Fig.21, where the crossover regime is vanishing and the raise in fluctuation in kr /ks = 1 is negligible.

49

A)

Probability

Probability

B)
FFL

0.006

0.006
TF-gene

0.005

0.005
open circuit

0.004

0.004

0.003

0.003

0.002

0.002

0.001

0.001

500

C)

1000

1500

2000

Protein Number
0

D)

CV p

500

1500

2000

Protein Number

CV p
0.60

0.4

1000

X

X

0.55
X

0.50

æ X

0.45

0.3

0.2
æ

0.1

X æX
æ
X
æX æ
æ æ
X
X æ æ æ æ æ æ æ æ X
X
æ
X
X
æ
æ
æ
æ
æ
æ
æ
æ

X
20

X 40

X

X

X

0.35
X
0.30

X

X
X

60

X
X

80
X

X

100
X
X

120

h

140
X

0.25
0

50

100

150

200

h

0.20

Figure 20. Attenuation of noise by a FFL mediated by a sRNA that acts stoichiometrically on its
mRNA target. We chose the same parameter set described in the caption of Fig.13. In the upper part
of the figure we show the probability distribution of the target protein number for the three circuits in
the case of stoichiometric action (A) and catalytic action (B). Although in both cases the FFL reduces
relative fluctuations with respect to the direct TF regulation and the open circuit, the catalytic
modality turns out to be more efficient than the stoichiometric one. For the same set of parameters we
report in (C) the CVp as a function of the inverse of the repression strength h. In the stoichiometric
case CVp is actually a function of krs which however can be expressed as function of h (see the text).
To allow a simpler comparison of the various plots we plotted the stoichiometric results directly as
function of h. Dots are the result of simulations based on the hypothesis of a catalytic sRNA action
while the x-shaped points derive from simulations with a stoichiometric action. For each regulatory
modality we report the FFL and the open circuit data (which can be recognized because are always
higher than the FFL ones). Even if the qualitative behaviour is the same (in both cases a maximum of
noise attenuation appears) the figure clearly shows that the catalytic modality is more efficient than the
stoichiometric one in reducing the noise. (D) Same as (C) but for the alternative set of parameters
discussed in the caption of Fig.16.

50

A)

p
1200

krs =10-4
1000

krs =10-3

krs =10-2

800

krs =10-1
600

400

200

0
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

kr/ks

Figure 21. We report the response (p) of the FFL as a function of kr /ks for different values of
miRNA-mRNA interaction strength. The red dot represents the protein production in absence of
miRNA regulation. The threshold linear response is evident only for strong repression, while for
krs = 10−4 , compatible with a fine tuning regulation, the response is almost purely linear.

5
5.1

Purely transcriptional incoherent FFLs
Stochastic model

The master equation describing a purely transcriptional incoherent FFL (depicted in the scheme of Fig.
22) is:
∂Pw,q,s,j,r,p
= kw (Pw−1,q,s,j,r,p − Pw,q,s,j,r,p ) + kq w(Pw,q−1,s,j,r,p − Pw,q,s,j,r,p )
∂t
+ks (q)(Pw,q,s−1,j,r,p − Pw,q,s,j,r,p ) + kj s(Pw,q,s,j−1,r,p − Pw,q,s,j,r,p )
+kr (q, j)(Pw,q,s,j,r−1,p − Pw,q,s,j,r,p ) + kp r(Pw,q,s,j,r,p−1 − Pw,q,s,j,r,p )
h
i
h
i
+gw (w + 1)Pw+1,q,s,j,r,p − wPw,q,s,j,r,p + gq (q + 1)Pw,q+1,s,j,r,p − qPw,q,s,j,r,p
h
i
h
i
+gs (s + 1)Pw,q,s+1,j,r,p − sPw,q,s,j,r,p + gj (j + 1)Pw,q,s,j+1,r,p − jPw,q,s,j,r,p
h
i
h
i
+gr (r + 1)Pw,q,s,j,r+1,p − rPw,q,s,j,r,p + gp (p + 1)Pw,q,s,j,r,p+1 − pPw,q,s,j,r,p .

(35)

The protein j represses target transcription, which is also activated by the master TF q; consequently
the rate kr (q, j) is represented as a function of the concentration of both regulators. In particular, we
model the rate of target transcription as a product of Hill functions:

kr (q, j) = kr

qc
1
.
c
c
hr + q 1 + ( hj )c
j

(36)

While the linearization of the Hill function ks (q) is the one presented in Eq.18, we have to introduce
the linearization of kr (q, j):

51

Figure 22. Scheme of a purely transcriptional incoherent FFL. Notations are the same of Fig.11. The
only difference with respect to Fig.11 is the presence of a protein in the indirect pathway from the TF
to target gene, therefore there are the additional reactions: translation of the protein j from its mRNAs
s with rate kj , and their degradation with rate gj . The repressive action on the target is at the level of
transcription in this case (represented by the red rounded end line), resulting in a rate of target
transcription kr (q, j) which is a function of the number of proteins j and master TFs q.

kr (q, j) ∼
+

kr (q, j)|<q>,<j> + ∂q kr (q, j)|<q>,<j> (q− < q >)
∂j kr (q, j)|<q>,<j> (j− < j >).

(37)

Therefore we can define:
kr0

= kr (q, j)|<q>,<j> − ∂j kr (q, j)|<q>,<j> < j > −∂q kr (q)|<q>,<j> < q >

kr1
kr2

= ∂q kr (q, j)|<q>,<j>
= ∂j kr (q, j)|<q>,<j> .

(38)

Using the linearization just defined and the method of moment generating function described in section
2, the analytical expression of < p > and CVp can be obtained.

5.2

Constraints on parameters for a comparison with miRNA-mediated FFLs

As stated in the main text, in order to make an unbiased comparison of the noise properties of these two
circuits, the corresponding models must be constrained to produce the same amount of target proteins.
There are several possible ways of putting this constraint, due to the fact that there are two additional
parameters in the transcriptional FFL (kj and gj ) and therefore two supplementary degrees of freedom.
In fact, a constraint can be inserted for example in the Hill function of target activation (tuning hj ) or

52

in the rate of s transcription ks (q), choosing accordingly the values of kj and gj . This variety of options
introduces some arbitrariness in the comparison. Our criterion is to keep the shared parameters to the
same values (i.e. repression/activation efficiencies and production/degradation rates) and choose the two
additional ones to make equal the average amount of repressor proteins < j > in the transcriptional case
to the average amount of miRNAs < s > in the mixed circuit. With this choice we end up with the
same average amount of repressors in the two circuit versions (< j >=< s >), with the same efficiency of
repression (hj = hp ), and therefore with same impact on the target expression (making equal the amount
of target proteins produced by the two circuits). To implement this constraint, in the transcriptional
FFL the rate of translation kj must simply equal the rate of degradation gj (that we assume equivalent
to the other protein degradation rates gj = gq = gp ). As a result, the average number of proteins j which
is produced from a single mRNA is forced to b = kj /gs = gj /gs . b represents the translational burst size
and, as discussed in the main text, it is a critical quantity in determining the noise level. As reported
in [1], the fluctuations in the concentration of a single gene product can be expressed as:


b
1
2
+1 .
(39)
CV =
<p> 1+η
Therefore, the noise level is dependent on the translational burst size (where η is the ratio of protein
to mRNA lifetime).
We report the parameter values used in the analysis summarized in Figure 8 of the main text: kj =
gj = gq = gp = 0.002; gw = gs = gr = 0.006, kr = 0.8; ks = 0.5; c = 2; hr = 200; hs = 200; kp =
0.04. For these values, the translational burst size b, compatible with constraints, is b = 0.33, which
is considerably smaller than expected in eukaryotes. In conclusion, to satisfy the constraints we are
probably underestimating the noise introduced by the supplementary translation step required in a purely
transcriptional FFL. This is why we expect that a miRNA-mediated FFL can overcome in noise-buffering
efficiency its purely transcriptional counterpart even more than reported in Figure 8 of the main text.

6
6.1

Cross-talk between miRNA targets
Stoichiometric vs catalytic model of miRNA action

We start from a mass-action model for miRNA-mediated FFLs where we introduce explicitily a paramenter α representing the degree of catalyticity of miRNA action on targets. This type of description was
introduced by Levine et al [9] and it will be straightforwardly applied to the FFL case in the following:
dw
dt
dq
dt
ds
dt
dr
dt
dc
dt
dp
dt

=

kw − gw w

=

kq w − gq q

=

ks (q) − gs s − (k+ rs − k− c) + (1 − α)βc

=

kr (q) − gr r − (k+ rs − k− c)

=

(k+ rs − k− c) − βc

=

kp r − gp p,

(40)

where c is the concentration of miRNA-mRNA complexes, k+ is the probability of miRNA-mRNA
association, k− the probability of dissociation of the complex c, which can degrade with rate β. The

53

parameter α represents the probability that degradation of the mRNA in the complex is accompained
by degradation of the miRNA. As discussed in [9], it is a measure of how much the miRNA action
is catalytic. In this section, the variables that describe the state of the system ( {w, q, r, s, c, p}) are
continuous variables, representing the average number of the various molecular species (we are omitting
the notation < .. > for averages). Since we are interested in steady state properties, we can simplify the
model equilibrating the c complex dynamics:
dw
dt
dq
dt
ds
dt
dr
dt
dp
dt

= kw − gw w
= kq w − gq q
= ks (q) − gs s − αγrs
= kr (q) − gr r − γrs
= kp r − gp p,

(41)

where γ = βk+ /(k− + β). The limit of α = 0 implies that for each degradation event of c complexes,
none of the miRNAs is lost. This corresponds to a simplification of the model presented in section 3 of
Text S1: the rate of mRNA degradation is supposed to be a linear function of miRNA concentration,
instead of a nonlinear Hill function. The opposite situation of p = 1 reproduces the stoichiometric model
presented in Eq.34 (apart from the sostitution γ → krs ).
It is straightforward to generalize this description to the case of two miRNA targets, adding an equation
describing the dynamics of a second target which is independently transcribed:
dw
dt
dq
dt
ds
dt
dr
dt
dr2
dt
dp
dt

=

kw − gw w

=

kq w − gq q

=

ks (q) − gs s − α(γ1 rs + γ2 r2 s)

=

kr (q) − gr r − γ1 rs

=

kr2 − gr2 r2 − γ2 r2 s

=

kp r − gp p.

(42)

The analytical solutions can be found easily at the steady state. This is the complete effective model
presented partially in the main text. In the following the coupling constants between miRNAs and the
mRNAs transcribed from the two target genes will be assumed equal (γ1 = γ2 = γ).

6.2

Details on the model setting

In this section we present a detailed view of the model setting and parameter values used for the analysis regarding the target cross-talk presented in the main text. We focus specifically on the minimal
assumptions and on the parameter values used to achieve the results in Figure 9.

54

6.2.1

Setting for Figure 9 B

The solution for < p > of Eqs. 42 at the steady state depends on α. Therefore, in order to evaluate the
impact of the dilution effect for different mechanisms (stoichiometric/catalytic) of miRNA repression, we
choose for each α the corresponding γ value that leads to the same mean amount of target proteins < p >.
Qualitatively, in a catalytic model (α = 0) the miRNAs are more efficient since they can affect several
target mRNAs without being degraded. Consequently, as α decreases the γ value must be decreased so as
to mantain the same target level expression. This is the constraint that makes unique the starting point
(for kr2 = 0) of the curves corresponding to different α values in Fig. 9 of the main text. Concerning the
other parameter values, in Fig. 9 they are fixed to: kq = 0.19s−1 ; gq = gp = 0.002s−1 ; gw = gr = gs =
gr2 = 0.006s−1 ; kw = 0.0126s−1 ; kr = ks = 0.8s−1 ; kp = 0.04s−1 ; c = 2; hr = hs = 200, while the value
of γ = 0.00011s−1 is assigned to the catalytic model (α = 0) - and it corresponds approximately to the
optimal buffering value-, while the γ values for the other α models can be calculated as described above.
6.2.2

Setting for Figure 9 C

As a first approximation we assume, for the sake of simplicity, that the expression of the second target
is not regulated by any TF. Therefore, it is a simple birth-death process, with transcription rate kr2 and
degradation rate gr2 (assumed unique for both targets gr2 = gr ). Since the target embedded in the FFL
is regulated by the TFs q, kr (< q >) can be used as the effective rate of transcription, to be compared
with kr2 of the second target. Indeed, kr (< q >) represents the average rate at which the joint target is
transcribed.
6.2.3

Setting for Figure 9 D

In this subsection we shall introduce a simple strategy to tune the second target fluctuations and analyze
their impact on noise buffering efficiency. The proposed strategy is in perfect analogy with the one
explained in section “The incoherent feedforward loop is effective in reducing extrinsic fluctuations” of
the main text. In brief, we add an independent TF q 0 which activates the transcrition of the second target.
0
Its rates of transcription kw
and translation kq0 are chosen so as to produce the same mean amount of
protein of the other activator (< q >=< q 0 >). Therefore, the effective mean rates of transcription of
0
/kq0 while keeping costant the product
both miRNA targets turn out to be equal. Changing the ratio kw
0 0
kw kq allows us to vary the second target fluctuations without altering its mean level.

7

Noise reduction and signaling sensitivity

Biological systems present the apparently contraddictory need for both high sensitivity to external signals
both homeostatic controls, depending on the specific function in analysis. Indeed, while one essential
feature of signal transduction systems is the amplification of small changes in input signals [12], the reliable
celullar functioning in a fluctuating environment lays on multiple homeostatic controls (the most evident
is temperature control in mammals). Similarly, at the level of genetic networks there is an interplay
between sensitivity to changes in the input signal and the ability to buffer stochastic fluctuations. An
increase in sensitivity to a signal results in an elevated exposure to its fluctuations, as shown for linear
cascades of regulations [12, 13]. More recently the sensitivity/noise-buffering analysis has been extended
to small genetic circuits, including feedback and feedforward loops [4]. The working hypothesis of the
authors is that the main function of a genetic circuit is to maximize the amplification of input signals.
We argue that while this can be often the case, some circuits can have evolved to mantain reliably a
functional steady state, even at the expense of a loss of sensitivity (and even thanks to that loss), to
implement in other words a homeostatic control.

55

Noise Amplification

A)

B) 2500<p>

1.4

FFL
TF-target

2000

1.2

1500

1.0

1000

0.8
500

0.6

FFL

0.4

TF-gene

0.2

open circuit

0

100

200

300

400

500

200

300

400

500

<q>

CV p CV p0
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

0

100

<q>

Susceptibility

C)

Probability
0.0035
0.0030
FFL

0.0025

TF-target

0.0020
0.0015
0.0010
0.0005
500

1000

1500

2000

Protein Number

Figure 23. (A) Noise amplification versus susceptibility for the three circuits: a miRNA-mediated
incoherent FFL, a TF-target regulation and an open circuit. The parameter values that are fixed are
those reported in caption of Fig.3 of the main text (unless kq = 0.19s−1 higher than in Fig.3 to increase
the TF fluctuations). (B) The upper panel shows the fold change in the target level in response to a
fold change in the TF level for the miRNA-mediated incoherent FFL and the TF-target linear circuit.
Continuous lines represent the behaviour of mean values while dashed lines are depicted at a distance
from the mean equal to one standard deviation. In the lower panel the noise reduction CVp /CVp0 is
depicted in same range of < q >.(C) The probability distribution of protein number for the two circuits
(miRNA-mediated FFL and TF-gene). In this case the two regulative circuits are constrained to
produce an equal mean amount of target proteins. The same steady state is achieved with a strikingly
different control of fluctuations by the two circuitries. Histograms are the result of Gillespie simulations
while continuous lines are empirical distributions (gaussian for the FFL and gamma for the TF-gene)
with mean and variance predicted by the analytical model.
Following [4], the steady state sensitivity can be defined as the relative response in output that follows
a change in the input. In the contest of incoherent FFLs (scheme in Fig. 11) we can consider as input
the mean number of TFs < q > and as output the consequent level of target proteins < p >. Following
these definitions, the susceptibility takes the form:
susceptibility =

<q>d <p>
d ln(< p >)
=
.
<p>d <q>
d ln(< q >)

(43)

As a measure of the quantity of noise propagating through the circuit, the noise amplification measure

56

η can be introduced [4]:
η=

CVp
,
CVq

(44)

defined as ratio between output and input noise. As shown in Fig. 23 A, the incoherent miRNAmediated FFL presents an interplay between noise amplification and susceptibility very similar to that
of a gene only activated by a TF, while the same fine-tuning implemented using an independent miRNA
would imply a more severe interplay. Therefore, the noise buffering function demonstrated in this paper
is achieved at the expense of steady-state sensitivity: given a fixed value of susceptibility, the FFL and
the TF-gene linear circuit lead to a similar degree of noise amplification, while when the noise is buffered
by the FFL there must be a loss of target susceptibility. Indeed, the fold change in target expression, that
follows a change in the TF mean level < q >, is reduced precisely in the region where the noise control
is implemented (see Fig.23 B). However, we propose that this is precisely the behaviour needed for a
homeostatic control. The output is highly sensitive to changes in the input concentration until a finely
tuned steady state is reached, then this functional steady state is kept robust to input fluctuations even
if at the expense of a sensitivity loss. The same steady state could be reached more simply without any
miRNA regulation, tuning the TF concentration in a TF-gene circuit, so as to conserve a high sensitivity.
However, in this case the equilibrium level would be affected by strong fluctuations propagating from the
upstream factor, as clearly shown in Fig. 23 B.
In conclusion, if the sensitivity is the function that have to be maximized, as it is probably the case
in signaling systems, incoherent FFLs (and miRNA mediated ones) are outperformed by other circuits
(like those making use of positive feedbacks loops [4]) that support less noise amplification at a fixed
susceptibility. However, in different biological contests a high sensitivity could be important only until a
functional steady state is reached. Then a homeostatic control can be required for keeping the reached
level constant in presence of noisy upstream regulators and miRNA-mediated FFLs seems properly designed for this aim. The proposed functioning is also in agreement with the idea of fine-tuning: when the
target expression is switched on by a rise in TF concentration, the maintenance of its level into a narrow
functional range can be more important than a reliable transmission of further incoming small signals. A
role of miRNA regulation in homeostasis is in line with the observation that miRNAs are often involved
in signaling networks to ensure homeostatic controls (see for example [14]).

8

Effects of possible delays in miRNA production.

The common lore is that a RNA based post-transcriptional regulation can have a faster action on a target
gene expression with respect to TF regulation [20, 21]. Indeed, a TF must be transported back to the
nucleus and find its target promoter to exert its regulative role. However there is a lack of data to support
quantitatively this assumption and the biogenesis of miRNA actually requires several processing steps.
The time needed for the miRNA to be processed, loaded in RISC and in general to become active can
introduce a delay between its transcription and its effect on targets. Therefore it could be interesting
to consider possible effects of this time delay on the noise buffering function of mixed FFLs. While in
the model presented in the main text the miRNA is supposed to act on its target instantaneously, in
this section we present results of simulations performed taking into account the time-delay that can arise
from miRNA processing. More specifically the time-delay has been inserted in the Hill function of regulation of the target translation, mimicking the time required for miRNA activation. With this simulation
procedure, for each chosen set of parameter values it is possible to establish the threshold in delay time
below which the circuit is able to reduce target fluctuations.
In Figure 24 the noise reduction achieved with a FFL (CVp /CVp0 ) is reported as a function of the time
required for miRNA activation. The time-delay is expressed in unit of protein half-life, chosen as a
reference since it represents the longest time-scale in the system. The ability of the circuit in filtering

57

CVP
CVP0
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
Delay
0.6

0

5

10

15

20 Τ12

Figure 24. The effect on noise-buffering efficiency of a time-delay between miRNA transcription and
miRNA repressive action. The values of parameters are the ones in caption of Figure 3 in the main
text. The target noise reduction CVp /CVp0 is measured as a function of the length of the time-delay
expressed in unit of protein half-life τ1/2 . CVp0 is the constitutive noise of a TF-gene circuit without the
miRNA regulation. Until the delay length approaches approximately 3 protein half-lives, the FFL is
still able to filter out fluctuations. After that the noise level tends to the value achieved with an open
circuit (dashed orange line) in which miRNAs and target mRNAs have uncorrelated fluctuations in
their level. Dots are the result of Gillespie’s simulations with the full nonlinear dynamics.
out fluctuations relies on the correlation between miRNA and target mRNA fluctuations, therefore an
eventual time-delay in miRNA action can negatively affect the noise buffering. More specifically, with
the parameter values of Fig.3-4 of the main text, the incoherent FFL is no more able to reduce target
fluctuations if the delay is longer than approximately 3 protein half-life (see Fig 24). As the processing
time becomes longer and longer, miRNA fluctuations lose any correlation with the target ones and the
target noise approches the value corresponding to the open circuit case (dashed orange line in Fig. 24).
In conclusion we showed that a significant time-delay between miRNA transcription and target repression can compromise the noise-buffering function. When quantitative measures of the time required for
transport and processing of miRNAs and proteins will be available, it will be possible to precisely evaluate the degree of reduction of target fluctuations inserting the appropriate delays in the Hill function of
regulations of our theoretical model (even if at the expense of its analytical tractability).

9

Bioinformatical analysis of miRNAs involved in FFLs in the
human mixed network.

Although miRNA mediated FFLs have been shown to be overrepresented in real mixed networks with
respect to randomized networks [15–18], it is equally important to establish the numerical fraction of

58

miRNAs and miRNA targets that are actually involved in these circuits, to better highlight the effective biological relevance of miRNA-mediated FFLs. To this aim we take advantage of the genome-wide
survey of human miRNA-mediated FFLs previously developed by our group [18], based on a search for
overrepresented motif in human and mouse promoters and 3’-UTRs. Of the 464 miRNAs annotated as
KNOWN-KNOWN in the Ensembl database (release 46) [19], using the filters and the software setup
of [18] 193 were selected to form the post-transcriptional network (miRNA-target interactions). Integrating this network with the transcriptional one (with TF-target and TF-miRNA interactions), 133 miRNA
have been significantly associated to at least one (usually more than one) of the 5030 mixed FFLs found
in the human regulatory network (see [18] for more details). Therefore miRNAs, at least in the database
considered, seem often involved in FFL circuits. Since each miRNA can regulate hundreds of targets it
is also interesting to evaluate what fraction of its targets are part of FFLs. The results of this analysis
are reported in the following Table where the total number of targets and the number of targets in a
FFL is presented for each miRNA embedded in a FFL . While some miRNAs preferentially regulate
genes through a FFL topology this is clearly not a general trend, further confirming the importance of
considering the possible cross-talk between miRNA targets (as discussed in the main text).
However it is important to notice that the proposed results suffer some limitations. Firstly we cannot
distinguish incoherent from coherent FFLs since sequence analysis allows the identification of putative
interactions but cannot establish if they are positive or negative. Secondly the proposed regulations
should be considered as potential interactions because they represent purely bioinformatic predictions
and furthermore the miRNA and its targets could be expressed preferentially in different tissues or at
different times. In this case the eventual cross-talk would be limited among co-expressed targets. In spite
of the reported limitations, the data presented here point out that miRNA-mediated FFLs can actually
represent an often exploited regulative circuitry, further suggesting their importance in real networks of
gene regulations.

59

miRNA gene
hsa-miR-129
hsa-miR-148b
hsa-miR-149
hsa-miR-449b
hsa-let-7a
hsa-miR-199a*
hsa-miR-125b
hsa-miR-199a
hsa-miR-101
hsa-miR-205
hsa-miR-31
hsa-miR-203
hsa-miR-30c
hsa-miR-425-3p
hsa-miR-9
hsa-miR-296
hsa-miR-194
hsa-miR-181d
hsa-miR-219
hsa-miR-32
hsa-miR-9*
hsa-miR-148a
hsa-miR-24
hsa-miR-133b
hsa-miR-499
hsa-miR-30a-3p
hsa-miR-218
hsa-miR-375
hsa-miR-223
hsa-miR-100
hsa-miR-214
hsa-miR-10a
hsa-miR-1
hsa-miR-130a
hsa-miR-30a-5p
hsa-miR-802
hsa-miR-26a
hsa-miR-23a
hsa-miR-99a
hsa-miR-126*
hsa-miR-330
hsa-miR-135b

Num. of targets

Num. of targets in FFLs

44
127
55
55
83
138
150
41
105
38
35
51
155
50
106
69
90
120
123
148
100
91
107
40
40
48
83
113
145
46
62
39
46
127
155
76
129
152
46
181
50
103

36
84
36
34
51
84
90
24
61
22
20
29
87
28
59
38
49
64
65
78
52
47
54
20
20
23
39
53
67
21
28
17
20
55
67
31
52
60
18
70
19
39

Percentage
81.8
66.1
65.5
61.8
61.4
60.9
60.0
58.5
58.1
57.9
57.1
56.9
56.1
56.0
55.7
55.1
54.4
53.3
52.8
52.7
52.0
51.6
50.5
50.0
50.0
47.9
47.0
46.9
46.2
45.7
45.2
43.6
43.5
43.3
43.2
40.8
40.3
39.5
39.1
38.7
38.0
37.9

%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%

60

miRNA gene
hsa-miR-133a
hsa-miR-155
hsa-miR-126
hsa-miR-140
hsa-miR-506
hsa-miR-99b
hsa-miR-202
hsa-miR-135a
hsa-let-7f
hsa-miR-16
hsa-let-7d
hsa-let-7e
hsa-miR-542-3p
hsa-miR-206
hsa-miR-34b
hsa-miR-34c
hsa-miR-342
hsa-miR-363
hsa-miR-365
hsa-miR-27a
hsa-miR-29a
hsa-miR-19a
hsa-miR-152
hsa-miR-199b
hsa-miR-141
hsa-miR-212
hsa-miR-302c*
hsa-miR-106a
hsa-miR-17-5p
hsa-miR-30e-5p
hsa-miR-495
hsa-miR-144
hsa-miR-7
hsa-miR-20b
hsa-miR-20a
hsa-miR-103
hsa-miR-106b
hsa-miR-367
hsa-miR-34a
hsa-miR-193a
hsa-miR-200c
hsa-miR-189

Num. of targets

Num. of targets in FFLs

40
100
109
106
127
46
88
103
83
57
90
127
39
46
55
55
49
84
46
104
115
145
127
41
146
58
93
126
126
155
123
146
89
126
132
97
132
111
43
112
143
35

15
37
40
38
45
16
30
35
28
19
29
40
12
14
16
16
14
24
13
29
32
39
34
11
38
15
24
32
32
39
31
36
22
31
32
23
31
26
10
26
33
8

Percentage
37.5
37.0
36.7
35.8
35.4
34.8
34.1
34.0
33.7
33.3
32.2
31.5
30.8
30.4
29.1
29.1
28.6
28.6
28.3
27.9
27.8
26.9
26.8
26.8
26.0
25.9
25.8
25.4
25.4
25.2
25.2
24.7
24.7
24.6
24.2
23.7
23.5
23.4
23.3
23.2
23.1
22.9

%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%

61

miRNA gene
hsa-miR-93
hsa-miR-202*
hsa-miR-451
hsa-miR-221
hsa-miR-222
hsa-miR-138
hsa-miR-302b
hsa-miR-302c
hsa-miR-302d
hsa-miR-299-5p
hsa-miR-182
hsa-miR-142-5p
hsa-miR-369-3p
hsa-let-7b
hsa-miR-494
hsa-miR-183
hsa-miR-505
hsa-miR-377
hsa-miR-96
hsa-miR-195
hsa-miR-497
hsa-miR-30e-3p
hsa-miR-381
hsa-miR-142-3p
hsa-miR-139
hsa-miR-30b
hsa-miR-30d
hsa-miR-302b*
hsa-miR-487b
hsa-miR-369-5p
hsa-miR-409-5p
hsa-miR-410
hsa-miR-329
hsa-miR-151
hsa-miR-412
hsa-miR-25
hsa-miR-192
hsa-miR-496
hsa-miR-153
hsa-miR-15a
hsa-miR-217
hsa-miR-323

Num. of targets

Num. of targets in FFLs

Percentage

83
49
45
50
50
60
134
134
134
108
80
57
101
83
122
92
51
82
133
57
57
48
165
127
34
155
155
76
83
90
80
133
93
70
42
74
45
113
100
57
102
57

19
11
10
11
11
13
29
29
29
23
17
12
21
17
24
18
10
16
26
11
11
9
31
23
6
27
27
13
14
15
13
21
14
10
6
10
6
14
9
5
9
5

22.9 %
22.4 %
22.2 %
22.0 %
22.0 %
21.7 %
21.6 %
21.6 %
21.6 %
21.3 %
21.2 %
21.1 %
20.8 %
20.5 %
19.7 %
19.6 %
19.6 %
19.5 %
19.5 %
19.3 %
19.3 %
18.8 %
18.8 %
18.1 %
17.6 %
17.4 %
17.4 %
17.1 %
16.9 %
16.7 %
16.2 %
15.8 %
15.1 %
14.3 %
14.3 %
13.5 %
13.3 %
12.4 %
9.0 %
8.8 %
8.8 %
8.8 %

62

miRNA gene
hsa-miR-484
hsa-miR-26b
hsa-miR-146b
hsa-miR-200a*
hsa-miR-200a
hsa-miR-200b
hsa-miR-429

Num. of targets

Num. of targets in FFLs

100
129
40
90
146
143
108

6
7
2
3
3
2
1

Percentage
6.0
5.4
5.0
3.3
2.1
1.4
0.9

%
%
%
%
%
%
%

References
1. Thattai M and van Oudenaarden A (2001) Intrinsic noise in gene regulatory networks. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 98: 8614-8619.
2. Komorowski M, Miekisz J and Kierzek AM (2009) Translational repression contributes grater noise
to gene expression than transcriptional repression. Biophys J 96(2): 372-84.
3. Mangan S and Alon U (2003) Structure and function of the feed-forward loop network motif. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 100: 11980-11985.
4. Hornung G and Barkai N (2008) Noise propagation and signaling sensitivity in biological networks:
a role for positive feedback. PLoS Comput Biol 4(1): e8.
5. Valencia-Sanchez MA, Liu J, Hannon GJ, Parker R (2006) Control of translation and mRNA
degradation by miRNAs and siRNAs. Genes Dev 20: 515-524.
6. Pillai RS, Bhattacharyya SN and Filipowicz W (2007) Repression of protein synthesis by miRNAs:
how many mechanisms? Trends Cell Biol 17: 118-126.
7. Filipowicz W, Bhattacharyya SN, Sonenberg N (2008) Mechanisms of post-transcriptional regulation by microRNAs: are the answer in sight? Nat Rev Genet 9: 102-114.
8. Metha P, Goyal S and Wingreen NS (2008) A quantitative comparison of sRNA-based and proteinbased gene regulation. Mol Syst Biol 4: 221.
9. Levine E, Kuhlman T, Zhang Z, Hwa T (2007) Quantitative characteristics of gene regulation by
small RNA. PLoS Biology 9: 229.
10. Shimoni Y, Friedlander G, Hetzroni G, Niv G, Altuvia S, Biham O, Margalit H (2007) Regulation
of gene expression by small non-coding RNAs: a quantitative view. Mol Syst Biol 3: 138.
11. Elf J, Paulsson J, Berg OG, Ehrenberg (2005) Mesoscopic kinetics and its applications in protein synthesis. In Topics in Current Genetics: Systems Biology: Definitions and Perspectives,
Alberghina L, Westerhoff HV (eds), pp 95-116. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
12. Shibata T and Fulimoto K (2005) Noisy signal amplification in ultrasensitive signal transduction.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102: 331-336.
13. Hooshangi S, Thiberge S, Weiss R (2005) Ultrasensitivity and noise propagation in a synthetic
transcriptional cascade. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102: 3581-3586.

63

14. Inui M, Martello G e Piccolo S. (2010) MicroRNA control of signal transduction. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol 11: 252-63.
15. Shalgi R, Lieber D, Oren M and Pilpel Y (2007) Global and local architecture of the mammalian
microRNA-transcription factor regulatory network. PLoS Comput Biol 3(7): e131.
16. Tsang J, Zhu J and van Oudenaarden A (2007) MicroRNA-mediated feedback and feedforward
loops are recurrent network motifs in mammals. Mol Cell 26: 753-767.
17. Yu X, lin J, Zack DJ, Mendell JT and Qian J (2008) Analysis of regulatory network topology
reveals functionally distinct classes of microRNAs. Nucleic Acids Res 36: 6494-6503.
18. Re A, Corá D, Taverna D and Caselle M (2009) Genome-wide survey of microRNA-transcription
factor feed-forward regulatory circuits in human. Mol BioSyst 5: 854-867.
19. Hubbard T, Aken B, Beal K, Ballester B and Caccamo M et al. (2007) Ensembl 2007. Nucleic
Acids Res 35: D610-D617.
20. Li X, Cassidy JJ, Reinke CA, Fischboeck S and Carthew RW (2009) A microRNA imparts robustness against environmental fluctuation during development. Cell 137: 273-282.
21. Mukherji S and van Oudenaarden A (2009) Synthetic biology: understanding biological design
from synthetic circuits. Nature Reviews 10: 859-871.

