Will the swine strain crowd out the seasonal influenza strain?
Rinaldo B. Schinazi

arXiv:1004.5569v1 [math.PR] 30 Apr 2010

University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
Colorado Springs CO80933-7150 USA
rschinaz@uccs.edu

Abstract. We use spatial and non spatial models to argue that competition alone
may explain why two influenza strains do not usually coexist. The more virulent strain
is likely to crowd out the less virulent one. This can be seen as a consequence of
the Exclusion Principle of Ecology. We exhibit, however, a spatial model for which
coexistence is possible.
1. Introduction. The seasonal flu strain has been a lot less prevalent during
the 2009/2010 influenza season than during the previous years, see Fluview (the weekly
CDC inluenza report) . On the other hand, some time during Spring 2009 the new
so called swine strain has appeared. There seems to be a relation between these two
events and at this point in time (March 2010) it seems likely that the swine strain will
crowd out the seasonal strain. In this paper we propose to explain this phenomenon
using competition models. We will use spatial and non spatial models to show that
coexistence of two strains is unlikely due to competition alone. We will show along the
way that the topology of space may be crucial.
A competing explanation of the non coexistence of the two influenza strains is cross
immunity. For instance, immunity may explain why older generations have not been
as much affected as the younger ones in this swine epidemic. It may be due to some
previous exposure to a similar strain, see the Discussion in Greenbaum et al. (2009).
However, using a cross immunity argument to explain why the swine strain crowds out
the seasonal one may be more difficult. The hypothesis would be that the swine strain
must confer some immunity against the seasonal flu. But, clearly the seasonal strain does
not confer any immunity to the swine strain: after all even young people (the group most
severely affected by the swine strain) have usually been exposed to the seasonal strain
and do not seem to be protected against the swine strain. Hence, for this argument to
work the swine strain must confer some immunity against the seasonal strain but the
seasonal strain cannot confer any immunity against the swine strain. In contrast to this
Key words and phrases: competition models, stochastic process, influenza, swine
strain
1

cross immunity hypothesis we argue in this paper that even in models for which there
is no immunity at all (every individual that recovers is immediately susceptible again!)
coexistence of two competing strains is rather unlikely.
2. The ODE Model. Our first model is a system of ordinary differential equations.
Let u1 (t) and u2 (t) be the density of individuals infected at time t with strains 1 and 2,
respectively . We set
u′1 = λ1 u1 u0 − δ1 u1
u′2 = λ2 u2 u0 − δ2 u2
where u0 (t) is the density of susceptible individuals at time t. In words, individuals
infected with strain i infect susceptible individuals at rate λi and get healthy at rate δi ,
for i = 1, 2. Since u0 (t) + u1 (t) + u2 (t) = 1 as soon as an infected individual gets healthy
it is back in the susceptible pool.
Let 1 be the seasonal and 2 be the swine strains. Early reports indicate that the
swine strain may be more virulent than the seasonal strain, see Fraser et al. (2009).
Under that assumption,
λ2
λ1
<
.
δ1
δ2
δ2
).
λ2

Assume also that at some point in time the ODE model is at the equilibrium (0, 1 −
That is, there is no seasonal strain and the swine strain is in equilibrium. Now

introduce a little bit of seasonal strain (small u1 ). Will the seasonal strain be able to
grow? Using that u1 is almost 0 and that u2 is almost 1 − λδ22 we make the approximation
u0 = 1 − u1 − u2 ∼ 1 − (1 −

δ2
δ2
)=
.
λ2
λ2

Hence,
u′1 ∼ λ1 u1

δ2
δ2
− δ1 u1 = u1 (λ1
− δ1 ).
λ2
λ2

Since we are assuming that λδ11 < λδ22 we get u′1 < 0. That is, under these assumptions
and according to this model the seasonal flu will not take hold.
In fact this system of ODE is a particular case of a well-known competition model.
For the general version of this model it is known that one of the strains will vanish,
see Exercise 3.3.5 in Hofbauer and Sigmund (1998). The point is that we have two
populations (the population of individuals infected with strain 1 and the population of
individuals infected with strain 2) that compete for a single resource (the susceptible
individuals). It turns out that in such a model one population will drive the other one
2

out. This is a particular case of the so called ”Exclusion Principle” of Ecology: if the
number of populations is larger than the number of resources all the populations cannot
subsist in the long run, see 5.4 in Hofbauer and Sigmund (1998).
2. The spatial stochastic model. In the preceding model there is no space
structure and all individuals can somehow be seen as neighbors. In this section we go
the other extreme where there is a rigid space structure and each individual has a fixed
number of neighbors.
We now describe the multitype contact process, see Neuhauser (1992). Let S be the
integer lattice Zd ( d is the dimension) or the homogeneous tree Td for which each site
has d + 1 neighbors. The system is described by a configuration ξ ∈ {0, 1, 2}S , where
ξ(x) = 0 means that site x is occupied by a susceptible individual, ξ(x) = 1 means that
x is occupied by an individual infected by strain 1 and ξ(x) = 2 means that x is occupied
by an individual infected by strain 2. If S is Zd then each site has 2d neighbors, if S
is Td then each site has d + 1 neighbors. For x ∈ S and ξ ∈ {0, 1, 2}S , let n1 (x, ξ) and
n2 (x, ξ) denote the number of neighbors of x that are infected by strain 1 and strain 2,
respectively.
The multitype contact process ξt with birth rates λ1 , λ2 makes transitions at x in
configuration ξ
1 → 0 at rate 1
2 → 0 at rate 1
0 → 1 at rate λ1 n1 (x, ξ),
0 → 2 at rate λ2 n2 (x, ξ),
In words, a susceptible individual gets infected by an infected neighbor at rates λ1 or
λ2 , depending on which strain the neighbor is infected with. An infected individual gets
healthy (and is immediately susceptible again) at rate 1. Note that compared to the
ODE model we are assuming in this model that δ1 = δ2 = 1. This is so because most of
the mathematical results have been proved under the assumption δ1 = δ2 . We take this
common value to be 1 to minimize the number of parameters.
The multitype contact process is a generalization of the basic contact process which
has only one type. The transitions of the basic contact process are given by
1 → 0 at rate 1
0 → 1 at rate λ1 n1 (x, ξ),
There exists a critical value λc (whose exact value is not known and which depends on
the graph the model is on) for this model. If λ1 > λc then starting with even a single
3

infected individual there is a positive probability of having infected individuals at all
times somewhere in the graph. On the other hand if λ1 ≤ λc then starting from any
finite number of infected individuals all the infected individuals will disappear after a
finite time. See Liggett (1999) for more on the basic contact process on the square lattice
and on trees.
2.1 The space is the square lattice Zd . We now go back to the multitype
contact process. Assume that λ2 > λc and λ2 > λ1 then there is no coexistence of
strains 1 and 2 in the sense that
lim P (ξt (x) = 1, ξt(y) = 2) = 0

t→∞

for any sites x and y in Zd . In fact, strain 2 always drives out strain 1 in the following
sense. Conditioned on strain 2 not disappearing then
lim P (ξt (x) = 1) = 0,

t→∞

for any site x in Zd and any initial configuration. See Theorem 2 in Cox and Schinazi
(2009) and also Neuhauser (1992). Hence, assuming that λ2 > λ1 (that is, strain 2
is more virulent than strain 1) this model too predicts that the seasonal flu will be
crowded out by the swine strain. The spatial structure seems to have no influence on
the outcome. The next section will show that this is not always so and and that a
different (more crowded) space structure allows coexistence.
2.2 The space is the tree Td . There is a fundamental difference between the
basic contact process on the square lattice and the same model on the tree. There are two
(instead of one) critical values for the basic contact process on the tree. The definition of
λc is as before. We also define another critical value λcc in the following way. Consider
the basic (one type) contact process with birth rate λ1 . Let O be a fixed site on the tree
or square lattice. There is a positive probability that site O will be infected infinitely
often if and only if λ1 > λcc , starting with at least one infected individual. It turns out
that λc < λcc on the tree but λc = λcc on the square lattice.
We have the following result for the multitype contact process on the tree. Let λ1
and λ2 be in (λc , λcc ) then strains 1 and 2 may coexist on the tree in the sense that
there is a positive probability of having individuals infected with strain 1 and others with
strain 2 at all times. See Theorem 1 in Cox and Schinazi (2009). Note that coexistence
occurs even for λ1 < λ2 but both parameters need to be in the rather narrow interval
(λc , λcc ). This result shows that space structure may be crucial in allowing coexistence.
4

3. Discussion. Our models show that at least in theory coexistence of two competing strains is unlikely. Coexistence is however possible for the multitype contact process
on a tree. The tree can be thought of as a model for high density populations (in a ball of
radius r there are (d + 1)dr−1 individuals on the tree Td but only about r d on the lattice
Zd ). In order to have coexistence both infection rates cannot be too low or too high but
may be unequal. In all other cases there will be no coexistence on the tree and there is
never coexistence on Zd unless λ1 is exactly equal to λ2 , a rather unlikely possibility,
see Neuhauser (1992). Interestingly the behavior of the ODE model (or mean-field) is
the same as the behavior of the model on Zd but different from the model on the tree.
In general, it is expected that the model on the tree be closer to the mean-field model
than to the model on Zd . This is not so in this example.
In all our models all infected individuals are put back in the susceptible pool as
soon as they recover. This is admittedly not realistic. However, it shows that there are
other possible explanations of non coexistence than cross immunity arguments.
References.
J.T. Cox and R.B.Schinazi (2009). Survival and coexistence for a multitype contact
process. Annals of probability 37, 853-876
C. Fraser et al. (2009).Pandemic Potential of a Strain of Influenza A (H1N1): Early
Findings. Science, 324, 1557 - 1561
J.A. Greenbaum et al. (2009). Pre-existing immunity against swine-origin H1N1 influenza viruses in the general human population. PNAS, 106, 20365-20370.
T.Liggett (1999). Stochastic interacting systems: contact, voter and exclusion processes,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
C. Neuhauser (1992). Ergodic theorems for the multitype contact process. Probab.
Theory Related Fields, 91, 467-506.

5

