Food web framework for size-structured populations
Martin Hartviga,∗, Ken H. Andersenb , Jan E. Beyerb
a Department

arXiv:1004.4138v2 [q-bio.PE] 6 Dec 2010

b DTU

of Theoretical Ecology, Lund University, Ecology Building, SE-223 62 Lund, Sweden
Aqua, National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Charlottenlund
Slot, Jægersborg Allé 1, DK-2920 Charlottenlund, Denmark

Abstract
We synthesise traditional unstructured food webs, allometric body size scaling, trait-based modelling, and physiologically structured modelling to provide a novel and ecologically relevant tool for
size-structured food webs. The framework allows food web models to include ontogenetic growth
and life-history omnivory at the individual level by resolving the population structure of each
species as a size-spectrum. Each species is characterised by the trait ’size at maturation’, and all
model parameters are made species independent through scaling with individual body size and size
at maturation. Parameter values are determined from cross-species analysis of fish communities
as life-history omnivory is widespread in aquatic systems, but may be reparameterised for other
systems. An ensemble of food webs is generated and the resulting communities are analysed at four
levels of organisation: community level, species level, trait level, and individual level. The model
may be solved analytically by assuming that the community spectrum follows a power law. The
analytical solution provides a baseline expectation of the results of complex food web simulations,
and agrees well with the predictions of the full model on 1) biomass distribution as a function of
individual size, 2) biomass distribution as a function of size at maturation, and 3) relation between
predator-prey mass ratio of preferred and eaten food. The full model additionally predicts the
diversity distribution as a function of size at maturation.
Keywords: community ecology, trait based model, life-history omnivory, ontogeny, size-spectrum

1. Introduction
Food webs are typically modelled using unstructured species populations based on generalised
Lotka-Volterra equations. This unstructured formulation ignores individual life-history by assigning a fixed trophic position to all individuals within a species. In aquatic ecosystems this
assumption is violated as fish offspring reside at a low trophic level and grow during ontogeny
through multiple trophic levels before reaching maturation (Werner and Gilliam, 1984). Along
this journey, from the milligram range and up to several kilogram, fish change diet (as well as
enemies) and consequently exhibit life-history omnivory through preying on different trophic levels
in different life-stages (Pimm and Rice, 1987). Thus the assignment of a unique trophic level and
role (resource, consumer, predator, etc.) for species in unstructured models is incompatible with
systems where ontogenetic growth and life-history omnivory are pronounced. In the cases where
trophic level of individuals within a species is positively correlated with body size (Jennings et al.,
2002), individual size may be used as a proxy for trophic level. Models may therefore account for
ontogenetic growth and life-history omnivory by resolving the size-structure within each species.
A general framework for large food webs that includes the size-structure for all species must fulfil a set of requirements. It should: 1) be generic in the sense that large species-specific parameter
sets are not necessary, 2) be based on mechanistic physiological individual-level processes, where
∗ Corresponding

author.
Email addresses: Martin.Pedersen@teorekol.lu.se / martin@hvig.dk (Martin Hartvig), kha@aqua.dtu.dk
(Ken H. Andersen), jeb@aqua.dtu.dk (Jan E. Beyer)

parameters represent measurable biological quantities, 3) resolve food dependent growth of individuals (Werner and Gilliam, 1984), 4) be practically solvable for species-rich systems over many
generations, and 5) comply with empirical data on size-structured communities. In this work we
develop a food web framework complying with these requirements by resolving the life-history of
individuals within species by a continuous size-spectrum. We parameterise the model for aquatic
systems as an example of a size-structured community with widespread life-history omnivory, but
the framework may be parameterised for other system types (cf. Discussion). In fish communities the most prominent empirical patterns, which the model framework should comply with, are
that individuals exhibit biphasic growth (Lester et al., 2004), and the Sheldon community spectrum. Sheldon et al. (1972) hypothesised that the community biomass spectrum, from bacteria
to whales, as a function of body mass is close to constant. Empiric studies later showed that the
biomass for fish indeed is close to constant or slightly declining as a function of body mass (Ursin,
1982; Boudreau and Dickie, 1992) with the complication that heavily fished systems have a steeper
decline in biomass (Jennings et al., 2002; Daan et al., 2005).
The importance of resolving ontogenetic growth and life-history omnivory has long been realised
in fisheries science, where mechanistic individual-level size-structured food web models of fish communities were pioneered (Andersen and Ursin, 1977). Independently, the physiologically structured
population model (PSPM) framework (Metz and Diekmann, 1986; de Roos and Persson, 2001) has
been developed in the field of ecology. While providing the ecological realism needed for a sizestructured food web framework these approaches typically rely on large species-dependent parameter sets, which must be reduced for the approaches to be useful as generic frameworks.
Reduction to species-independent parameter sets has been achieved in unstructured models of interacting populations by scaling of physiological and demographic rates with body size
(Yodzis and Innes, 1992). By using body size as a trait this approach has resulted in several simple generic food web models for unstructured populations (Loeuille and Loreau, 2005; Virgo et al.,
2006; Brose et al., 2006b; Lewis and Law, 2007).
In this work we combine the two approaches into one unified framework: We 1) use a physiological based description of individual life-history, and 2) use a single trait (size at maturation)
to characterise each species while using trait and body size scaling to get one condensed speciesindependent parameter set. All processes are based on descriptions at the level of individuals, and
interaction strengths among individuals are dynamic through the prescription of size-dependent
food selection. This leads to a realised effective food web structure which depends on the emergent
size-spectrum composition of all species. In this manner we synthesise a general framework that in
a conceptually simple yet ecologically realistic way can be used to model food webs where the life
cycle of individuals in each species is explicitly modelled from birth to reproduction and death.
Our primary objective is the formulation and parametrisation of the food web framework.
Food webs generated by unstructured food web models may be analysed at the community level
in terms of distributions of biomass across species and trophic levels. Trait-based size-structured
food webs allow a more detailed analysis of the community level as well as enabling analysis on
three additional levels of organisation: 1) at the community level, i.e., the distribution of total
biomass as a function of body size of individuals regardless of their species identity, and the
distribution of biomass and diversity as a function of the trait size at maturation, 2) at the species
level, i.e., distribution of biomass as a function of size within a given species, 3) at the trait level,
which in the case of a single trait equals the species level, and 4) at the individual level, i.e.,
distribution of size of food in the stomachs. Due to this added complexity of size-structured food
webs, our secondary objective is to illustrate diversity and biomass distributions at different levels
of organisation. To this end we generate an ensemble of food webs and analyse them in terms of
distributions of average community size-spectra, species size-spectra, trait biomass distributions,
and trait diversity distributions. Finally, we develop an analytical solution of the model framework,
basically by assuming that the community spectrum follows a power-law (equilibrium size-spectrum
theory, EQT). All distributions, except the diversity distribution, may be calculated from EQT,
and we demonstrate general accordance between EQT and the results from the full food web
simulations. The accordance between EQT and the food web simulations validates the simplifying

assumptions behind EQT. EQT provides a “null-solution” to the size- and trait-distributions which
may be used as a baseline expectation of the results of large size-structured food web simulations.
[Figure 1 about here.]
2. Food web model
The model is based on a description of the processes of food encounter, growth, reproduction,
and mortality at the level of an individual with body mass m (Fig. 1). The model is based on
two central assumptions: 1) Prey selection is determined at the individual level where individual
predators select prey from the rule “big individuals eat smaller individuals”, and at the species level
through introduction of species-specific size-independent coupling strengths (Andersen and Ursin,
1977; Werner and Gilliam, 1984; Emmerson and Raffaelli, 2004). 2) In addition to species-specific
coupling strengths, species identity is characterised by a single trait: size at maturation m∗ . Interactions among individuals are described by a food encounter process which leads to consumption
by predators and mortality on their prey. Food consumption leads to growth in body mass, and
when an individual reaches size at maturation m∗ it starts allocating energy for reproduction, as
well as producing new offspring. Thus the model encapsulates the life-cycle of individuals from
birth to maturity and death.
Population dynamics of species i is obtained from individual growth gi (m) and mortality µi (m)
by solving the number conservation equation (McKendrick, 1926; von Foerster, 1959):

∂ 
∂Ni
+
gi Ni = −µi Ni .
∂t
∂m

(1)

The population structure of species i is described by the size-spectrum Ni (m, t), denoted Ni (m)
to ease notation. The size-spectrum represents the volumetric abundance density distribution
of individuals such that Ni (m) dm is the number of individuals per unit volume in the mass
range [m; m + dm]. Similarly Bi (m) = mNi (m) denotes the biomass spectrum (biomass density
distribution), and Bi (m) dm the biomass per unit volume in the range [m; m + dm]. The sum of
all species’ size-spectra plus a resource spectrum NR (m) is the community spectrum (Fig. 1):
X
Ni (m).
(2)
Nc (m) = NR (m) +
i

The community spectrum represents the entire biotic environment providing individuals with food
(from smaller individuals) as well as their predation risk from larger individuals. To include
species-specific preferences each species i has its own experienced community spectrum:
X
θi,j Nj (m),
(3)
Ni (m) = θi,R NR (m) +
j

where θi,j ∈ [0; 1] is the coupling strength of species i to species j. Coupling strengths are
independent of body size (cf. Discussion) since size-dependent food intake is described with a
feeding kernel (below).
2.1. Food consumption
The consumption of food by an individual depends on the available food from the experienced
community spectrum, on the volume searched per time, and on its functional response. The
consumed food is assimilated and used to cover respiratory costs. Remaining available energy is
used for somatic growth by immature individuals and for a combination of somatic growth and
reproduction by mature individuals.
We incorporate the rule of “big ones eat smaller ones” by assuming that predators have a
preferred predator-prey mass ratio (PPMR). This assumption is inspired by stomach analyses of
marine fish (Ursin, 1973, 1974), and supported by stable isotope analyses (Jennings et al., 2001).

The feeding kernel describing the size preference for prey is prescribed with a normalised log-normal
function (Fig. 1, Ursin, 1973):
#
"  
2
βmp
/(2σ 2 ) ,
(4)
s(mp , m) = exp − ln
m
where mp is prey mass, m predator mass, β the preferred PPMR, and σ the width of the function.
The food available (mass per volume) for a predator of size m is:
Z
φi (m) = mp Ni (mp )s(mp , m) dmp .
(5)
Encountered food (mass per time) is the available food multiplied by the volumetric search rate
v(m) = γmq , where q is a positive exponent signifying that larger individuals search a larger
volume per unit time (Ware, 1978). Satiation is described using a feeding level (number between
0 and 1, Kitchell and Stewart, 1977; Andersen and Ursin, 1977):
fi (m) =

v(m)φi (m)
,
v(m)φi (m) + hmn

(6)

where hmn is the maximum food intake. Feeding level times hmn corresponds to a type II functional response.
2.2. Somatic growth
Ingested food f (m)hmn is assimilated with an efficiency α accounting for waste products and
specific dynamic action. From the assimilated energy an individual has to pay the metabolic costs
of standard metabolism and activity, kmp . Thus the energy available for growth and reproduction
is:
Ei (m) = αfi (m)hmn − kmp .
(7)
Of the available energy a fraction ψ(m, m∗ ) is used for reproduction, and the rest for somatic
growth:
( 

1 − ψ(m, m∗ ) Ei (m) Ei (m) > 0
gi (m, m∗ ) =
.
(8)
0
otherwise
If the intake is insufficient to cover respiratory costs (Ei (m) < 0) growth is halted. Body size does
not shrink when costs cannot be covered, instead starving individuals are exposed to a starvation
mortality (see section 2.4). The maximum asymptotic size M an individual can obtain is reached
when all available energy is used for reproduction (ψ(M, m∗ ) = 1).
2.3. Reproduction
In order to generate growth trajectories with biphasic growth the allocation rule ψ(m, m∗ ) has
to change smoothly from 0 around size at maturation to 1 at the theoretical maximum asymptotic size M . The allocation rule ψ(m, m∗ ) is derived using two requirements: 1) that the size of
gonads is proportional to individual mass (Blueweiss et al., 1978), and 2) that size at maturation
is proportional to asymptotic size (Beverton, 1992; Froese and Binohlan, 2000; He and Stewart,
2001). To obtain an analytical solution as to how individuals allocate available energy to growth
and reproduction we assume that the allocation rule is based on a constant feeding level f . Requiring allocation to reproduction to be proportional to individual mass, ψ(m, m∗ )E(m) = kr m,
gives ψ(m, m∗ ) = kr m/E(m), where E(m) = αf hmn − kmp denotes the available energy when
feeding level is constant. The factor kr is found by the second requirement through ψ(M, m∗ ) = 1:
kr = E(M )/M where M = m∗ /η∗ . The allocation can thus be described as:
"
−u #−1

E(m∗ /η∗ ) m
m
,
(9)
ψ(m, m∗ ) = 1 +
m∗
E(m) m∗ /η∗

where the term in the square brackets is a smooth step function switching from zero to one around
the size at maturation (u determines transition width).
The exponents of maximum consumption and standard metabolism are close to equal (cf. Appendix E
and Discussion). In the limit of n = p the available energy for growth and reproduction becomes
E(m) = ~mn where ~ = αf h − k. This gives: ψ(m, m∗ ) = [1 + (m/m∗ )−u ]−1 (η∗ m/m∗ )1−n ,
meaning that the juvenile growth pattern is g = ~mn whereas adults grow according to g =
~mn − ~(m∗ /η∗ )n−1 m. Thus the growth model is a biphasic growth model where adults follow von
Bertalanffy growth curves as advocated by Lester et al. (2004).
The total flux of offspring is found by integrating the energy allocated to reproduction ψ(m, m∗ )Ei (m)
over all individual sizes:
Z
ǫ
Ri =
Ni (m)ψ(m, m∗ )Ei (m) dm,
(10)
2m0
where m0 is the egg size, ǫ the efficiency of offspring production (Appendix C), and 1/2 takes into
account that only females spawn (assuming equal sex distribution). Reproduction determines the
lower boundary condition of (1) for the size-spectrum of the species:
gi (m0 , m∗ )Ni (m0 ) = Ri .

(11)

2.4. Mortality
The mortality rate µ(m) of an individual has three sources: predation mortality µp (m), starvation mortality µs (m), and a small constant background mortality µb (m∗ ). The background
mortality is needed to ensure that the largest individuals in the community also experience mortality as they are not predated upon by any individuals from the community spectrum.
Predation mortality is calculated such that all that is eaten translates into predation mortalities
on the ingested prey individuals (Appendix A):
XZ
µp,i (mp ) =
s(mp , m)(1 − fj (m))v(m)θj,i Nj (m) dm.
(12)
j

When food supply does not cover metabolic requirements kmp starvation mortality kicks in.
Starvation mortality is proportional to the energy deficiency kmp − αf (m)hmn , and inversely
proportional to lipid reserves, which are assumed proportional to body mass:
(
0
Ei (m) > 0
.
(13)
µs (m) =
−Ei (m)
otherwise
ξm
Mortality from other sources than predation and starvation is assumed constant within a species
and inversely proportional to generation time (Peters, 1983):
µb = µ0 m∗n−1 .

(14)

2.5. Resource spectrum
The resource spectrum NR (m) represents food items which are needed for the smallest individuals (smaller than βm0 ). The dynamics of each size group in the resource spectrum is described
using semi-chemostatic growth:
h
i
∂NR (m, t)
= r0 mp−1 κm−λ − NR (m, t) − µp (m)NR (m, t),
∂t

(15)

where r0 mp−1 is the population regeneration rate (Fenchel, 1974; Savage et al., 2004) and κm−λ
the carrying capacity. We prefer semi-chemostatic to logistic growth since planktonic resources
rebuild from depletion locally due to both population growth and invasions.
[Table 1 about here.]

2.6. Derivation of parameters
Each species is characterised by a single trait, size at maturation m∗ , and a species-independent
parameter set is achieved through scaling with body size m and m∗ . The model is parameterised
for marine ecosystems using cross-species analyses of fish communities (Appendix E and Table 1).
The constant γ for the volumetric search rate is difficult to assess (Appendix E). However,
since the feeding level f (m) of small individuals is determined solely by the amount of encountered
food from the resource spectrum, we may use initial feeding level f0 as a physiological measure of
food encounter; f0 is defined as the feeding level resulting from a resource spectrum at carrying
capacity. The initial feeding level is used as a control parameter for food availability (enrichment),
through which the value of γ can be calculated (Appendix D):
γi (f0 ) =

f0 hβ 2−λ
√
,
(1 − f0 ) 2πθi,R κσ

(16)

where it is noted that γ will be species dependent if species have different coupling strengths to
the resource.
A critical feeding level fc can be formulated as the feeding level where all assimilated food is
used for metabolic costs (using values from Table 1):
fc =

k
k p−n
m
=
≈ 0.2.
αh
αh

(17)

Individuals can only grow and reproduce if f > fc . Assuming that individuals experience an
average feeding level f , the growth (8) of juveniles is g = ~mn (for n = p). The parameter
~ = αhf − k can be estimated through the relation between observed von Bertalanffy growth rate
and asymptotic size yielding ~ ≈ 10 g0.25 /year (Andersen et al., 2008). This allows an estimation
of the expected average feeding level of individuals in the field (Table 1):
f=

~+k
≈ 0.4,
αh

(18)

i.e. around twice the critical feeding level. As the initial feeding level f0 is calculated from a
resource spectrum at carrying capacity, the realised feeding level in the model will be smaller than
f0 . A value of f0 = 0.6 was seen to give realised feeding levels around 0.4.
3. Methods
Stable food webs are constructed using the full dynamic food web model with random coupling
strengths θi,j . For each run, 30 species are assigned with m∗ evenly distributed on a logarithmic size
axis (m∗ ∈ [0.25 g; 20 kg]), random θi,j matrices (mean 0.5), and a common θi,R = 0.5 coupling to
the resource spectrum. Numerical integration is performed by standard finite difference techniques
(Appendix G). Food webs are simulated in 10 consecutive intervals covering 300 years each, where
species with a biomass less than 10−30 g/m3 are eliminated after each interval. To eliminate food
webs that still have not reached the final state each community is integrated for additional 500
years and discarded if any species has an absolute population growth rate larger than 1 logarithmic
decade per 100 years. To ensure that each food web in the final ensemble spans multiple trophic
levels we only retain food webs where at least one species has m∗ larger than 2.5 kg. For statistics
we use the mean of the last 250 years of the simulation with time steps saved in 0.1 year increments.
In this manner 204 food webs having a total number of 1016 species were collected. Each web
contained between 2 and 9 species with a mean of 4.98 species.
We analyse the generated food webs in terms of distributions of average community sizespectrum, species size-spectra, trait biomass distributions, and trait diversity distributions. Additionally we demonstrate the importance of distinguishing between what an individual prefers to
eat and what is actually ingested (i.e. found in its stomach) by showing how emerging PPMRs
vary with food availability and differ from preferred PPMRs.

An approximate steady-state solution to the food web model which neglects the dynamics of
reproduction can be found using two assumptions: 1) all species consume food and experience
mortality from a scaling community size-spectrum Nc = κc m−λ , and 2) constant feeding level f ,
which implies equal species coupling strengths θi,j = θ. Whereas the food webs in the full model
are based on a discrete set of m∗ , the analytical solution considers m∗ as a continuous distribution.
The procedure for deriving the analytical solution is similar to the derivation of equilibrium sizespectrum theory (Andersen and Beyer, 2006), but the results are slightly different as standard
metabolism is taken explicitly into account
R here. The food encountered by an individual is found
using assumption 1): v(m)φ(m) = γmq Nc s(mp , m)mp dmp ∝ m2−λ+q . The feeding level is
calculated from (6), and the requirement that it is constant (assumption 2) leads to a constraint
on the exponent of the community spectrum: λ = 2 + q − n. Feeding with a constant feeding level
generates a predation mortality of µp = αp mn−1 (Appendix A). The size-spectrum of juvenile
individuals is found as the steady state solution of (1) using the above predation mortality and
g = ~mn (cf. (F.1)): N (m, m∗ ) = κ(m∗ )m−n−a , where a = αp /~ is the physiological level
of predation (Beyer, 1989; Andersen and Beyer, 2006), which can be calculated as a ≈ f /(f −
fc )β 2n−q−1 /α = 0.86 (Appendix B). The constant κ(m∗ ) is found from the requirement that the
sum of all species spectra should equal
R the community spectrum. Assuming a continuum of species
the requirement can be written as N (m, m∗ ) dm∗ = Nc (m) which leads to κ(m∗ ) ∝ m2n−q−3+a
∗
(Fig. 1). This approximate solution of the model will be referred to as equilibrium size-spectrum
theory (EQT), and it will be compared to the output of the complete dynamic food web model.
In dynamic models, as in nature, the lifetime reproductive success (fitness) has to be R0 = 1
for all coexisting species. Since EQT does not consider the boundary condition (11) life-time
reproductive success becomes a function of size at maturation: R0 ∝ m1−a
(Andersen et al.,
∗
2008). One solution to making R0 independent of m∗ is to set a = 1, but that breaks the above
employed mass balance between growth and mortality used to calculate a. Due to the R0 6= 1
inconsistency in EQT we have a specific focus on the realised values of a when comparing food
web simulations with EQT predictions. To examine how the regulation of R0 occurs in the full
food web model R0 is split into two factors: 1) the probability of surviving to become adult, and
2) lifetime reproduction per adult (Appendix F):
pm0 →m =
Radult (m∗ ) =

Z

N (m)g(m, m∗ )
,
N (m0 )g(m0 , m∗ )

M

m∗

pm∗ →m

ψ(m, m∗ )E(m)
dm.
g(m, m∗ )

(19)

(20)

Survival probabilities and reproductive outputs in the food web simulations are compared
with EQT predictions, which are calculated by inserting the EQT size-spectra into (19) and (20).
mn∗ = m−a
Juvenile growth is g ∝ mn , which gives pm0 →m∗ ∝ m−n−a
∗
∗ and Radult ∝ m∗ .
[Figure 2 about here.]
4. Model predictions
4.1. Growth trajectories
In unstructured models fluctuations are manifested as oscillations in the biomass of species,
whereas the oscillations in structured models stem from oscillations in the size-spectrum composition. Such oscillations give rise to fluctuating feeding levels as individuals encounter different
levels of food in different life-stages (Fig. 2.a). Variations in feeding levels between species and as
a function of individual size lead to different emergent growth trajectories (Fig. 2.b). The growth
trajectories roughly follow the biphasic growth curve that is obtained if the feeding level is assumed
to be constant.
[Figure 3 about here.]
[Figure 4 about here.]

4.2. Biomass structure
By pooling species from each food web into logarithmic evenly distributed m∗ groups, and
summing the size-spectra in each group, a size-spectrum is obtained for each m∗ group. Next,
the logarithmic average of m∗ groups across all food webs is performed to produce the average
size-spectra of a m∗ group (Fig. 3). Average community biomass spectrum Nc (m)m follows the
EQT prediction of a slope
of 1 + q − n = 1.05, meaning that the biomass in logarithmically
R cm
evenly sized size-groups, m Nc (m)mdm, is a slightly declining function of body mass. The
community spectrum oscillates around the EQT prediction due to a trophic cascade initiated
by a superabundance of the largest predators which do not experience any predation mortality
(Andersen and Pedersen, 2010). The peaks of the oscillating pattern are roughly spaced by the
preferred PPMR. Biomass density within species is constant until individuals reach the end of the
resource spectrum, and larger individuals, & 0.1 g, have a biomass spectrum slope flatter than
that of the community spectrum (Fig. 3). Thus, in contrast to EQT, the dynamic model produces
species size-spectra that cannot be described as power laws. The number of small individuals
is inversely related toR size at maturation. The scaling of offspring abundance can be calculated
cm
using EQT as N0 ∝ m∗ ∗ κ(m′∗ )dm′∗ ∝ m∗2n−q−2+a , which fits the simulated results well for a = 1
(Fig. 3, inset).
The distribution of species biomass as a function m∗ can be calculated from EQT as:
B(m∗ ) =

Z

cm∗
m∗

Z

M

m0

N (m, m′∗ )mdm dm′∗ ∝ m∗n−q .

(21)

As n and q are almost equal the biomass distribution B(m∗ ) as a function of m∗ is almost constant.
This result is also borne out by the dynamical simulations (Fig. 4.a) with some variation due to
uneven species distribution along the m∗ axis: peaks occur in species diversity separated by the
preferred PPMR β (Fig. 4.b).
[Figure 5 about here.]
4.3. PPMR and feeding level
The realised mean PPMR can be derived when prey concentrations are known: N (mp )s(mp , m)
is the prey size distribution
encountered by a m sized predator. Mean prey size encountered by a
R∞
mp N (mp )s(mp ,m)dmp
. The realised mean PPMR is calculated as the predator
m sized predator is 0R ∞ N
(mp )s(mp ,m)dmp
0
size m divided by the mean prey size:
R∞
m 0 N (mp )s(mp , m)dmp
.
(22)
P P M R(m) = R ∞
mp N (mp )s(mp , m)dmp
0

Realised mean PPMR is always larger than the preferred PPMR β, due to higher abundance of
smaller prey items (Fig. 5.a). The realised mean PPMR calculated from EQT (using N ∝ m−λ
p )
is exp[(λ − 3/2)σ 2 ]β ≈ 1.7β. Realised PPMR from the simulations oscillate around this value due
to the fluctuations in the community spectrum (Fig. 3).
As individuals grow to a size larger than βm0 they switch from eating food in the resource
spectrum to feeding on other species. This leads to a decrease in the feeding level from f0 = 0.6
to about 0.45. The oscillations in feeding level increase in magnitude as body size increases due
to larger fluctuations in prey availability (Fig. 5.b). Many large individuals periodically have a
feeding level below the critical feeding level fc (where starvation kicks in) since prey items in the
preferred size range become scarce, which results in ingestion of smaller food items and therefore
increasing PPMR.
[Figure 6 about here.]

4.4. Reproduction and survival
Lifetime adult reproduction calculated from the simulated food webs fit the EQT prediction
since it scales linearly with m∗ (Fig. 6.b). The probability of surviving to a given size is independent
of m∗ , as the survival curves of the different m∗ groups lie on top of one another (Fig. 6.a). Survival
to m∗ scales inversely with m∗ (i.e. a = 1, crosses in Fig. 6.a), which ensures that R0 is constant.
However, if the a = 1 scaling of survival to m∗ is extrapolated to m0 it is seen that it does not
intersect pm0 →m0 = 1. Instead the survival curves change slope between m0 and around 10−1 g
where predation mortality starts to dominate due to an abundance of fish individuals in the same
order of magnitude as the resource spectrum, which is intensified by reduced growth stemming
from food competition (Fig. 3). In summary survival does not scale with m−a
as predicted by
∗
EQT. Instead adult survival scales with m−1
∗ (i.e. a = 1) whereas individuals smaller than ≈ 0.1 g
have a higher survival (i.e. a smaller scaling exponent).
5. Discussion
We have developed a generic food web framework suitable for analysing systems of interacting
size-structured populations. The framework increases ecological realism compared to traditional
unstructured food web models by explicitly resolving the whole life-history of individuals, but
maintains simplicity by describing species with only one trait: maturation size m∗ . Remaining
parameters are made species-independent through inter- and intraspecies scaling with m∗ and
body mass m. The productivity of the system is characterised by one parameter, the initial
feeding level f0 . Feeding behaviour is assumed to be determined by a feeding kernel with a fixed
preferred PPMR (big individuals eat small individuals), multiplied by a species-specific coupling
strength.
Only characterising the life-history and feeding preference of individuals of a species by body
mass m and trait m∗ is clearly a simplification, but contemporary knowledge suggests that a large
part of the individual bioenergetics related to growth (Peters, 1983) and reproduction (Blueweiss et al.,
1978) indeed can be described by such scaling. Additionally it is well-known that predators often
outsize their prey (Brose et al., 2006a) which justifies the use of the generalisation “big ones eat
small ones”.
5.1. Model architecture
The model was parameterised from cross-species analyses of fish communities, since aquatic systems constitute a group of strongly size-structured ecosystems. Other less strongly size-structured
taxa can be modelled as well through reparametrisation and by allowing each species to have
its own offspring size m0,i . Additionally, the description of how available energy energy is divided
between growth and reproduction may have to be reformulated since animals in other taxa may exhibit determinate growth. Determinate growth can be modelled simply by replacing the allocation
function (9) with only the part within the square brackets.
The proposed modelling framework is similar to physiologically structured models (Andersen and Ursin,
1977; Metz and Diekmann, 1986; de Roos and Persson, 2001), and as these based on mechanistic
individual-level processes. Our contribution is to employ a trait-based description of species identity, and a formulation of food preference which is split into a size- and a species-based contribution, which renders the developed framework useful as a generic food web framework. Recently
the PSPM approach has been reduced to a stage-structured model which facilitates multi-species
studies (de Roos et al., 2008a); however this is achieved at the cost of collapsing continuous sizestructure to a discrete stage-structure. A first step towards multi-species PSPMs was carried out
with an intra-guild predation model, which showed that obtaining species coexistence between
two size-structured populations is a difficult task (van de Wolfshaar et al., 2006); a result which is
probably due to insufficient ecological differentiation of the two species. In the proposed framework
the trait maturation size provides a simple and logical way of representing ecological differentiation
of species, whereas this differentiation in PSPMs is less clear due to large species-specific parameter

sets. Additional ecological differentiation and heterogeneity are obtained by also including food
web structure in the form of species coupling strengths.
An alternative approach to model a size-structured community is the community size-spectrum
models (Silvert and Platt, 1980; Benoı̂t and Rochet, 2004). In these models the community is represented by a community size-spectrum of all individuals irrespective of species identity (Sheldon and Parsons,
1967). As with the physiologically structured models these are based on individual-level descriptions of life-history. The community spectrum approach has the drawback that species are not
resolved, as all individuals are lumped together into one spectrum. Their advantage is their ability
to make community-wide predictions with simple means (Blanchard et al., 2009) similarly to the
mean-field theory in unstructured food webs (McKane et al., 2000; Wilson et al., 2003).
A central element in the model is the division of energy between somatic growth and reproduction through the allocation function ψ(m, m∗ ). As in PSPMs our bioenergetic model is a netproduction model where it is assumed that metabolic costs are covered with highest priority after
which the remaining energy can be used for growth and reproduction. PSPMs are formulated either
with one state variable: individual body weight (Kooijman and Metz, 1984; Claessen and de Roos,
2003), or with two state variables: somatic weight and reserve weight (de Roos and Persson, 2001).
In the latter case energy is divided between the two states such that the ratio between the two
state variables is aimed to be constant, and accumulated reserves are used for reproduction at
the end of the growing season. In the case with only one state variable surplus energy is divided
between somatic growth and reproduction with a fixed ratio (κ-rule). When using the κ-rule the
n
maximum asymptotic size any species individual can obtain is M+ where intake αhf (M+ )M+
p
equals the metabolic costs kM+ – meaning that all species would obtain the same asymptotic size
if parameters are species independent as in our formulation. M+ is very sensitive to the precise
values of n and p, and they can therefore only be regarded as poor determinators for asymptotic
size (Andersen et al., 2008). Our model deviates from the single-state PSPMs in this partitioning
of energy, as we assume that mature individuals allocate an amount proportional to their body
size for reproduction (Blueweiss et al., 1978), and that asymptotic size depends on the trait size
at maturation (Beverton, 1992; Froese and Binohlan, 2000; He and Stewart, 2001). This ensures
that the ratio between gonad size and somatic weight is constant within a species, which is similar to the partitioning rule used in two-state PSPMs. The allocation function is derived under
the assumption of a constant feeding level throughout adult life. Even though the feeding level
is assumed constant, the actual allocation still vary depending on the actual food availability, as
ψ(m, m∗ ) only determines the fraction of available energy allocated to reproduction. An alternative way to derive ψ(m, m∗ ) is to let it depend on actual feeding levels. This assumption, however,
would imply that individuals adjust their allocation to reproduction such that asymptotic size
is always reached. This does not seem plausible as individuals in resource scarce environments
probably obtain smaller maximum sizes, and therefore we find the most reasonable assumption to
be that of a constant feeding level. The exponents n and p are close to equal in nature, and for
n = p the energy allocation function leads to biphasic growth where adults follow von Bertalanffy
growth curves (Lester et al., 2004). We fixed the yearly mass-specific allocation to reproduction
(yearly gonado-somatic index, GSI) to be independent of individual body size within a species. The
obtained form of ψ(m, m∗ ), however, yields a m∗n−1 scaling of yearly GSI across species, which is
consistent with empiric evidence (Gunderson, 1997). This means that the form of ψ(m, m∗ ) implies
a trade-off between m∗ and the mass-specific reproduction: large m∗ species can escape predation
mortality via growth by paying the price of a lower mass-specific reproduction (Charnov et al.,
2001). When the exponents n and p differ, growth will still be biphasic and adult growth curves
will be similar to von Bertalanffy curves (see also Andersen and Pedersen, 2010). In conclusion
the derived allocation rule leads to realistic growth patterns.
5.2. Food web structure
Food web structure is the most essential part of a food web model, and in principle two approaches can be taken to obtain a structure for a dynamic food web model: a top-down and a
bottom-up approach.

The top-down method generates food web matrices from the desired number of species and connectance using a static model (stochastic phenomenological models: Cohen and Newman (1985);
Williams and Martinez (2000); Cattin et al. (2004); Allesina et al. (2008), or more mechanistic approaches involving phylogenetic correlations (Rossberg et al., 2006) or foraging theory (Petchey et al.,
2008)). Next, the food web matrix is used to drive a dynamic model, which is simulated forward
in time where some of the initial species will go extinct, and the remaining species set can be used
for analysis. Note that in addition to a decreased species richness in the final community other
food web statistics as e.g. the final connectance may differ as well (Uchida and Drossel, 2007).
In the bottom-up approach link strengths are determined from ecological relations, such as
e.g. a predator-prey feeding kernel: if the prey fits into a certain size range relative to the predator size, then interaction occurs between the nodes with a strength determined by the feeding
kernel (Loeuille and Loreau, 2005; Virgo et al., 2006; Lewis and Law, 2007). Predator preferences
depend, in addition to ecological characters, on evolutionary history and recent approaches add
this component of phylogenetic correlations (Rossberg et al., 2008).
For size-structured food webs a top-down algorithm for generating realistic food web matrices
does not exist. This is due to lack of data describing the three dimensional interaction matrix
– dimension one and two is respectively predator and prey identity as in the classic interaction
matrix, and the third dimension is predator/prey body size. Thus one is confined to the bottom-up
approach and/or random interaction matrices. In this study we use the bottom-up approach to
prescribe interactions to obey the pattern of “big ones eat smaller ones”. Life-history omnivory
(Pimm and Rice, 1987) is therefore naturally incorporated in size-structured food webs through
the use of a feeding kernel. To obtain an ensemble of different communities we use the topdown approach of a classical two-dimensional predator-prey interaction matrix – that is we assume
that regardless of size individuals within a species have equal potential maximum link strength
(coupling strengths in our model) to another species. As no top-down method exists for generating
this matrix we use random matrices. The actual link strength is the product of the coupling
strength and the feeding kernel, meaning that link strengths indeed are dynamic as they depend
on the size-structure of both prey and predator.
As we generate food webs from a fixed initial pool of only 30 species and use a random matrix
as coupling matrix we only obtain small food webs (maximum: 9 species). However, it should be
noted that the number of resource species the resource spectrum represents is not included. To
obtain larger food webs a larger species pool is needed along with a sequential assembly algorithm
(Post and Pimm, 1983), and a better method for obtaining coupling strengths between species.
Our primary interest in the food web analyses has been the size- and trait-structure of food webs
with a finite number of species, and how these compare with EQT predictions, which are based
on the premise of a continuum of species. The general correspondence with EQT indicates that
the broad-scale patterns are relatively insensitive to how the species-specific coupling strengths
(i.e. food web structure) are specified. Still, an interesting follow-up study would be focused on
the coupling matrix structure, which may more generally be size-dependent, and how the effective
food web structure that emerges from the coupling strengths and feeding kernel compares with
empiric food webs.
5.3. Community structure
We generated an ensemble of size-structured food webs and used averages over these to make
general predictions of the structure of fish communities, in particular the size-structure of individual
populations, and how these spectra “stack” to form the community size-spectrum. In accordance
with EQT we find the community spectrum to scale with λ = 2 + q − n ≈ 2 meaning that the
distribution of biomass as a function of individual body size is close to constant when individuals are
sorted into logarithmically evenly sized bins. This prediction means that the biomass of individuals
between e.g. 1 g and 10 g is the same as those present with body sizes between 1 kg and 10 kg, in
accordance with the Sheldon hypothesis (Sheldon et al., 1972).
The distribution of biomass as a function of m∗ is predicted to be almost independent of
m∗ in accordance with EQT. The result is reminiscent of the Sheldon hypothesis, and it can be

formulated as an extension of the Sheldon hypothesis: “The total biomass of individuals ordered
in logarithmically spaced groups of their maturation size is approximately constant”. This means
that the total biomass of all species with m∗ between 1 and 10 g is approximately the same as
that of species with m∗ within 1 to 10 kg. This prediction is a novel extension and could be tested
by size-based field data. In contrast to EQT the dynamic framework also provides predictions on
the distribution of the number of species as a function of m∗ . Species tend to cluster in groups on
the m∗ axis separated by a distance corresponding to the preferred PPMR β. This clustering is
partly a reflection of the use of a fixed value of β; more diversity in feeding strategies (i.e. different
β) would probably smoothen the species distribution as well as making the feeding level more
constant.
The size-spectra of individual species do not to follow power laws as predicted by EQT since
there is a change in spectrum slopes from small to medium sized individuals. This difference stems
from different scaling relationships for the survival probability of small and larger individuals. The
less steep slope in survival for small individuals is due to a proportionally low mortality rate caused
by their low abundance relative to similarly sized resource items. Incorporating mortality from
the resource spectrum on the smallest individuals may thus result in a single survival probability
scaling. The probability of surviving to m∗ scale as m−a
for a physiological predation constant
∗
value of a = 1, which is conflicting with the value a = 0.86 predicted by EQT. The discrepancy
about the value of a highlights an inconsistency within EQT: Enforcement of mass-balance between
growth and predation leads to a = 0.86, while the reproductive boundary condition can only be
fulfilled if a = 1. The full food web simulations demonstrate that both the scaling of surviving to
m∗ and the scaling of the number of offspring are best predicted by a value of a = 1. This indicates
that when EQT predictions depend on a, the value a = 1 should be used even though that breaks
mass conservation in EQT.
Lastly we demonstrate that realised PPMRs (i.e. PPMRs based on ingested prey) emerge in
the model. Average realised PPMR is always larger than the preferred PPMR β since smaller prey
items are more abundant than larger ones. It is found that the realised PPMR is proportional
to the preferred ratio (P P M R = 1.7β). Model predictions show that realised PPMR oscillates
around this value due to fluctuations in the average community spectrum. PPMR displays large
fluctuations with size demonstrating that determination of PPMR from single measurements is
problematic due to high prey abundance sensitivity. Empirical findings show that realised PPMRs
increase with body size (Barnes et al., 2010), but one should be careful about concluding that the
preferred PPMR (which we put into models) shares this size scaling, since relative abundances
may cause the increase rather than actual behavioural prey preferences: even though we have a
fixed preferred PPMR our model predicts that realised PPMR is an increasing function of body
size.
5.4. Conclusion and outlook
The proposed food web framework increases ecological realism in food web models as it resolves
the complete life-history of individuals by representing the size-structure of each species with a sizespectrum. More specifically the framework complies with five requirements of (cf. Introduction):
1) being generic with few parameters, 2) being mechanistic and utilising individual-level processes,
3) including food dependent growth, 4) being practically solvable for species-rich communities, and
5) complying with data on community structure and individual growth curves.
Trait-based size-structured food webs can be examined at four levels of organisation: at community level, at species level, at trait level, and at the individual level. We generated empirically
testable hypotheses of mainly biomass distributions at different levels of organisation.
By assuming a power law community spectrum and a constant feeding level the full dynamic
model can be simplified to an EQT model (Andersen and Beyer, 2006). Correspondence of predictions by EQT and the full model justifies the use of the simplifying assumptions. EQT is a
powerful analytical tool that in a simple manner yields insight to e.g. the biomass distributions
within and across species in size-structured food webs. However, as EQT assumes steady-state,

the study of emerging effects, e.g. diversity and responses to perturbations, has to be conducted
with the full model.
The PSPM framework has showed existence of alternative stable states where single populations
can exist with different size-structure compositions (de Roos and Persson, 2002; Persson et al.,
2007; de Roos et al., 2008b). It is an open question whether such alternative states become more
widespread or if they disappear when more species interact with each other. This question is
important since it tells whether such alternative states are expected to occur frequently or rarely
in nature, and consequently whether exploitation can easily induce shifts between states. An
important future challenge is thus to study the possibilities of multiple states in complex food
webs – not only of single individual populations, but of the ecosystem as a whole. The proposed
framework allows exactly this kind of studies since it provides a full ecologically realistic but
conceptually simple model of size-structured ecosystems.
Natural future extensions of the model could be to allow the species coupling strengths to
be size-dependent and make coupling strengths depend on vulnerability and forageability of prey
and predators (Rossberg et al., 2008) as well as on the spatial overlaps of the interacting species.
Adding this extra level of mechanistic realism would allow the framework to be useful for studying
ecosystem consequences of spatial changes of species populations, which could be driven by climatic
changes.
Acknowledgements
Niels Gerner Andersen is thanked for valuable discussions on bioenergetic models. MH was supported
by the European Marie Curie Research Training Network FishACE (Fisheries-induced Adaptive Changes
in Exploited Stocks) funded through the European Community’s Sixth Framework Programme (Contract
MRTN-CT-2004-005578). KHA was supported by the EU 7th framework research projects MEECE and
FACTS.

References
Allesina, S., Alonso, D., Pascual, M., 2008. A general model for food web structure. Science 320, 658.
Andersen, K.H., Beyer, J.E., 2006. Asymptotic size determines species abundance in the marine size
spectrum. The American Naturalist 168, 54–61.
Andersen, K.H., Beyer, J.E., Pedersen, M., Andersen, N.G., Gislason, H., 2008. Life-history constraints on
the success of the many small eggs reproductive strategy. Theoretical Population Biology 73, 490–497.
Andersen, K.H., Pedersen, M., 2010. Damped trophic cascades driven by fishing in model marine ecosystems. Proc. R. Soc. B 277, 795–802.
Andersen, K.P., Ursin, E., 1977. A Multispecies Extension to the Beverton and Holt Theory of Fishing,
with Accounts of Phosphorus Circulation and Primary Production. Meddelelser fra Danmarks Fiskeriog Havundersgelser, N.S 7, 319–435.
Barnes, C., Maxwell, D., Reuman, D.C., Jennings, S., 2010. Global patterns in predator-prey size relationships reveal size dependency of trophic transfer efficienc. Ecology 91, 222–232.
Benoı̂t, E., Rochet, M.J., 2004. A continuous model of biomass size spectra governed by predation and
the effects of fishing on them. Journal of Theoretical Biology 226, 9–21.
Beverton, R., 1992. Patterns of reproductive strategy parameters in some marine teleost fishes. Journal
of Fish Biology 41, 137–160.
Beyer, J.E., 1989. Recruitment stability and survival – simple size-specific theory with examples from the
early life dynamics of marine fish. Dana 7, 45–147.

Blanchard, J.L., Jennings, S., Law, R., Castle, M.D., McCloghrie, P., Rochet, M.J., Benot, E., 2009. How
does abundance scale with body size in coupled size-structured food webs? Journal of Animal Ecology
78, 270–280.
Blueweiss, L., Fox, H., Kudzma, V., Nakashima, D., Peters, R., Sams, S., 1978. Relationships between
Body Size and Some Life History Parameters. Oecologia (Berl.) 37, 257–272.
Boudreau, P.R., Dickie, L.M., 1992. Biomass Spectra of Aquatic Ecosystems in Relation to Fisheries Yield.
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 49, 1528–1538.
Brose, U., Jonsson, T., Berlow, E.L., Warren, P., Banasek-Richter, C., Bersier, L.F., Blanchard, J.L., Brey,
T., Carpenter, S.R., Blandenier, M.F.C., Cushing, L., Dawah, H.A., Dell, T., Edwards, F., HarperSmith, S., Jacob, U., Ledger, M.E., Martinez, N.D., Memmott, J., Mintenbeck, K., Pinnegar, J.K., Rall,
B.C., Rayner, T.S., Reuman, D.C., Ruess, L., Ulrich, W., Williams, R.J., Woodward, G., Cohen, J.E.,
2006a. Consumer-resource body-size relationships in natural food webs. Ecology 87, 2411–2417.
Brose, U., Williams, R.J., Martinez, N.D., 2006b. Allometric scaling enhances stability in complex food
webs. Ecology Letters 9, 1228–1236.
Cattin, M.F., Bersier, L.F., Banašek-Richter, C., Baltensperger, R., Gabriel, J.P., 2004. Phylogenetic
constraints and adaptation explain food-web structure. Nature 427, 835–839.
Charnov, E.L., Turner, T.F., Winemiller, K.O., 2001. Reproductive constraints and the evolution of life
histories with indeterminate growth. PNAS 98, 9460–9464.
Claessen, D., de Roos, A.M., 2003. Bistability in a size-structured population model of cannibalistic fish a continuation study. Theoretical Population Biology 64, 49–65.
Cohen, J.E., Newman, C.M., 1985. A stochastic theory of community food webs: I. models and aggregated
data. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 224, 421–448.
Daan, N., Gislason, H., Pope, J.G., Rice, J.C., 2005. Changes in the North Sea fish community: evidence
of indirect effects of fishing? ICES Journal of Marine Science 62, 177–188.
Emmerson, M., Raffaelli, D., 2004. Predator-prey body size, interaction strength and the stability of a
real food web. Journal of Animal Ecology 73, 399–409.
Fenchel, T., 1974. Intrinsic Rate of Natural Increase: The Relationship with Body Size. Oecologia 14,
317–326.
von Foerster, H., 1959. Some Remarks on Changing Populations, in: Stohlman, F. (Ed.), The Kinetics of
Cellular Proliferation. Grune & Stratton, pp. 382–407.
Froese, R., Binohlan, C., 2000. Empirical relationships to estimate asymptotic length, length at first
maturity and length at maximum yield per recruit in fishes, with a simple method to evaluate length
frequency data. Journal of Fish Biology 56, 758–773.
Gunderson, D.R., 1997. Trade-off between reproductive effort and adult survival in oviparous and
viviparous fishes. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 54, 990–998.
He, J.X., Stewart, D.J., 2001. Age and size at first reproduction of fishes: predictive models based only
on growth trajectories. Ecology 82, 784–791.
Jennings, S., Greenstreet, S., Hill, L., Piet, G., Pinnegar, J., Warr, K., 2002. Long-term trends in the
trophic structure of the North Sea fish community: evidence from stable-isotope analysis, size-spectra
and community metrics. Marine Biology 141, 1085–1097.
Jennings, S., Pinnegar, J.K., Polunin, N.V.C., Boon, T.W., 2001. Weak cross-species relationships between
body size and trophic level belie powerful size-based trophic structuring in fish communities. Journal of
Animal Ecology 70, 934–944.
Kitchell, J.F., Stewart, D.J., 1977. Applications of a Bioenergetics Model to Yellow Perch (Perca flavescens)
and Walleye (Stizostedion vitreum vitreum). J. Fish. Res. Board Can. 34, 1922–1935.

Kooijman, S.A.L.M., Metz, J.A.J., 1984. One the Dynamics of Chemically Stressed Populations: The
Deduction of Population Consequences from Effects on Individuals. Ecotoxicology and Environmental
Safety 8, 254–274.
Lester, N.P., Shutter, B.J., Abrams, P.A., 2004. Interpreting the von Bertalanffy model of somatic growth
in fishes: the cost of reproduction. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B. 271, 1625–1631.
Lewis, H.M., Law, R., 2007. Effects of dynamics on ecological networks. Journal of Theoretical Biology
247, 64–76.
Loeuille, N., Loreau, M., 2005. Evolutionary emergence of size-structured food webs. PNAS 102, 5761–
5766.
McKane, A., Alonso, D., Sole, R., 2000. Mean-field stochastic theory for species-rich assembled communities. Physical Review E 62, 8466–8484.
McKendrick, A.G., 1926. Applications of Mathematics to Medical Problems. Proceedings of the Edinburgh
Mathematical Society 44, 98–130.
Metz, J.A.J., Diekmann, O. (Eds.), 1986. The Dynamics of Physiologically Structured Populations. volume 68 of Lecture Notes in Biomathematics. Springer-Verlag.
Persson, L., Amundsen, P.A., de Roos, A.M., Klemetsen, A., Knudsen, R., Primicerio, R., 2007. Culling
Prey Promotes Predator Recovery – Alternative States in a Whole-Lake Experiment. Science 316,
1743–1746.
Petchey, O.L., Beckerman, A.P., Riede, J.O., Warren, P.H., 2008. Size, foraging, and food web structure.
PNAS 105, 4191–4196.
Peters, R.H., 1983. The ecological implications of body size. Cambridge University Press.
Pimm, S., Rice, J., 1987. The dynamics of multispecies, multi-life-stage models of aquatic food webs.
Theoretical population biology 32, 303–325.
Post, W., Pimm, S., 1983. Community assembly and food web stability. Mathematical Biosciences 64,
169–182.
de Roos, A.M., Persson, L., 2001. Physiologically structured models – from versatile technique to ecological
theory. Oikos 94, 51–71.
de Roos, A.M., Persson, L., 2002. Size-dependent life-history traits promote catastrophic collapses of top
predators. PNAS 99, 12907–12912.
de Roos, A.M., Schellekens, T., Kootenb, T.V., Wolfshaar, K.V.D., Claessen, D., Persson, L., 2008a. Simplifying a physiologically structured population model to a stage-structured biomass model. Theoretical
Population Biology 73, 47–62.
de Roos, A.M., Schellekens, T., Van Kooten, T., Persson, L., 2008b. Stage-specific predator species help
each other to persist while competing for a single prey. PNAS 105, 13930–13935.
Rossberg, A., Ishii, R., Amemiya, T., Itoh, K., 2008. The top-down mechanism for body-mass-abundance
scaling. Ecology 89, 567–580.
Rossberg, A., Matsuda, H., Amemiya, T., Itoh, K., 2006. Food webs: experts consuming families of
experts. Journal of Theoretical Biology 241, 552–563.
Savage, V.M., Gillooly, J.F., Brown, J.H., West, G.B., Charnov, E.L., 2004. Effects of Body Size and
Temperature on Population Growth. The American Naturalist 163, 429–441.
Sheldon, R.W., Parsons, T.R., 1967. A Continuous Size Spectrum for Particulate Matter in the Sea. J.
Fish. Res. Board Can. 24, 909–915.
Sheldon, R.W., Prakash, A., Sutcliffe, Jr., W.H., 1972. The size distribution of particles in the ocean.
Limnology and Oceanography 17, 327–340.

Silvert, W., Platt, T., 1980. Dynamic Energy-Flow Model of the Particle Size Distribution in Pelagic
Ecosystems, in: Kerfoot, W.C. (Ed.), Evolution and Ecology of Zooplankton Communities. The University Press of New England, pp. 754–763.
Uchida, S., Drossel, B., 2007. Relation between complexity and stability in food webs with adaptive
behavior. Journal of Theoretical Biology 247, 713–722.
Ursin, E., 1973. On the Prey Size Preferences of Cod and Dab. Meddelelser fra Danmarks Fiskeri- og
Havundersgelser, N.S 7, 85–98.
Ursin, E., 1974. Search Rate and Food Size Preference in Two Copepods. ICES CM L/23, 1–13.
Ursin, E., 1982. Stability and variability in the marine ecosystem. Dana 2, 51–67.
Virgo, N., Law, R., Emmerson, M., 2006. Sequentially assembled food webs and extremum principles in
ecosystem ecology. Journal of Animal Ecology 75, 377–386.
Ware, D.M., 1978. Bioenergetics of Pelagic Fish: Theoretical Change in Swimming Speed and Ration with
Body Size. J. Fish. Res. Board. Can. 35, 220–228.
Werner, E.E., Gilliam, J.F., 1984. The Ontogenetic Niche and Species Interactions in Size-Structured
Populations. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 15, 393–425.
Williams, R.J., Martinez, N.D., 2000. Simple rules yield complex food webs. Nature 404, 180–183.
Wilson, W., Lundberg, P., Vázquez, D., Shurin, J., Smith, M., Langford, W., Gross, K., Mittelbach,
G., 2003. Biodiversity and species interactions: extending Lotka-Volterra community theory. Ecology
Letters 6, 944–952.
van de Wolfshaar, K.E., de Roos, A.M., Persson, L., 2006. Size-Dependent Interactions Inhibit Coexistence
in Intraguild Predation Systems with Life-History Omnivory. The American Naturalist 168, 62–75.
Yodzis, P., Innes, S., 1992. Body Size and Consumer-Resource Dynamics. The American Naturalist 139,
1151–1175.

Volumetric number density, N [#/(g m3)]

Resource spectrum,
10

5

NR

Community (total) spectrum,
10

10

10

10

10

2

Nc

Spectrum of species i,

-1

-4

Ni

Mature individuals
in species i
s(mp ,m)

-7

mp

βmp

1.0

0.5

-10

10

-4

10

-3

10

m0

-2

10

-1

10

0

10

mcut

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

Mass
m [g]

Flow of new offspring

1

b)

f

realised

0

0.5

f

c

6

10

Normalised body mass m/M

a)

Feeding level

Figure 1: Illustration of the community model: resource spectrum (with cut-off mcut ) and four species size-spectra
(m∗ = 2.5, 25, 250, and 2 500 g) having off-spring of size m0 . Shaded regions mark the spawning stock from
maturation size m∗ to maximum asymptotic size M . The sum of all spectra gives the community spectrum. The
spectra shown are the steady-state solutions from Andersen and Beyer (2006). Inset shows how individuals feed on
smaller prey using a feeding kernel with a preferred PPMR of β.

0

Density, N(m) [(gm3)-1 ]

4

10

2

10

0

10

-2

10

-4

10

-6

10

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

-8

10

0.1

-10

10

-4

10

-3

10

-2

10

-1

10

0

10

1

10

Mass, m [g]

2

10

3

10

4

10

5

10

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8
1-n

Normalised time t/(am*

1

)

Figure 2: Example of an eight species cyclic state. a) Top: Feeding levels of the species along with the min/max
(light grey) and the 25%/75% (dark grey) percentile values of the time-series. Dashed lines indicate initial f0 and
critical fc feeding level. Bottom: The time-average of the resource and species spectra along with the community
spectra (thick dashed). The idealised community spectrum κc m−λ (thin dashed) and the species maturation sizes
m∗ (circles). b) Time averaged growth curves for the species (thin lines) along with the biphasic growth curve (8)
for a fixed feeding level that equals 75% of the time and size averaged feeding level experienced by the species (thick
line). Growth curves are normalised with realised asymptotic size (y-axis) and generation time (x-axis) to enable
comparison.

2

Biomass density spectra [m-3]

10

2

10

1

10

N0

0

10

0

10

-1

10

-2

-1

10

10

0

1

10

10

2

3

10

10

4

10

m* group

-4

10

-6

10

-8

10

-4

-3

10

-2

10

-1

10

10

0

10

1

2

10

3

10

4

10

10

Mass m [g]

Figure 3: Mean species biomass spectra (grey lines) when species are divided into 5 logarithmic evenly distributed
m∗ groups. Also shown is the total mean community biomass spectrum (thick line), and the EQT community
biomass spectrum κc m1−λ (dashed). Inset shows how offspring abundance (N0 ) scales with m∗ (data pooled in 25
log groups). Expected EQT scaling of N0 is shown for a = 0.86 (dashed) and a = 1 (solid).

a)

10−1

b)

0.7

No of species

Biomass [g/m3]

0.6
10−2

10−3

10−4

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

10−5 −2
10

10−1

100

101

102

103

104

0
10−2

105

10−1

100

101

102

103

104

105

m* group

m* group

Figure 4: a) Distribution of biomass in different m∗ groups. The expected distribution B(m∗ ) ∝ mn−q
is illustrated
∗
with the solid line. Dashed line shows biomass per species (bar values divided with bar values in b)). b) Mean no
of species as a function of m∗ . Species are pooled into 16 logarithmic groups.

0.9

a)

b)

3

PPMR(m)

10

Feeding level, f(m)

Mean PPMR
Theory
β

2

10

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

−3

10

−2

10

−1

10

0

10

1

10

2

10

Mass m [g]

3

10

4

10

0

−3

10

−2

10

−1

10

0

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

10

Mass m [g]

Figure 5: a) Realised PPMR from each food web (grey), mean realised PPMR across all simulations (thick black),
realised PPMR prediction from equilibrium theory (thin black), and preferred PPMR β (thin dashed). b) Feeding
level from each species (grey), and mean feeding level (thick black).

0

6

10

10

b)
Lifetime adult reproduction

Survival probability

a)

−2

10

−4

10

−6

10

4

10

2

10

0

10

−2

10

−8

10

−3

10

−2

10

−1

10

0

10

1

10

Mass m [g]

2

10

3

10

4

10

−2

10

−1

10

0

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

10

Maturation size m* [g]

Figure 6: The components of the expected lifetime reproductive output. a) Probability of surviving to maturation
size m∗ (crosses) along with survival curves throughout life (grey line) for data pooled into 7 logarithmic groups.
Expected p ∝ m−a
scaling from EQT is shown for a = 0.86 (dashed) and a = 1 (solid). b) Lifetime adult
∗
reproduction for all species (crosses) along with EQT Radult ∝ m∗ expectation (line).

Table 1: Default parameter values for a temperature of 10◦ C (Appendix E).

Symbol Value
Individual growth
f0
0.6
α
0.6
h
85
n
0.75
k
10
p
0.75
β
100
σ
1
q
0.8
Reproduction
m0
0.5
η∗
0.25
ǫ
0.1
u
10
Mortality
ξ
0.1
µ0
0.84
Resource spectrum
κ
5 · 10−3
λ
2−n+q
r0
4
mcut 0.5

Units

Parameter

g1−n /year
g1−p /year
-

Initial feeding level
Assimilation efficiency
Maximum food intake
Exponent for max. food intake
Std. metabolism and activity
Exponent of std. metabolism
Preferred PPMR
Width of feeding kernel
Exponent for search volume

mg
-

Offspring mass
m∗ rel. to asymptotic mass M
Efficiency of offspring production
Width of maturation transition

Fraction of energy reserves
g1−n /year Background mortality
gλ−1 /m3
g1−p /year
g

Magnitude of resource spectrum
Slope of resource spectrum
Regeneration rate of resources
Upper limit of resource spectrum

Appendix should be available as online material.
Appendix A. Derivation of predation mortality
Predators with a size between m and m + dm have a food intake rate of s(mp , m)f (m)hmn θN (m)dm
for mp sized prey. The total density of food available from all prey sizes to the predators in [m ; m + dm]
is φ(m) (5), meaning that the mortality experienced by a mp sized individual is:
X Z s(mp , m)fj (m)hmn θj,i Nj (m)
µp,i (mp ) =
dm.
(A.1)
φj (m)
j
The maximum food intake may be expressed as a function of f (m), v(m), and φ(m) via (6), such that
the predation mortality can be written as:
XZ
s(mp , m)(1 − fj (m))v(m)θj,i Nj (m) dm.
(A.2)
µp,i (mp ) =
j

By using the EQT assumptions of constant feeding Rlevel and a power law community spectrum (cf.
section 3) the mortality reduces to µp (mp ) = θ(1 − f ) s(mp , m)v(m)κc m−λ dm, which can be solved
analytically:
µp (mp ) = αp mn−1
,
(A.3)
p
√


2
1+q−λ
1 2
where αp = θ(1 − f ) 2πκc γσβ
exp 2 σ (1 + q − λ) .

Appendix B. Available food and the physiological level of predation a
Using the EQT assumption
of a power law community spectrum allows calculation of the available
R
food density φ(m) = θ s(mp , m)κc m−λ
p mp dmp :
φ(m) = αφ θκc m2−λ ,

(B.1)

√



where αφ = 2πσβ λ−2 exp 21 σ 2 (2 − λ)2 .
Using the EQT assumption of constant feeding level yielding λ = 2 + q − n allows us to write θκc =
f h/(αφ γ(1 − f )) by rearranging the expression of the feeding
 level (6). Using this andthe definition
of ~ allows writing αp = c(~ + k)β 2n−q−1 /α where c = exp 21 σ 2 (1 + q − λ)2 − (2 − λ)2 = 1.03 ≈ 1.
Ultimately using the definition of fc allows writing the physiological level of predation a = αp /~ as:
a=c

f
β 2n−q−1 /α.
f − fc

(B.2)

Appendix C. Calculating efficiency ǫ of offspring production
The efficiency of turning energy into offspring is denoted ǫ. It includes losses due to behavioural aspects,
pre-hatching mortality, and that the energy contents in gonadic tissue is higher than in somatic tissue. It
is a quantity that is difficult to measure, but for n = p its value can be derived.
The energy (in units of mass) routed into reproduction (for n = p) is ψ(m, m∗ )~mn where ~ = αf h − k.
The energy of the produced offspring is then, Eo (m) = ǫψ(m, m∗ )~mn :
Eo (m) = ǫ~η∗1−n mn−1
m.
∗

(C.1)

From Gunderson (1997) we have the yearly mass-specific allocation to reproduction:
̺(m∗ ) = ̺0 η∗1−n mn−1
,
∗

(C.2)

where ̺0 = 1.2 g1−n /year is obtained using least sum of squares in fitting the curve to the data for
oviparous fish in Gunderson (1997). Equalling (C.2) and Eo /m allow us to determine the efficiency of
offspring production ǫ:
̺0
ǫ=
≈ 0.12.
(C.3)
~

Appendix D. Setting the search rate prefactor γ from initial feeding level f0
Food for the smallest individuals in the spectra will be supplied by the background spectrum. If we
assume that the resource spectrum is at carrying capacity κ then an equilibrium initial feeding level f0 for
the small individuals can be calculated using (6).
Alternatively we may specify an initial feeding level f0 and derive one other parameter. By solving
the feeding level for γ by using the analytical solution for the density of food φ(m) (B.1) we find γ as a
function of f0 :
f0 hβ 2−λ
f0 h
√
≈
.
(D.1)
γ=
(1 − f0 )αφ θi,R κ
(1 − f0 ) 2πσθi,R κ

Appendix E. Parameter estimation
Individual growth: From Kitchell and Stewart (1977) we obtain an estimate of specific dynamic action
on 15 % of food consumption, and conservative estimates of egestion and excretion on 15 % and 10 %
respectively. This results in an assimilation efficiency of α = 0.6.
The maximum intake scales with a 0.6–0.8 exponent, with n = 0.75 being an approximate average
value (Jobling, 1994). Andersen and Riis-Vestergaard (2004) provides a length-based relationship for the
maximum intake rate based on a whiting study adopted for saithe. Using m = 0.01l3 (m in g and l in cm)
(Peters, 1983), and an energy content of 5.8 kJ/g (fish) or 4.2 kJ/g (invertebrates) (Boudreau and Dickie,
1992) yields a prefactor h for the maximal food intake on 83 g1−n /year or 114 g1−n /year (at 10◦ C). These
intake values overestimate the intake of large individuals since Andersen and Riis-Vestergaard (2004) use
an intake exponent of 0.67 instead of n = 0.75. Due to this a value of h = 85 g1−n /year is selected, which
also provides reasonable fits to ’cod-like’ growth curves (m∗ = 5 kg).
The standard metabolism scaling exponent p for fish is slightly higher than for other taxa, around 0.8
from intra- and interspecies measurements (Winberg, 1956; Killen et al., 2007). For simplicity we assume
p = n. The first term (acquired energy) in the growth model (8) is αf (m)hmn where the feeding level f (m)
is a decreasing function of body size (see Results). This has the effect that even when n = p is assumed
the acquired energy term still effectively scale with a smaller exponent than the maintenance term kmp
in accordance with the experimental data on food intake and standard metabolism. Furthermore it is
noted that this clearly makes the individuals in each functional species non-neutral. The bioenergetic
consequences of n 6= p has been explored in detail by Andersen et al. (2008).
The prefactor for standard metabolism can from Peters (1983) be determined to 6.5 g1−n /year if the
diet is composed of only invertebrates and 4.7 g1−n /year if all the energy is from fish. Both values were
corrected to 10◦ C using Q10 = 1.83 (Clarke and Johnston, 1999). It is assumed that energy costs due
to activity can be described with an activity multiplier on the standard metabolic rate. Estimations of
activity costs are difficult to obtain, but activity multipliers are often reported in the range 1 to 3; e.g. 1.25
for North Sea cod (Hansson et al., 1996), 1.7 for dace (Trudel and Boisclair, 1996), and 1.44-3.27 for saithe
(Andersen and Riis-Vestergaard, 2004) (however see also Rowan and Rasmussen (1996); He and Stewart
(1997)). A reasonable value of the prefactor for the standard metabolism and activity costs is assumed to
be k = 10 g1−n /year corresponding to an activity multiplier in the range 1.5 to 2.1.
Food encounter: The preferred predator-prey mass ratio is set to β = 100 (Jennings et al., 2002) and
the width of the selection function to σ = 1, which catches the general picture for at least cod and dab
(Ursin, 1973). It should be noted that small organisms such as copepods have a larger σ of 3–4.5 (Ursin,
1974), but for simplicity and since focus is on species with rather large m∗ the width σ will be held
constant.
The exponent for swimming speed is q = 0.8 (Andersen and Beyer, 2006). The prefactor γ for the
volumetric search rate is difficult to assess from the literature. An alternative approach is to determine it
as a function of of initial feeding level f0 via (D.1). Experience with the model shows that feeding level is
a decreasing function of body size. This means that it is sensible to use an initial feeding level f0 that is
larger than the expected average feeding level f . In this study a default value of f0 = 0.6 is used. This
−q
along with default parameters yields γ = 0.8 · 104 m3 g /year (Table 1). An alternative estimate of γ
is possible by multiplying the prefactors for swimming speed (Ware, 1978) and swept reactive field area
−q
−q
(reactive radius assumed equal to body length): γ = 20.3 · π · 0.01−2/3 cm3 g /s ≈ 4.3 · 104 m3 g /year,
which indeed justifies the use of f0 = 0.6.
Mortality: Realistic energy reserve sizes may be ξ ∈ [5%; 20%], and in the present study ξ = 0.1 is
used. A widely used background mortality for ’cod-like’ m∗ = 5 kg fishes is µb = 0.1 year−1 , which yields
µ0 = 0.84 g1−n /year.

Reproduction: The efficiency of offspring production was not found in the literature. However, an analytical expression may be obtained (for n = p) by combining the calculation of yearly mass-specific allocation to reproduction from the bioenergetic model (Appendix C) with empirical measurements (Gunderson,
1997), which yields ǫ = ̺0 /~ ≈ 0.1. The fraction of asymptotic size to mature at is η∗ = 0.25 (Andersen et al.,
2008). Offspring mass is m0 = 0.5 mg which corresponds to an egg diameter of 1 mm (Wootton, 1979;
Chambers, 1997).
Resource spectrum: The carrying capacity of the resource spectrum should equal the magnitude of
the community spectrum: κm−λ , with an exponent λ = 2 − n + q = 2.05 (Andersen and Beyer, 2006).
The magnitude of the resource spectrum is set to κ = 5 · 10−3 gλ−1 /m3 , which is comparable with
findings from empirical studies (Rodriguez and Mullin, 1986). The constant for resource regeneration rate
is r0 = 4 g1−p /year at 10◦ C (Savage et al., 2004). The cut-off of the resource spectrum is set to include
mesoplankton, mcut = 0.5 g.

Appendix F. Expected Lifetime Reproductive Success
The expected lifetime reproductive success can be split into two components: 1) the probability of
surviving to become adult, and 2) lifetime reproduction per adult.

Appendix F.1. Survival probability
If we set

∂N
∂t

= 0 in (1) we may obtain the steady-state solution as:
 Z

µ(m)
K(m∗ )
exp −
dm ,
N (m) =
g(m, m∗ )
g(m, m∗ )

(F.1)

where K(m∗ ) is the constant from the integration
along m.We notice that the probability of surviving
 R
m
µ(m′ )
′
, which along with pm0 →m0 = 1 allow us to
from size m0 to size m is pm0 →m = exp − m0 g(m
′ ,m ) dm
∗
write the survival probability as:
N (m)g(m, m∗ )
pm0 →m =
.
(F.2)
N (m0 )g(m0 , m∗ )

Appendix F.2. Lifetime adult reproduction
The amount of energy an adult belonging to a m∗ population will spend on reproduction throughout
its life is:
Z ∞
Rlif e (m∗ ) =
pt∗ →t ψ(m, m∗ )E(m)dt,
t∗

where t∗ is maturation age, and ψ(m, m∗ )Ei (m) the rate at which energy is allocated to reproduction.
allows us to write this as:
Noting that g(m, m∗ ) = dm
dt
Rlif e (m∗ ) =

Z

M

pm∗ →m
m∗

ψ(m, m∗ )E(m)
dm.
g(m, m∗ )

(F.3)

Appendix G. Details of Numerical Methods
The model is in the form of a series of coupled partial-integro-differential equations (1), one for each
species with the size preference function (4) being the integral kernel. The equations are of the first order
in mass (i.e. hyperbolic) in which case shocks could be formed in the solutions. However the integral kernel
smooths out any discontinuities and the equations can be solved effectively and accurately using a standard
semi-implicit upwind finite-difference scheme for solving PDEs (Press et al., 1992). The McKendrick-von
Foerster PDE (1) is discretised by calculating g(m, m∗ ) and µ(m) explicitly and making the time update
implicit, to yield:
i+1
i
i
gw
Nwi+1 − gw−1
Nw−1
Nwi+1 − Nwi
= −µiw Nwi+1 ,
(G.1)
+
∆t
∆mw
where i denotes the time step, and w the grid index on the mass axis (i, w ∈ ℵ+ ). First order approximations
have been used for both the time and mass derivatives. The discretisation in mass is known as the upwind
approximation since the derivative is calculated from w and w − 1, which is possible since the growth

function is non-negative. It is further noted that the ∂m approximation is semi-implicit since densities at
time step i + 1 are used. Equation (G.1) may be written as:




∆t i
∆t i
i+1
gw−1 +Nwi+1 1 +
gw + ∆tµiw = Nwi ,
(G.2)
Nw−1
−
|{z}
∆ww
∆ww
|
|
{z
}
{z
}
Cw
Aw

Bw

which allows us to write an explicit solution for the density spectrum at the i + 1 time step:
Nwi+1 =

i+1
Cw − Aw Nw−1
,
Bw

(G.3)

which can be solved iteratively since N1i+1 is given by the boundary condition. The flux in the boundary
g(m0 , m∗ )N (m0 , t) is equal to the reproduction flux of new recruits R (11) such that g0i N0i+1 = R, which
∆t
yields: A1 = 0, and C1 = N1i + ∆m
R.
1
This semi-implicit upwind scheme is very stable but diffusive. The third order QUICK (Quadratic
Upwind Interpolation for Convective Kinematics) scheme along with the techniques by Zijlema (1996),
which prevents overshooting problems introduced by the QUICK method, were used to check that numerical
diffusion poses no problem for ∆t = 0.02 years, and a mw mass grid with 200 logarithmically evenly
distributed points. To ensure stability the Courant condition (i.e. Press et al. (1992)):
i
|gw
|∆t
≤ 1,
∆mw

(G.4)

is prudent to fulfill. The essence of the criterion is that ∆t should be small enough not to allow individuals
to skip any mass cells mw during their growth trajectory.
The grid mw spans the offspring size m0 to 85 kg to include maturation sizes up to the order of 20 kg.
The grid for the background spectrum ends at mcut , and the lower limit should be low enough to ensure
food items for the smallest individuals in the functional species, i.e. 3 decades lower than m0 . Identical
∆mw is used for the background and species spectra to ease computations in the overlap [m0 ; mcut ].
To save computational time the ODEs for the background spectrum (15) are solved analytically. The
solution at time t0 + ∆t for the semi-chemostatic equation is:


p−1
NR (m, t0 + ∆t) = K(m) − K(m) − NR (m, t0 ) e−[r0 m +µp (m)]∆t ,
(G.5)
where K(m) =

r0 mp−1 κm−λ
r0 mp−1 +µp (m)

is the effective carrying capacity at resource size m.

References
Andersen, K.H., Beyer, J.E., 2006. Asymptotic size determines species abundance in the marine size
spectrum. The American Naturalist 168, 54–61.
Andersen, K.H., Beyer, J.E., Pedersen, M., Andersen, N.G., Gislason, H., 2008. Life-history constraints on
the success of the many small eggs reproductive strategy. Theoretical Population Biology 73, 490–497.
Andersen, N.G., Riis-Vestergaard, J., 2004. Alternative model structures for bioenergetics budgets of a
cruising predatory gadoid: incorporating estimates of food conversion and costs of locomotion. Can. J.
Fish. Aquat. Sci. 61, 2413–2424.
Boudreau, P.R., Dickie, L.M., 1992. Biomass Spectra of Aquatic Ecosystems in Relation to Fisheries Yield.
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 49, 1528–1538.
Chambers, R.C., 1997. Environmental influences on egg and propagule sizes in marine fishes, in: Chambers,
R.C., Trippel, E.A. (Eds.), Early Life History and Recruitment in Fish Populations. Chapman & Hall.
Clarke, A., Johnston, N.M., 1999. Scaling of metabolic rate with body mass and temperature in teleost
fish. Journal of Animal Ecology 68, 893–905.
Gunderson, D.R., 1997. Trade-off between reproductive effort and adult survival in oviparous and
viviparous fishes. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 54, 990–998.

Hansson, S., Rudstam, L.G., Kitchell, J.F., Hildn, M., Johnson, B.L., Peppard, P.E., 1996. Predation rates
by North Sea cod (Gadus morhua) – predictions from models on gastric evacuation and bioenergetics.
ICES Journal of Marine Science 53, 107–114.
He, J., Stewart, D.J., 1997. Comment – Measuring the bioenergetic cost of fish activity in situ using a
globally dispersed radiotracer (137 Cs). Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 54, 1953–1954.
Jennings, S., Warr, K.J., Mackinson, S., 2002. Use of size-based production and stable isotope analyses to
predict trophic transfer efficiencies and predator-prey body mass ratios in food webs. MEPS 240, 11–20.
Jobling, M., 1994. Fish Bioenergetics. Fish and Fisheries Series 13, Chapman & Hall.
Killen, S.S., Costa, I., Brown, J.A., Gamperl, A.K., 2007. Little left in the tank: metabolic scaling in
marine teleosts and its implications for aerobic scope. Proc. R. Soc. B 274, 431–438.
Kitchell, J.F., Stewart, D.J., 1977. Applications of a Bioenergetics Model to Yellow Perch (Perca flavescens)
and Walleye (Stizostedion vitreum vitreum). J. Fish. Res. Board Can. 34, 1922–1935.
Peters, R.H., 1983. The ecological implications of body size. Cambridge University Press.
Press, W.H., Flannery, B.P., Teukolsky, S.A., Vetterling, W.T., 1992. Numerical Recipes in C : The Art
of Scientific Computing. Cambridge University Press. Also available at: http://www.nr.com/.
Rodriguez, J., Mullin, M.M., 1986. Relation between biomass and body weight of plankton in a steady
state oceanic ecosystem. Limnol. Oceanogr. 31, 361–370.
Rowan, D.J., Rasmussen, J.B., 1996. Measuring the bioenergetic cost of fish activity in situ using a globally
dispersed radiotracer (137 Cs). Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 53, 734–745.
Savage, V.M., Gillooly, J.F., Brown, J.H., West, G.B., Charnov, E.L., 2004. Effects of Body Size and
Temperature on Population Growth. The American Naturalist 163, 429–441.
Trudel, M., Boisclair, D., 1996. Estimation of fish activity costs using underwater video cameras. Journal
of Fish Biology 48, 40–53.
Ursin, E., 1973. On the Prey Size Preferences of Cod and Dab. Meddelelser fra Danmarks Fiskeri- og
Havundersgelser, N.S 7, 85–98.
Ursin, E., 1974. Search Rate and Food Size Preference in Two Copepods. ICES CM L/23, 1–13.
Ware, D.M., 1978. Bioenergetics of Pelagic Fish: Theoretical Change in Swimming Speed and Ration with
Body Size. J. Fish. Res. Board. Can. 35, 220–228.
Winberg, G.G., 1956. Rate of metabolism and food requirements of fishes. Fish. Res. Board Can. Translation Series No. 194, 1–253.
Wootton, R.J., 1979. Energy Costs of Egg Production and Environmental Determinants of Fecundity in
Teleost Fishes. Symp. zool. Soc. Lond. 44, 133–159.
Zijlema, M., 1996. On the construction of a third-order accurate monotone convection scheme with application to turbulent flows in general domains. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids
22, 619–641.

