Phenotypic robustness can increase phenotypic variability after
non-genetic perturbations in gene regulatory circuits
Carlos Espinosa-Soto∗1,2

arXiv:1010.0370v1 [q-bio.PE] 2 Oct 2010

1
2
3
4

Olivier C. Martin3

Andreas Wagner1,2,4

University of Zurich, Dept. of Biochemistry, Bldg. Y27 Winterthurerstrasse 190 CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland
The Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics. Quartier Sorge, Batiment Genopode, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
INRA, UMR 0320 / UMR 8120 Génétique Végétale, F-91190 Gif-sur- Yvette, France
The Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, NM 87501, USA

Email: C. Espinosa-Soto∗ – c.espinosas@gmail.com; O.C. Martin – olivier.martin@u-psud.fr ; A. Wagner – aw@bioc.uzh.ch
Corresponding author

∗

Abstract
Non-genetic perturbations, such as environmental change or developmental noise, can induce novel phenotypes.
If an induced phenotype confers a fitness advantage, selection may promote its genetic stabilization. Non-genetic
perturbations can thus initiate evolutionary innovation. Genetic variation that is not usually phenotypically visible
may play an important role in this process. Populations under stabilizing selection on a phenotype that is robust to
mutations can accumulate such variation. After non-genetic perturbations, this variation can become a source of
new phenotypes. We here study the relationship between a phenotype’s robustness to mutations and a population’s
potential to generate novel phenotypic variation. To this end, we use a well-studied model of transcriptional regulation circuits. Such circuits are important in many evolutionary innovations. We find that phenotypic robustness
promotes phenotypic variability in response to non-genetic perturbations, but not in response to mutation. Our
work suggests that non-genetic perturbations may initiate innovation more frequently in mutationally robust gene
expression traits.

Introduction

variants that exaggerate, refine or “stabilize” this phenotype by making it independent of non-genetic factors.
Two main perspectives exist about the origin of evolu- Waddington coined the term genetic assimilation for this
tionary innovations. The orthodox “genotype-first” per- stabilization process (Waddington, 1953).
spective emphasizes the role of mutations in the production of new phenotypes. In this perspective, mutaIncreasing amounts of evidence support the importions produce individuals with novel phenotypes whose tance for innovation of traits induced by non-genetic facfrequency in a population may increase through natu- tors (for dissenting opinions, see de Jong and Crozier,
ral selection. The heterodox “phenotype-first” perspec- 2003; Orr, 1999).
First, theoretical work shows
tive (Hall, 2001; Moczek, 2007; Newman et al., 2006; that assimilation can occur under broad condiPalmer, 2004; Pigliucci et al., 2006; Price et al., 2003; tions (Ciliberti et al., 2007b; Espinosa-Soto et al.,
West-Eberhard, 1989, 2003) emphasizes the role of non- 2010; Lande, 2009; Masel, 2004; Rice, 1998;
genetic perturbations, such as exposure to different tem- Siegal and Bergman, 2002; Wagner, 1996; Wagner et al.,
peratures, diets, or biotic interactions. Non-genetic 1997).
Second, laboratory evolution experiments
perturbations also comprise fluctuations in an organ- show that assimilation does occur (Eldar et al., 2009;
ism’s internal “microenvironment”, such as gene activity Rutherford and Lindquist, 1998; Suzuki and Nijhout,
changes caused by noisy gene expression (Elowitz et al., 2006; Waddington, 1953, 1956). Third, studies in natu2002; McAdams and Arkin, 1997; Raj et al., 2010).
ral populations suggest that genetic assimilation of traits
The phenotype-first perspective is based on the ob- induced by non-genetic factors is not rare (Palmer, 2004;
servation that organisms often have highly plastic phe- Pigliucci and Murren, 2003; West-Eberhard, 2003). For
notypes. That is, the same genotype has the potential to example, taxa with genetically determined dextral or
produce different phenotypes depending on non-genetic sinistral morphologies are frequently derived from taxa
influences. Thus, a perturbation can trigger a plastic phe- in which the direction of the asymmetry is not genetinotypic response in some individuals of a population. If cally fixed, but where it is a plastic response (Palmer,
the resulting novel phenotype provides a benefit to its 1996, 2004). This occurs for many traits, such as the
carrier, it facilitates survival. Then, selection may in- side on which the eye occurs in flat fishes (Pleuronecticrease the frequency of new or already existing genetic formes), and the side of the larger first claw in decapods
1

(Thalassinidea) (Palmer, 1996). Transitions like these
indicate genetic assimilation of a direction of asymmetry originally induced by non-inheritable factors. More
generally, traits where fixed differences among closely
related species are mirrored by plastic variation within
populations are good candidates for genetic assimilation.
For example, amphibian traits, such as gut morphology
(Ledon-Rettig et al., 2008) and limb length and snout
length (Gomez-Mestre and Buchholz, 2006), follow this
pattern.
A system is robust to genetic or non-genetic
perturbations if its phenotype does not change when
perturbed.
Mutational robustness and robustness
to non-genetic perturbations are correlated with one
another in many cases (Ancel and Fontana, 2000;
Ciliberti et al., 2007b; de Visser et al., 2003; Lehner,
2010; Meiklejohn and Hartl, 2002; Proulx et al., 2007;
Rutherford and Lindquist, 1998), although exceptions
exist (Cooper et al., 2006; Fraser and Schadt, 2010;
Masel and Siegal, 2009).
The ability to produce evolutionary innovation,
is linked to the robustness of a biological system (Ancel and Fontana, 2000; Ciliberti et al., 2007a;
Draghi and Wagner, 2009; Wagner, 2005, 2008a). At
first sight, robustness seems to hamper innovation. First,
a mutationally robust system produces less phenotypic
variation in response to mutations. It may thus not facilitate the genotype-first scenario (Ciliberti et al., 2007a;
Draghi and Wagner, 2009). Second, a system robust
to non-genetic factors shows little phenotypic plasticity.
Thus, it may not support innovation under the phenotypefirst scenario. However, the role of robustness in innovation is subtler than it may seem. This becomes evident
when one considers how genotypes and their phenotypes
are organized in a space of genotypes.
Genotypes exist in a vast space of possible genotypes. Two genotypes are neighbors in this space if
one can be transformed into the other by a single mutation. The distribution of phenotypes in genotype space
shows some qualitative similarities for different kinds of
systems, from RNA and protein molecules to metabolic
networks and transcriptional regulation circuits. First,
in these systems large sets of genotypes produce the
same phenotype. Each of these sets can be traversed
through single mutation steps that leave the phenotype
unchanged. Such a set is also referred to as a neutral network or genotype network (Schuster et al., 1994).
Second, different neighborhoods of the same genotype
network contain genotypes with very different genotypes (Ciliberti et al., 2007a; Ferrada and Wagner, 2008;
Lipman and Wilbur, 1991; Rodrigues and Wagner, 2009;
Schultes and Bartel, 2000; Schuster et al., 1994; Wagner,
2008b).
To understand how mutational robustness relates to
a system’s ability to produce evolutionary innovations,
it is useful to distinguish between the mutational robust-

ness of a genotype and that of a phenotype. A genotype G1 is mutationally more robust than another genotype G2 , if G1 is more likely to maintain the same phenotype than G2 in response to mutation. By extension,
a phenotype P1 is mutationally more robust than P2 if
the genotypes that produce P1 preserve P1 , on average,
more often than the genotypes adopting P2 preserve P2
in response to mutations. Perhaps surprisingly, mutational phenotypic robustness can facilitate the production of novel phenotypes for RNA structure phenotypes
(Wagner, 2008b). The reason is that genotypes with a
more robust phenotype form larger genotype networks
and have, on average, more neighbors with the same
phenotype. A population of such genotypes encounters relatively few deleterious mutations that would slow
its diversification and spreading through genotype space
(while preserving its phenotype). It thus attains a higher
genotypic diversity which translates into greater phenotypic variability in response to mutations, even though
every single genotype may have access to fewer other
phenotypes (Wagner, 2008a).
This mechanism, although corroborated for RNA
and protein structural phenotypes (Ferrada and Wagner,
2008; Wagner, 2008b) may not lead to increased phenotypic variability in all systems. The reason is that it
depends on how many different and unique phenotypes
the neighborhood of different genotypes contains, and on
how rapidly populations can spread through a genotype
network. In other words, it depends on the organization
of genotype networks in genotype space, which may differ among different system classes. For example, a recent theoretical analysis suggests that the relationship between phenotypic mutational robustness and the potential
to generate phenotypic variation through mutation need
not even be monotonic (Draghi et al., 2010).
The above considerations pertain to phenotypic
variability in response to mutations. One might think
that phenotypic variability in response to non-genetic
perturbations may behave similarly since robustness to
mutations and to non-genetic factors are often positively
correlated (Ancel and Fontana, 2000; Ciliberti et al.,
2007b;
de Visser et al.,
2003;
Lehner,
2010;
Meiklejohn and Hartl, 2002; Rutherford and Lindquist,
1998). However, we show that this is not necessarily
so for transcriptional regulation circuits, which exist on
a higher level of organization than individual evolving
molecules. Such circuits direct the production of specific
gene activity patterns at particular times and places in
the developing organism. Changes in the expression of
their genes are involved in many evolutionary innovations (Davidson and Erwin, 2006; Shubin et al., 2009).
We study a generic computational model of transcriptional regulation in which the genotypes correspond to
the cis-regulatory interactions in a transcriptional circuit.
The phenotypes correspond to the gene activity pattern a
circuit produces.
2

gene activity pattern s∞ that a circuit attains when starting from s0 . We here focus on circuits producing such
stable patterns and disregard circuits with more complex
dynamics. We define a circuit’s fitness by a function that
increases steeply with the similarity of its phenotype s∞
to a reference activity state sopt
∞ , that is considered the
optimal phenotype in a given environment. We consider
circuits that attain the same s∞ as equal with respect to
their gene expression phenotype. Under this assumption,
a mutation that transforms two such circuits into one another would be neutral with respect to this phenotype
(Fig. 1b).

For this system, we show that high phenotypic robustness to mutations increases the number of novel
expression phenotypes a circuit can produce in response to non-genetic perturbations. Thus, phenotypic robustness to mutation facilitates innovation under the phenotype-first scenario. It does so by allowing the accumulation of genetic variation that is
not observed phenotypically under typical conditions,
but that may be exposed after non-genetic perturbations (de Visser et al., 2003; Gibson and Dworkin, 2004;
Masel, 2006; Masel and Siegal, 2009).

Methods

Determination of 1-mutant neighborhoods

Model

In several of our analyses, we explored properties of the
circuits that differ from a reference circuit genotype G
by one single mutation. For each entry aij in the matrix
A of G we considered the following cases: i) if aij = 0
we check the phenotype of two mutants, one in which
aij < 0, and one in which aij > 0; ii) if aij 6= 0 we
also check the phenotype of two mutants, one in which
an interaction is lost (aij = 0), and one in which we
change the value of aij while keeping its sign unchanged.
Among all the variants in the one-mutation neighborhood, we allowed exclusively those that maintained the
number of interactions within an interval [m− , m+ ], thus
keeping interaction density at a value close to c. In all
cases m+ − m− = 5. We discarded circuits that did
not attain a steady-state gene activity pattern in this approach. Whenever a new non-zero value was required for
a given aij , we chose an N(0,1) pseudorandom number,
and forced its sign if needed. We defined the robustness
to mutations of a genotype G as the fraction of G’s 1mutant neighbors that produce the same phenotype as G
when their dynamics start from the initial state s0 . To
assess the phenotypes that G can access through mutations we registered and counted all the different phenotypes produced by the set of single mutant circuits that
neighbor the reference circuit G. The approach is readily extended to entire populations, where we determined
all the different phenotypes that occur in the neighborhood circuits in the population. We counted phenotypes
that occurred in the neighborhood of two or more circuits
only once.

The model represents a regulatory circuit of N genes,
where each gene’s activity is regulated by other genes
in the circuit. The circuit’s genotype is defined by a
real-valued matrix A = (aij ), in which non-zero elements represent regulatory interactions between genes
(Fig. 1a). An interaction (aij 6= 0) means that the activity of gene j can either have a positive (aij > 0) or a
negative (aij < 0) effect on the activity of gene i. We use
m to refer to the number of interactions in a given circuit,
and c to its interaction density, i.e. to the number of interactions m divided by the maximum possible number of
(1)
(N )
interactions N 2 . A vector st = (st , ..., st ) describes
the activity state of the circuit at time t.
The activity of the genes in the circuit changes according to the difference equation
(i)
st+τ



N
X
(j)
=σ
aij st 

(1)

j=1

where σ(x) equals -1 when x < 0, it equals 1 when
x > 0, and it equals 0 when x = 0.
Despite its level of abstraction, variants of this
model have proven useful for studying the evolution
of robustness in gene regulatory circuits (Ciliberti et al.,
2007b; Martin and Wagner, 2008; Siegal and Bergman,
2002; Wagner, 1996), the effect of recombination on
the production of negative epistasis (Azevedo et al.,
2006; Martin and Wagner, 2009), the evolution of modularity in gene circuits (Espinosa-Soto and Wagner,
2010) and the evolution of new gene activity patterns (Ciliberti et al., 2007a; Draghi and Wagner, 2009).
Similar models have also been successfully used to
predict the dynamics of developmental processes in
plants and animals (Mendoza and Alvarez-Buylla, 1998;
Mjolsness et al., 1991).
We consider circuits that start their dynamics from
a particular initial gene expression state s0 . One can
view this initial state as being specified by factors external to the circuit, be they environmental factors, signals
from adjacent cells, maternal regulators, or any genes
“upstream” of the circuit. The phenotype is the stable

Evolving populations
For the model we use, a given pair of initial and final expression states (s0 , sopt
∞ ) is representative of all pairs with
the same fraction d of individual genes’ expression values that differ between s0 and sopt
∞ . For a pre-specified
d, we thus chose an arbitrary such pair, and followed previously established procedures (Ciliberti et al., 2007b) to
identify a circuit genotype G that is able to drive the system from s0 to sopt
∞ . The regulatory interactions in the
initial genotype G are real numbers sampled from a normal distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation 1,
i.e., an N(0,1) distribution. After having identified one
3

such genotype G, we created a population of 200 copies trajectories.
of it, and subjected this population to repeated cycles
(“generations”) of mutations (with a probability of mutation of µ = 0.5 per circuit), and strong stabilizing selection on sopt
∞ . Whenever a circuit underwent mutation,
we picked one of the circuit’s 1-mutation neighbors at
random (see above). We allowed exclusively those mutations that maintained the number of interactions within
a predetermined interval [m− , m+ ], thus keeping interaction density around a predetermined fraction c of nonzero interactions among all possible (N 2 ) interactions.
In this study, m+ − m− = 5 in all cases.
Throughout, we interpret a circuit’s “fitness” as a
survival probability. We followed the regulatory dynamics of each gene circuit with s0 as initial condition. As in
previous work (Ciliberti et al., 2007a,b), we disregarded
genotypes that did not produce fixed-point equilibrium
states, or that produced phenotypes in which the activity
of a gene was equal to zero (neither active nor inactive).
We assigned genotypes that attained the reference pattern
opt
sopt
∞ a maximally possible fitness of 1. Thus, s∞ represents a pre-determined optimal gene expression state. We
assigned genotypes that attained an equilibrium state s∞
that differed from sopt
∞ in the activity state of k genes a Fig. 1. Gene regulatory circuit model. (a) A gene regulatory circuit.
fitness equal to (1 − k/N )5 , which ensures a steep de- Black bars indicate genes that encode proteins which regulate the
crease in survival probability even for small deviations activity of other genes in a hypothetical circuit. The regulatory
interactions are described by a matrix A = (aij ). An interaction
from sopt
∞ . Each generation, we constructed a new popmeans that the activity of gene j can either have a positive (aij > 0,
ulation by sampling individuals with replacement from red rectangles) or a negative (a < 0, blue rectangles) effect on the
ij
the previous generation, and subjecting copies of them activity of gene i. (b) Gene circuits that differ in a single interaction
to mutation with a probability µ. We kept each of these are neighbors in genotype space. . Each large circle surrounds a
new individuals with a probability equal to its fitness, and distinct gene regulatory circuit. Red arrows represent activating
interactions, and blue lines represent repressing interactions between
continued sampling until the newly generated population different genes (black rectangles). Dashed lines represent the
had 200 members. For all the populations we study, we interactions that are necessary to convert the indicated circuits into the
let the initial population of identical genotypes evolve for middle circuit. a) and b) are modified with permission from
(Ciliberti et al., 2007b). (c) Example of novel phenotypes caused by
104 generations under selection for sopt
∞ , before collect- three kinds of perturbations. A reference gene circuit produces
ing any simulation data. This allows the population to phenotype s∞ , in which four genes are active (genes 5-8; yellow) and
erase any traces of the initial genotype and to reach a four genes are inactive (genes 1-4; red). In a one-mutation
reference one by a
plateau where phenotypic variability in response to ei- neighborhood (all circuits that differ from thenew
single interaction) we find four phenotypes s∞ different from the
ther mutations or non-genetic perturbations varies little original s (left). If we perturb the system state of the reference
∞
across generations.
circuit without altering its genotype, other novel phenotypes are
We define the genotypic distance between two cir- encountered (center and right panels). The perturbations we used are
cuits as the minimum number of mutations needed to either all single-gene perturbations in the initial condition s0 (center),
or perturbations of the dynamical trajectory of the circuit (‘noisy
transform one circuit into the other, normalized by the dynamics’; right).
maximally possible number of such mutations for circuits with the same number of interactions.
Random sampling of genotypes in genotype networks
Noisy dynamics
For each circuit in a population, we generated 5N dynamic trajectories, each of which started from s0 . For
each of these trajectories, and for each step of the regulatory dynamics, we perturbed the activity of a randomly
picked gene with a probability of 0.5. We then followed
each trajectory until an activity pattern s had consecutively repeated itself, and labeled this pattern as s∞ . We
then counted the number of different fixed-point equilibrium states that each circuit could attain in these 5N

In order to sample properties of a given genotype network uniformly, we performed a random mutational walk
restricted to this genotype network, that is, to circuits that
attain a given sopt
∞ from the initial state s0 . We then examined properties of genotypes every n steps of this random walk, where n equaled 5 times the upper limit m+
of the number of interactions in the circuit. This sporadic
sampling serves to erase correlations in genotypes along
this random walk.
4

Results

dynamics, and lead to a new steady-state activity pattern
snew
∞ .

Genotype networks of gene expression phenotypes
have different sizes

We emulated the perturbations produced by noise in
two complementary ways. First, we changed the activity
For our model, most or all genotypes that produce the state of single genes in the initial state s0 , for each gene
same phenotype form large connected genotype net- in a circuit, and determined the different new phenotypes
works (Ciliberti et al., 2007a,b). The size of any one snew
∞ that resulted from such change. Secondly, we ranphenotype’s genotype network depends only on the frac- domly perturbed the dynamic trajectory from s0 to s∞
tion d of genes whose expression state differs between (‘noisy dynamics’), as described in Methods.
the initial state s0 , and the steady state activity phenoWe asked how the mutational robustness of a gene
type sopt
∞ (Ciliberti et al., 2007b). Specifically, phenoexpression phenotype affects the number of new phenotypes where these two states (regardless of their actual
types that these two kinds of noise can produce in popexpression values) are more similar have larger genotype
ulations of evolving circuits. We evolved populations of
networks (Fig. S1 in Supplementary Material). One can
200 circuits under stabilizing selection on a given gene
view regulatory circuits as devices that compute an exexpression state sopt
opt
∞ , as described in Methods. We then
pression state s∞ from the initial state s0 . From this
counted the number of unique new phenotypes that the
perspective, a larger number of gene expression differtwo different kinds of noise produced among the individences between these states means that the computation
uals in a population. Specifically, we counted phenotypes
becomes increasingly difficult, in the sense that fewer
that appeared multiple times only once, thus focusing on
genotypes can perform it.
unique phenotypes.
We first examined, in our model, the relationship
Noise can produce a greater number of new phebetween the size of a phenotype P ’s genotype network
and the robustness of circuits with this phenotype P to notypes in populations evolving on large genotype netmutations. To this end, we uniformly sampled 106 geno- works. Fig. 2 demonstrates these observations for cirtypes from genotype networks of different sizes (differ- cuits with N = 20 genes and an interaction density
ent d), and determined their mean robustness to muta- c ≈ 0.2. These observations also hold if we vary the
tions, that is, the mean fraction of their neighbors with numbers of genes and regulatory interactions in a circuit
the same phenotype. For all examined cases, the aver- (Figs. S3,4), with a single exception for perturbations
age mutational robustness (i.e. phenotypic robustness) is in s0 when the number of regulatory interactions is very
higher for genotypes on larger genotype networks (Fig. low (Fig. S3d).
S2). Thus, phenotypic robustness to mutations increases
with genotype network size, just as for RNA (Wagner, Populations with more robust phenotypes harbor
2008b). Therefore, we can simply use 1 − d as a proxy more diverse genotypes
for genotype network size and phenotypic robustness to
Increased genotypic diversity in populations evolving
mutations.
in large genotype networks might aid in producing inPhenotypic robustness to mutations facilitates pheno- creased phenotypic variability, as discussed in the Introtypic variability in response to noise
duction. We next asked whether this mechanism may
In this paper, we are concerned with the production apply to our system. To this end, we quantified the genoof new steady-state gene expression patterns snew that typic distance among two circuits (see Methods).
∞

are different from sopt
∞ . We refer to such activity patterns as new phenotypes. They could result from mutations that change regulatory interactions in a circuit.
They could also result from non-genetic perturbations
(Fig. 1c). We here consider two kinds of non-genetic perturbations, noise in a cell’s internal milieu, and change in
the organism’s (external) environment. Both kinds can
induce dramatic gene expression changes in organisms
ranging from bacteria to metazoans (Elowitz et al., 2002;
Raj et al., 2010; Snell-Rood et al., 2010). We first focus
on noise, which includes stochastic changes in protein or
mRNA copy numbers in a cell, and can cause phenotypic
heterogeneity in clonal populations (Elowitz et al., 2002;
McAdams and Arkin, 1997; Raj et al., 2010). Such noise
may affect the activity or expression of circuit genes at a
given time, which may alter a circuit’s gene expression

As a measure of a population’s genotypic diversity,
we estimated the mean pairwise circuit distance, as well
as its maximum, in each of 500 populations evolved under stabilizing selection on a phenotype sopt
∞ . We did so
for two classes of populations that differ in the robustness
of their phenotypes, and found that the mean genotypic
distance is significantly higher for populations with a robust phenotype. The same holds also for the maximum
genotypic distance. These observations are not sensitive
to the number of genes and interactions in a circuit (Table S1). Thus, populations with a robust phenotype are
genetically more diverse than populations with a less robust phenotype. These observations hint that the higher
genetic diversity of populations with robust phenotypes
may be exposed as phenotypic variability in response to
noise.
5

Fig. 3. High phenotypic robustness does not facilitate phenotypic
variability in response to mutations without preceding environmental
change. ‘High’, ‘medium’ and ‘low’ correspond to expression
phenotypes with high (d = 0.1), intermediate (d = 0.25), and low
(d = 0.5) robustness. The figure shows results for N = 20 genes and
a fraction c ≈ 0.2 of non-zero regulatory interactions. The panel
shows the mean number of novel phenotypes averaged over 500
independent populations, at each level of robustness. The length of
bars denotes one standard error.

We found that populations with a highly robust phenotype show lower phenotypic variability in response to
mutations. This holds despite their somewhat higher
genotypic diversity (Table S1, discussed above). Fig. 3
shows pertinent data for circuits with 20 genes and interaction density c ≈ 0.2. The same behavior holds for
populations of circuits with different number of genes
and different interaction densities (Fig. S5). In sum, robustness of a phenotype to mutations impairs phenotypic
variability to mutation, as opposed to what we saw for
variability in response to noise.
Our results suggest that a phenotype’s mutational
robustness promotes phenotypic variability in response
to noise, but hinders such variability in response to mutations. This may seem surprising, because robustness
to mutations increases with robustness to noise for individual circuits (Ciliberti et al., 2007b). One might thus
think that phenotypic variability also behaves similarly
in response to these perturbations. However, robustness
to mutations explains less than 25 percent of the variance in robustness to noise, as shown by a new statistical
analyses of our previously published data (Ciliberti et al.,
2007b). Thus phenotypic variability in response to noise
and to mutation are only weakly coupled.
With these observations in mind, we analyzed the
phenotypic variability in response to noise and mutations
of individual circuits in populations evolving on different genotype networks (Table S2). After obtaining this
data, we compared the mean number of new phenotypes
that mutations or noise could produce from circuits in
populations with different levels of phenotypic robustness (Table S3). We found that phenotypic variability
in response to gene expression noise decreases less with
phenotypic robustness to mutations than phenotypic variability to mutations (Table S3). It may even increase with

Fig. 2. High phenotypic robustness facilitates phenotypic variability in
response to noise in gene expression. The distance d between the
initial state s0 and the optimal phenotype sopt
∞ is strongly associated
with genotype network size and with phenotypic mutational
robustness (“phenotypic robustness”) hereafter. ‘High’, ‘medium’ and
‘low’ correspond to expression phenotypes with high (d = 0.1),
intermediate (d = 0.25), and low (d = 0.5) robustness. The figure
shows results for N = 20 genes and a fraction c ≈ 0.2 of non-zero
regulatory interactions. Both panels show mean numbers of novel
phenotypes averaged over 500 independent populations, for each level
of robustness. The length of bars denotes one standard error. The
number of different new phenotypes that a population can access after
perturbations of a) single genes in the initial state s0 , or b) a circuit’s
gene expression trajectory, increases with phenotypic robustness.

Phenotypic robustness does not facilitate phenotypic
variability caused by mutations

We next asked whether phenotypic robustness also facilitates phenotypic variability in response to mutations for
the regulatory circuits we study. We again studied populations of circuits evolved under stabilizing selection on
a phenotype sopt
∞ . In such populations, we determined
the 1-mutation neighborhood of each circuit, that is, all
circuits that differ from it in a single regulatory interaction. We then determined the number of unique new gene
expression phenotypes in the population’s neighborhood.
That is, we counted only once a phenotype if it occurred
in the neighborhood of two different circuits. This number of unique phenotypes is a measure of the population’s
phenotypic variability in response to mutations.
6

phenotypic robustness. These observations suggest that
the increased genotypic diversity attained on larger genotype networks is insufficient to compensate for the small
(or null) reduction in variability in response to mutations.
It is, however, sufficient to compensate for the smaller reduction in phenotypic variability in response to noise in
gene expression.

der stabilizing selection on an optimal expression phenoa
type sopt
∞ and a given gene activity pattern s0 as initial
condition. We counted the number of phenotypes in the
population, and compared it with the number of different
phenotypes that the same population displays when sa0 is
replaced by a random gene activity pattern sb0 as an initial
condition. We found that phenotypic variability increases
after substitution of sa0 with sb0 (Figs. 4 and S6). In addition, the magnitude of this increment increases with phenotypic robustness (Fig. 4). This last observation is generally not sensitive to the number of genes and regulatory
interactions in a circuit (Fig. S6). The increase in phenotypic variability is significantly higher for populations
with a robust phenotype (Mann-Whitney U-test; Table
S4). The single exception to these observations were circuits of very low interaction density (N = 20; c ≈ 0.1
Fig. S6d), that also show other non-typical behaviors
(Ciliberti et al., 2007b). Our results suggest that, after
environmental change, observable phenotypic diversity
increases to a larger extent in populations with a robust
phenotype. We note that because the identity of s∞ does
not affect the production of phenotypes, but only their
viability, it is not appropriate to carry out an analogous
analysis for changes in sopt
∞ .
In earlier sections, we have shown that phenotypic
robustness impedes phenotypic variability after mutations in populations evolving in a constant environment
(Fig. 3). We next asked whether this also holds after
a change in the inducing role of the environment. We
started out, as in our last analysis, with populations of
circuits evolved under stabilizing selection on an optimal
expression phenotype sopt
∞ and with a given gene activity pattern sa0 as initial condition. Then, we changed the
initial condition sa0 for all the circuits to a new random
initial condition sb0 , and allowed evolution to proceed.
Before and after this change, we recorded the number
of different phenotypes accessible from the population
through mutations. Under the new condition the population effectively searches genotype space for optimal phenotypes. During this search, many variant circuits may
not pass to subsequent generations. Our primary focus,
however, is not this search, but the immediate increase in
a population’s phenotypic variability in response to environmental change.
Before environmental change, populations with a
robust phenotype have access to fewer phenotypic variants, just as in our previous observations (Fig. 3). Immediately after environmental change (at t = 1), the number of new phenotypes accessible through mutations increases, in a burst, in all populations. Importantly, this
increase is higher in populations with a robust phenotype
(Figs. 5a and S7). This means that phenotypic robustness facilitates the phenotypic variability caused by mutations, but only after environmental change. As in our
analysis above, the only exception occurs when interaction density is very low (Fig. S7d).

Phenotypic robustness increases phenotypic variability after environmental change
Thus far, we focused mostly on phenotypic variability
in response to small, random non-genetic perturbations,
such as single gene expression perturbations along a gene
expression trajectory. We now turn to the question of
what happens when a whole population is subject to the
same non-genetic perturbation. In nature, this may occur
because of environmental change outside the organism,
or colonization of a new habitat.
The environment can have two different roles in this
context. The first is an inducing role, where the environment acts as an “agent of development” (West-Eberhard,
1989). In this role, it affects the phenotype produced
from a genotype. In many cases, environmentally induced phenotypic change is linked to major changes in
gene expression (Snell-Rood et al., 2010). The second
role is an evaluating role, where the environment acts as
an “agent of selection” (West-Eberhard, 1989). In anthropomorphic terms, the environment in this role distinguishes well-adapted from poorly adapted phenotypes.
Conveniently, our model allows us to study these
roles independently. We model a change in the environment’s evaluation role as a change in the identity of the
optimal phenotype sopt
∞ , for all circuits in the population.
We model a change in the environment’s inducing role
as a change in the initial state s0 in the whole population. Such a change could occur, for example, through a
signaling pathway that detects an environmental change,
and that affects genes upstream of the circuit. Put differently, changes in s0 reflect the environment’s effect
on phenotype production, while changes in sopt
∞ affect
the survival probability of individuals, without inducing
novel phenotypes. We note that other factors, such as
mutations in upstream genes, might also lead to changes
in s0 . Any one such change, however, would initially
affect only one individual in a population, and not the
whole population at the same time.
We first asked how an environmentally induced
change in the initial gene activity pattern s0 affects the
number of different actual phenotypes that a population
displays. We note that our populations may contain a
few individuals with phenotypes different from the optimal phenotype sopt
∞ . The reason is that, in contrast to
previous formulations (Ciliberti et al., 2007b), we here
represent fitness as a continuous variable that depends
on the similarity of a circuit’s phenotype s∞ to sopt
∞ (see
Methods). We started out with a population evolved un7

occurs when interaction density is very low (Fig. S9d).
These observations imply that the inductive role dominates in its immediate effect on phenotypic variability
when both roles of the environment change. In sum, populations with a robust phenotype have mutational access
to more phenotypic variants after environmental change.
This increased access is caused by the inductive role of
the environment, that is by the new phenotypes that a new
environment can bring forth.

Discussion
If non-genetic change is to be causally involved in evolutionary innovation, it needs to generate novel phenotypes. Genetic assimilation can then stabilize these
phenotypes if the non-genetic perturbations that induced
them appear recurrently. Here, we focused on whether
the robustness of an existing phenotype and non-genetic
change can facilitate the origin of new phenotypes. To
address this question, we examined a generic model of
transcriptional regulation circuitry, in which the relationship between genotypes (patterns of regulatory interactions) and phenotypes (gene activity or expression patterns) is well-studied (Ciliberti et al., 2007a,b;
Martin and Wagner, 2008, 2009; Wagner, 1996). In this
model, we can use the size of a phenotype’s genotype
network as a proxy for a phenotype’s robustness to mutations.
We broadly distinguished two kinds of non-genetic
perturbations. The first corresponds to fluctuations in
a gene circuit’s microenvironment that produce random
changes in gene expression. Such changes, are ubiquitous and have important effects on cell biological processes (Elowitz et al., 2002; McAdams and Arkin, 1997;
Raj et al., 2010). The second kind comprises changes
in the (macro)environment external to an organism. For
brevity, we refer to these kinds of change as noise and
environmental change.
We first explored how noise and mutations affect
phenotypic variability in populations that differ in the
robustness of their gene activity phenotypes. We found
that phenotypic mutational robustness increases phenotypic variability of populations in response to noise but
not in response to mutations. This last finding differs
from observations for RNA secondary structure, where
phenotypic robustness facilitates the mutational access
to phenotypic variants (Wagner, 2008b). The reason
stems from differences in the organization of genotype
space for these two system classes, i.e. in the distribution of different genotype networks in genotype
space (Ancel and Fontana, 2000; Ciliberti et al., 2007a;
Espinosa-Soto et al., 2010; Wagner, 2008b). A recent
mathematical model (Draghi et al., 2010) shows that mutational access to new phenotypes can depend on this organization, and on details of a population’s evolutionary
dynamics.
Next, we asked how phenotypic robustness af-

Fig. 4. High phenotypic robustness increases phenotypic diversity in
populations of gene circuits after environmental change. The number
of different phenotypes that populations display increases after
changing the initial expression state s0 . Such an increase is greater for
populations with mutationally more robust phenotypes. The figure
shows results for N = 20 genes and a fraction c ≈ 0.2 of non-zero
regulatory interactions. The panel shows the mean number of observed
phenotypes averaged over 500 independent populations, for each level
of robustness. The length of bars denotes one standard error.

We next asked whether the evaluation role of the environment has similar effects on the mutational access to
new phenotypes. To this end, we repeated the above analysis, but replaced, at t = 1, the optimal phenotype sopt,a
∞
by a randomly chosen optimal sopt,b
(without changing
∞
s0 ). We also observed a transient, but more gradual, increase in the number of phenotypes that are mutationally
accessible. However, in this case, phenotypic variability is lower for populations with a robust phenotype after
environmental change (Figs. 5b and S8). Thus, the inductive role of environment, but not its evaluative role,
causes higher phenotypic variability in populations with
robust phenotypes.
An open question is how mutation-accessible phenotypic variability changes when both the inductive and
the evaluation roles of the environment change. This
question is important because a change in the inductive
role favors phenotypic variability to a larger extent in
populations with a robust phenotype, whereas a change
in the evaluative role particularly favors variability in
populations with less robust phenotypes. Thus, a combination of both effects could result in a negligible effect of
phenotypic robustness on variability after environmental
change. To answer this question, we repeated our analysis from the previous paragraph, but replaced the original
b opt,b
pair of states (sa0 , sopt,a
∞ ) with a new pair (s0 , s∞ ), such
opt
that the distance d between s0 and s∞ was the same for
both pairs.
In this new analysis, populations evolving on a large
genotype network show greater phenotypic variability in
response to mutations immediately after this change (Fig.
5c). These differences are statistically highly significant
(Table S5). The same observations hold for circuits of
different sizes and different connectivities (Fig. S9 and
Table S5). As in our analysis above, the only exception
8

Fig. 5. High phenotypic robustness allows mutational access to more phenotypes after an environmental change produces novel phenotypes.The
figure shows the number of different phenotypes in the 1-mutant neighborhood of a population, for three different scenarios of environmental
change at generation t = 1. The insets show the number of phenotypes accessible through mutation immediately before (t = 0) and
immediately after (t = 1) environmental change. The figure shows results for N = 20 genes and a fraction c ≈ 0.2 of non-zero regulatory
interactions. ‘High’, ‘medium’ and ‘low’ correspond to expression phenotypes with high (d = 0.1), intermediate (d = 0.25), and low (d = 0.5)
phenotypic robustness. Data are mean values averaged across 500 independent simulations for each level of robustness. The length of bars
a
denotes one standard error. (a) The initial state s0 changes. (b) The identity of the optimal phenotype sopt
∞ changes. (c) The original pair (s0 ,
b , sopt,b ).
sopt,a
)
changes
to
a
new
pair
(s
∞
0 ∞

fects phenotypic variability in response to environmental change, which we modeled to affect all individuals
in a population. We showed that environmental change,
besides increasing observable phenotypic variation, transiently increases phenotypic variability caused by mutations. Because mutational access to most novel variants is only possible in the new environment, these variants can be considered environmentally-induced phenotypes, supporting the phenotype-first scenario. From this
perspective, environmental change increases phenotypic
variability and the chances to refine, exaggerate and stabilize phenotypic variation via genetic change. Importantly, this increase in phenotypic variability is higher in
populations that had a more robust phenotype before environmental change.
In sum, we found a positive effect of phenotypic
robustness on phenotypic variability after non-genetic
perturbations. This positive effect is not sensitive to
the magnitude of non-genetic perturbations. Phenotypic
robustness favors phenotypic variability after singlegene perturbations in the initial condition, which is the
smallest possible non-genetic perturbation in our model
(Fig. 2a). It also favors phenotypic variability after replacing the initial condition by a completely new random activity pattern (Figs. 4 and 5a). In contrast, populations with robust gene expression phenotypes produce less phenotypic variation when only mutations are
used to explore the phenotypic possibilities. Thus, a
mechanism that relies exclusively on mutation to produce novel phenotypes becomes less important for innovation as a phenotype’s robustness increases. Our results
suggest that plasticity-mediated innovation may be especially important for gene expression traits with high mutational robustness. Our work is an initial step towards
the definition of two different domains where either the
genotype-first or phenotype-first scenarios prevail over
the other. In this regard, we note that environmental induction of novel traits is not only expected for gene cir-

cuits with robust phenotypes. In fact, we observe a general increase in phenotypic variability after environmental change (Figs. 4 and 5). It is just that this increase is
especially strong for robust phenotypes.
The general increase in phenotypic variability
we observe is consistent with many empirical observations on phenotypic variation that is conditional
on the environment. For example, severe environments enhance phenotypic differences among fruit fly
strains (Kondrashov and Houle, 1994), and a temperature rise due to an unshaded milieu increases the
frequency of abnormal morphologies in fruit flies
(Roberts and Feder, 1999). Moreover, population genetics studies show that the release of hidden genetic variation after environmental change should be very common
(Hermisson and Wagner, 2004).
Unfortunately, because the mutational robustness
of most traits is unknown and difficult to measure
(de Visser et al., 2003), these observations do not speak
directly to the question whether phenotypic robustness promotes phenotypic variability after environmental change. However, there is an intriguing phenomenon
with potential parallels to our observations. In the
fruit fly D. melanogaster and in the plant Arabidopsis
thaliana, previously unobserved phenotypic variants appear when the activity of the chaperone protein Hsp90
is impaired (by environmental stress or by other means)
(Queitsch et al., 2002; Rutherford and Lindquist, 1998).
This observation suggests that an active Hsp90 protein
usually conceals genetic variation that would otherwise
be visible phenotypically, although the appearance of
new genetic variants may underlie some of the new phenotypic variation (Specchia et al., 2010). Hence, Hsp90
might increase phenotypic variability by allowing the accumulation of cryptic genetic variation that can become
phenotypically visible in the right environment. Our
analysis revealed an analogous phenomenon for robust
gene expression phenotypes. Robustness of phenotypic
9

traits can facilitate the accumulation of cryptic genetic
variation in a population. Non-genetic perturbations can
expose this variation as new phenotypes, some of which
may be adaptive. The parallels between the action of
Hsp90 and the phenomenon we study may be more than
superficial. The reason is that Hsp90 increases the number of genotypes with a given phenotype for several traits
(Rutherford, 2003; Rutherford and Lindquist, 1998). It
thus increases phenotypic robustness. Hsp90 is a specific
example – with a peculiar mechanism – of how phenotypic robustness can increase phenotypic variability after
non-genetic perturbations.
In conclusion, our observations suggest that phenotypic robustness to mutations can play a positive role
in the phenotypic variability after non-genetic perturbations. To see this, one needs to study the role of
population level processes, as we did. We caution that
we made our observation in the context of a specific
model of transcriptional regulation circuits. The gene
expression phenotypes of such circuits play central roles
in many evolutionary innovations (Davidson and Erwin,
2006; Shubin et al., 2009). However, phenotypes may be
distributed differently in genotype space in other classes
of biological systems. Thus, whether our observations
hold in other systems remains to be seen.

de Visser, J. A. G. M., Hermisson, J., Wagner, G. P., Meyers, L. A.,
Bagheri-Chaichian, H., Blanchard, J. L., Chao, L., Cheverud, J. M.,
Elena, S. F., Fontana, W. F., Gibson, G., Hansen, T. F., Krakauer,
D., Lewontin, R. C., Ofria, C., Rice, S. H., von Dassow, G., Wagner,
A., and Whitlock, M. C. (2003). Evolution and detection of genetic
robustness. Evolution, 57:1959–1972.
Draghi, J. and Wagner, G. P. (2009). The evolutionary dynamics of
evolvability in a gene network model. J. Evol. Biol., 22:599–611.
Draghi, J. A., Parsons, T. L., Wagner, G. P., and Plotkin, J. B. (2010).
Mutational robustness can facilitate adaptation. Nature, 463:353–
355.
Eldar, A., Chary, V. K., Xenopoulos, P., Fontes, M. E., Losón, O. C.,
Dworkin, J., Piggot, P. J., and Elowitz, M. B. (2009). Partial
penetrance facilitates developmental evolution in bacteria. Nature,
460:510–514.
Elowitz, M. B., Levine, A. J., Siggia, E. D., and Swain, P. S. (2002).
Stochastic gene expression in a single cell. Science, 297:1183–1186.
Espinosa-Soto, C., Martin, O. C., and Wagner, A. (2010). Phenotypic
plasticity can facilitate innovation in gene regulatory circuits. Submitted.
Espinosa-Soto, C. and Wagner, A. (2010). Specialization can drive the
evolution of modularity. PLoS Comput. Biol., 6:e1000719.
Ferrada, E. and Wagner, A. (2008). Protein robustness promotes evolutionary innovations on large evolutionary time-scales. Proc. R. Soc.
B, 275:1595–1602.
Fraser, H. B. and Schadt, E. E. (2010). The quantitative genetics of
phenotypic robustness. PLoS ONE, 5:e8635.

Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-2013 under grant agreement no PIIF-GA2008-220274. AW acknowledges support through SNF grants
315200-116814, 315200-119697, and 315230-129708, as well
as through the YeastX project of SystemsX.ch , and the University Priority Research Program in systems biology at the University of Zurich.

References
Ancel, L. W. and Fontana, W. (2000). Plasticity, evolvability, and modularity in RNA. J. Exp. Zool. (Mol Dev Biol), 288:242–283.
Azevedo, R. B. R., Lohaus, R., Srinivasan, S., Dang, K. K., and Burch,
C. L. (2006). Sexual reproduction selects for robustness and negative epistasis in artificial gene networks. Nature, 440:87–90.
Ciliberti, S., Martin, O. C., and Wagner, A. (2007a). Innovation and
robustness in complex regulatory gene networks. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A., 104(34):13591–13596.
Ciliberti, S., Martin, O. C., and Wagner, A. (2007b). Robustness can
evolve gradually in complex regulatory gene networks with varying
topology. PLoS Comput. Biol., 3(2):e15.
Cooper, T. F., Morby, A. P., Gunn, A., and Schneider, D. (2006). Effect
of random and hub gene disruptions on environmental and mutational robustness in escherichia coli. BMC Genomics, 7:237.

Gibson, G. and Dworkin, I. (2004). Uncovering cryptic genetic variation. Nat. Rev. Genet., 5:681–690.
Gomez-Mestre, I. and Buchholz, D. R. (2006). Developmental plasticity mirrors differences among taxa in spadefoot toads linking plasticity and diversity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 103:19021–19026.
Hall, B. K. (2001). Organic selection: Proximate environmental effects on the evolution of morphology and behaviour. Biol. Philos.,
16:215–237.
Hermisson, J. and Wagner, G. P. (2004). The population genetic theory
of hidden variation and genetic robustness. Genetics, 168:2271–
2284.
Kondrashov, A. S. and Houle, D. (1994). Genotype-environment
interactions and the estimation of the genomic mutation rate in
Drosophila melanogaster. Proc. R. Soc. B, 258:221–227.
Lande, R. (2009). Adaptation to an extraordinary environment by evolution of phenotypic plasticity and genetic assimilation. J. Evol.
Biol., 22:1435–1446.
Ledon-Rettig, C. C., Pfennig, D. W., and Nascone-Yoder, N. (2008).
Ancestral variation and the potential for genetic accommodation in
larval amphibians: implications for the evolution of novel feeding
strategies. Evol. Dev., 10(3):316–325.
Lehner, B. (2010). Genes confer similar robustness to environmental,
stochastic, and genetic perturbations in yeast. PLoS ONE, 5:e9035.
Lipman, D. J. and Wilbur, W. J. (1991). Modelling neutral and selective
evolution of protein folding. Proc. R. Soc. B, 245(1312):7–11.

Davidson, E. H. and Erwin, D. H. (2006). Gene regulatory networks
and the evolution of animal body plans. Science, 311:796–800.

Martin, O. C. and Wagner, A. (2008). Multifunctionality and robustness
trade-offs in model genetic circuits. Biophys. J., 94:2927–2937.

de Jong, G. and Crozier, R. H. (2003). A flexible theory of evolution.
Nature, 424:16–17.

Martin, O. C. and Wagner, A. (2009). Effects of recombination on
complex regulatory circuits. Genetics, 183:673–684.

10

Masel, J. (2004). Genetic assimilation can occur in the absence of
selection for the assimilating phenotype, suggesting a role for the
canalization heuristic. J. Evol. Biol., 17:1106–1110.

Rodrigues, J. F. M. and Wagner, A. (2009). Evolutionary plasticity and
innovations in complex metabolic reaction networks. PLoS Comput.
Biol., 5:e1000613.

Masel, J. (2006). Cryptic genetic variation is enriched for potential
adaptations. Genetics, 172:1985–1991.

Rutherford, S. L. (2003). Between genotype and phenotype: protein
chaperones and evolvability. Nat. Rev. Genet., 4:263–274.

Masel, J. and Siegal, M. L. (2009). Robustness: mechanisms and consequences. Trends Genet, 25:395–403.

Rutherford, S. L. and Lindquist, S. (1998). Hsp90 as a capacitor for
morphological evolution. Nature, 396:336–342.

McAdams, H. H. and Arkin, A. (1997). Stochastic mechanisms in gene
expression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 94:814–819.

Schultes, E. A. and Bartel, D. P. (2000). One sequence, two ribozymes:
implications for the emergence of new ribozyme folds. Science,
289:448–452.

Meiklejohn, C. D. and Hartl, D. L. (2002). A single mode of canalization. Trends Ecol. Evol., 17:468–473.
Mendoza, L. and Alvarez-Buylla, E. R. (1998). Dynamics of the genetic regulatory network of Arabidopsis thaliana flower morphogenesis. J. Theor. Biol., 193:307–319.

Schuster, P., Fontana, W., Stadler, P. F., and Hofacker, I. L. (1994).
From sequences to shapes and back: a case study in RNA secondary
structures. Proc. R. Soc. B, 255:279–284.
Shubin, N., Tabin, C., and Carroll, S. (2009). Deep homology and the
origins of evolutionary novelty. Nature, 457:818–823.

Mjolsness, E., Sharp, D. H., and Reinitz, J. (1991). A connectionist
model of development. J. Theor. Biol., 152:429–453.

Siegal, M. L. and Bergman, A. (2002). Waddington’s canalization revisited: Developmental stability and evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A., 99:10528–10532.

Moczek, A. P. (2007). Developmental capacitance, genetic accommodation, and adaptive evolution. Evol. Dev., 9:299–305.
Newman, S. A., Forgacs, G., and Müller, G. B. (2006). Before programs: the physical origination of multicellular forms. Int. J. Dev.
Biol., 50:289–299.
Orr, H. A. (1999). An evolutionary dead end? Science, 285:343–344.
Palmer, A. R. (1996). From symmetry to asymmetry: phylogenetic
patterns of asymmetry variation in animals and their evolutionary
significance. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 93(25):14279–14286.

Snell-Rood, E. C., Dyken, J. D. V., Cruickshank, T., Wade, M. J.,
and Moczek, A. P. (2010). Toward a population genetic framework
of developmental evolution: the costs, limits, and consequences of
phenotypic plasticity. BioEssays, 32:71–81.
Specchia, V., Piacentini, L., Tritto, P., Fanti, L., D’Alessandro, R.,
Palumbo, G., Pimpinelli, S., and Bozzetti, M. P. (2010). Hsp90
prevents phenotypic variation by suppressing the mutagenic activity
of transposons. Nature, 463:662–665.

Palmer, A. R. (2004). Symmetry breaking and the evolution of development. Science, 306(5697):828–833.
Pigliucci, M. and Murren, C. J. (2003). Genetic assimilation and a possible evolutionary paradox: can macroevolution sometimes be so
fast as to pass us by? Evolution, 57:1455–1464.
Pigliucci, M., Murren, C. J., and Schlichting, C. D. (2006). Phenotypic plasticity and evolution by genetic assimilation. J. Exp. Biol.,
209:2362–2367.
Price, T. D., Qvarnström, A., and Irwin, D. E. (2003). The role of
phenotypic plasticity in driving genetic evolution. Proc. R. Soc. B,
270:1433–1440.

Suzuki, Y. and Nijhout, H. F. (2006). Evolution of a polyphenism by
genetic accomodation. Science, 311:650–652.
Waddington, C. H. (1953). Genetic assimilation of an acquired character. Evolution, 7:118–126.
Waddington, C. H. (1956). Genetic assimilation of the Bithorax phenotype. Evolution, 10:1–13.
Wagner, A. (1996). Does evolutionary plasticity evolve? Evolution,
50:1008–1023.
Wagner, A. (2005).
Robustness and evolvability in living systems. Princeton Studies in Complexity. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.

Proulx, S. R., Nuzhdin, S., and Promislow, D. E. L. (2007). Direct
selection on genetic robustness revealed in the yeast transcriptome.
PLoS One, 2(9):e911.
Queitsch, C., Sangster, T. A., and Lindquist, S. (2002). Hsp90 as a
capacitor of phenotypic variation. Nature, 417:618–624.
Raj, A., Rifkin, S. A., Andersen, E., and van Oudenaarden, A. (2010).
Variability in gene expression underlies incomplete penetrance. Nature, 463(7283):913–918.
Rice, S. H. (1998). The evolution of canalization and the breaking of
von Baer’s laws: modeling the evolution of development with epistasis. Evolution, 52:647–656.
Roberts, S. P. and Feder, M. E. (1999). Natural hyperthermia and expression of the heat shock protein Hsp70 affect developmental abnormalities in Drosophila melanogaster. Oecologia, 121:323–329.

11

Wagner, A. (2008a). Neutralism and selectionism: a network-based
reconciliation. Nat. Rev. Genet., 9(12):965–974.
Wagner, A. (2008b). Robustness and evolvability: a paradox resolved.
Proc. R. Soc. B, 275:91–100.
Wagner, G. P., Booth, G., and Bagheri-Chaichian, H. (1997). A population genetic theory of canalization. Evolution, 51:329–347.
West-Eberhard, M. J. (1989). Phenotypic plasticity and the origins of
diversity. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst., 20:249–278.
West-Eberhard, M. J. (2003). Developmental Plasticity and Evolution.
Oxford University Press, New York.

