From Structure to Function in Open Ionic Channels
May 24, 1999

Bob Eisenberg
Dept. of Molecular Biophysics and Physiology
Rush Medical Center
1750 West Harrison Street
Chicago Illinois 60612
USA

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24.

Submitted to arXiv November 12, 2010 with text unchanged

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Introduction. Life is diverse and complex in both structure and function. The variety of
animals and structures within animals has been obvious at least since the time of Aristotle
(Aristotle, 1961), and so has been the richness of what they can do. For more than two
millennia scientists have followed Aristotle‘s path, trying to understand how structure
produces function in biological systems, continually looking at smaller and smaller parts of
the systems, trying to make ‗the secrets of life‘ understandable, and controllable.
Progress along this path has been frustrating scientists for centuries. Every structure
seems to be followed by still smaller structures, all important to natural function. But the
end of the path can now be seen. Structures smaller than atoms are not directly involved in
life‘s work, except in so far as electrons carry current and protons control the chemical
properties of dissolved molecules. The role of macroscopic quantum coherence in the
biological world has intrigued many (Loewenstein, 1999) but is not yet established. The
smallest length scale directly relevant to life is that of molecules and their atoms. The
magnificent tools of molecular biology make life‘s machines (proteins) and blueprints
(nucleic acids) experimentally accessible. The machines and blueprints are on the
molecular and atomic scale, and not on the length scale of the nucleus, the quark, or
(fortunately) the electron.
The other part of the biologists‘ quest is to understand how these structures produce
function. There, the goal is not in sight yet, although we will argue later in this paper that it
may be fairly soon for one type of protein, ionic channels, that have simple structure when
open, and use particularly simple physics, that of electrodiffusion.
Understanding the function of any biological systems means understanding how
biological systems use physical laws to perform that function. When the biological systems
consist of hierarchy upon hierarchy of structures, each itself of considerable complexity,
the role of physical laws may be hard to recognize, at least in the form they are used by
chemists and physicists. But open ionic channels have such simple structure, they involve
so few hierarchical levels in their biological function, that we may be able to understand
and solve them in the not too distant future. Fortunately, channels are of great biological
importance, so despite their simplicity, they are worth studying.

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

1

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Before we turn to channels explicitly, I will try the reader‘s patience (or ask the
impatient reader to skip ahead to the section labeled Working Hypothesis) with some more
philosophical remarks about biological complexity, that are meant to show that not all
biological systems use physical laws in the simple way they are used by open channels.
Vitalism and Complexity. Hierarchies can and do have qualitatively different properties
from their components. The operation of an automobile engine cannot be understood just
from the study of the burning of gasoline. The function of an integrated circuit or even
transistor cannot be understood solely from the physics of conduction of current by quasiparticles. The nervous system cannot be understood from the physics of ionic conduction.
In each case, knowledge of structure is needed as well as knowledge of underlying physics.
The wiring diagram of the devices is as important as their physics.
The structure and underlying physics are not always enough to understand
biological systems of complexity, because the complexity itself adds qualitatively new
behaviors not evident in the underlying pieces of the system. While these new behaviors
are certainly compatible with the underlying physical laws of the pieces, and in that sense
implicit in them, they cannot be uniquely predicted from those underlying laws without a
detailed understanding of the relevant hierarchy of structure. In many fewer words: a
machine does much more than its parts do separately because its parts are designed to work
together to perform a function.
When confronted with biological behaviors for which there is no technological
precedent, like the speed with which the human visual system recognizes loved ones in a
rain or snowstorm, it is sensible to seek explanations that are not well precedented in
chemistry and physics, simply because chemical and physical systems have no such
behaviors. It is sensible to seek explanations that arise from the hierarchy of structural
complexity. In this quite limited sense, explanations are needed for biological systems that
lie outside the laws of physics, as they are usually presented. The explanation must include
both the physics and the structure, and, in a certain sense, the purpose of the structure, but
it cannot consist only of the structure or only of the physics, at least in my view.

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

2

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

In this quite limited sense, then, vitalism is an appropriate part of biology. Physical
laws undoubtedly govern the behavior of these complex systems, as well as governing the
behavior of their elements, but, taken as a whole, biological systems, and organisms, often
show behaviors that reflect the hierarchies of structures more than the properties of the
elements of those structures. Those behaviors might be called ‗vital‘, organic to the
complexity of the structure, not obvious in the underlying physical laws.
Of course, this need to study complexity in its own right is not confined to
biological systems. It is precisely what faces an engineer trying to understand a complex
machine, if she has no clues about what it does or how it was built, other than those present
in the machine itself. Thus, the word ‗vitalism‘, which I used above is somewhat
inappropriate, a piece of artistic license, that I hope may be granted me, with a smile on the
reader‘s face.
Vitalism and molecules. When we confront the molecules of life, these semi-philosophical
issues evaporate. The behaviors of individual molecules are much more closely related to
physical laws than behaviors of complex biological systems or organisms. Every molecular
biologist I have ever met agrees that vitalism is inappropriate in his or her science:
explanations of the behavior of proteins and nucleic acids should be found in the laws of
physics and chemistry, not in laws that describe complex biological systems.
When molecular biologists say they are not vitalists, more is being said than is
often heard, even by the speakers themselves. The molecular biologists are in fact more or
less disqualifying themselves as creators and even judges of the laws they will use to
describe and analyze their molecules.
Just as the biologist is not responsible for the operating system of his computer, or
the electronics of his oscilloscope or other instruments (with notable exceptions: Hodgkin,
Huxley & Katz, 1952; Levis & Rae, 1992; Levis & Rae, 1995; Nonner, 1969; Sigworth,
1995; Valdiosera, Clausen & Eisenberg, 1974), so the biologist is not responsible for the
physics and chemistry of the ionic solutions that his molecules live in. Molecular biologists
must use physical laws as they are given us by our colleagues who study the physics and
chemistry of ionic solutions. If those colleagues are successful, they will give us succinct

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

3

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

‗laws‘ (often nowadays, computer programs) that summarize masses of experiments,
covering the full range of conditions biologists need to describe.
These issues seem not very controversial, to me, when applied to proteins in
general, and certainly to open ionic channels, but it is possible that a touch of vitalism is
needed when describing gating properties of channels. It possible that the conformation
changes that occur in channels involve a complexity in behavior not easily captured in
ordinary physical language, even with the large number of states currently in fashion (more
than 50). I believe that a proper understanding of the mechanical, chemical and electrical
structure of proteins will be enough to understand their conformational changes, and
gating; just as a proper understanding of those properties is enough to understand
automobile engines, but it is possible, I guess, that conformation changes are so complex,
resulting from interactions of so many chaotic systems that they need separate explanation.
What seems impossible is that we need separate laws to describe functions of a
protein that occur without conformation change. Vitalism in even its most limited sense
has no place in the analysis of function produced by just one protein conformation, and
probably not in functions produced by conformation changes either. It is certainly better
when planning experiments to assume that conformational changes can be explained by the
ordinary laws of physics than to assume otherwise. Indeed, a good way to reveal the role of
complexity is to understand what would happen without it. That means trying to make
physical models of models of biological systems, using just as much complexity as is
needed to explain experiments, but no more, hopefully not using state models whose
complexity is comparable to the experimental data set.
Open ionic channels are thought to function mostly in just one conformation, so if
there is any biological function that can be described entirely in the language of physics
and chemistry, it should be current flow through channels, once they are open. (For present
purposes we ignore subconductance states.) That language is also a particularly easy one.
Permeation (as ion movement through open channels is called) does not involve changing
covalent bonds, and so permeation can be described without quantum chemistry, without
traditional organic or biochemistry for that matter. Indeed, if channels are studied only
when they are open, when ions are moving through their pores at nearly the rate they move
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

4

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

in free solution, it is obvious that channels should be viewed as natural nanotubes through
which ions move much as they move in artificial nanotubes, i.e., in crystalline channels
(Krager & Ruthven, 1992; Paul, 1982; Perram, 1983; Wilmer et al., 1994) or in free
solution (Anderson & Wood, 1973; Berry, Rice & Ross, 1980; Blum, 1975; Blum,
Holovko & Protsykevych, 1996; Blum & Hoye, 1977; Bockris & Reddy, 1970; Conway,
Bockris & Yaeger, 1983; Fleming & Hänggi, 1993; Friedman, 1962; Friedman, 1985;
Hänggi, Talkner & Borokovec, 1990; Henderson, 1992; Hockney & Eastwood, 1981;
Murthy & Singer, 1987; Newman, 1991; Tyrrell & Harris, 1984).
Thus, when we seek to understand how the function of channels arises from their
structures, the physical laws are very clear. They are the physical laws that govern the
behavior of condensed phases like ionic solutions and proteins. Those laws are not
numerous. Condensed phases (under these biological conditions) do quite little. Matter in
them can diffuse; it can neither fission nor fuse; energy in them can diffuse as well, in the
form of heat; both energy and matter can flow according to the laws of convection; and,
most importantly, matter and energy can be moved by an electric field.
Working Hypothesis. Here we will consider a simple working hypothesis, and check to see
how well it does. We imagine that all permeation properties of open ionic channels can be
predicted by understanding electrodiffusion in fixed structures, without invoking
conformation changes, or changes in chemical bonds. We know, of course, that ions can
bind to specific protein structures, and that this binding is not easily described by the
traditional electrostatic equations of physics textbooks, that describe average electric fields,
the so called ‗mean field‘. The question is which specific properties can be explained just
by mean field electrostatics and which cannot.
I believe the best way to uncover the specific chemical properties of channels is to
invoke them as little as possible, seeking to explain with mean field electrostatics first.
Then, when phenomena appear that cannot be described that way, by the mean field alone,
we turn to chemically specific explanations, seeking the appropriate tools (of
electrochemistry, Langevin, or molecular dynamics, for example) to understand them. In
this spirit, we turn now to the structure of open ionic channels, apply the laws of

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

5

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

electrodiffusion to them, and see how many of their properties we can predict just that
way.
Structure is geometry and charge. The structure of an open channel is the location of its
atoms, the location of its nuclei and the surrounding electron clouds. Those clouds are
more or less directly measured by x-ray crystallography and for our purposes the structure
will be the coordinates given us by that technique.
Few ionic channels have been crystallized and ‗structured‘, but with the
understanding of just how little can be done without three dimensional structure, effort is
increasing and progress forthcoming, see the recent publication (Doyle et al., 1998:
structure 1BL8 at the Brookhaven web site http://pdb.pdb.bnl.gov) of the structure of the K+
channel of Streptomyces lividans (that our lab likes to call the McK channel, in appreciation
for the hard work and significance of the contribution of MacKinnon‘s lab, as well as the
public prominence of the Mc prefix.
Clearly, the movement of ions through a channel depends on the geometry of the
hole in the protein. Atoms cannot long exist in the same place at the same time, and so a
hole of larger diameter will let through more ions in a given time (with a given driving
force) than a hole of smaller diameter. A channel of longer length is likely to expose the
permeating ion to greater friction, and thus to allow less flow of ions in a given time (with
a given driving force) than a shorter channel. The geometry of the open channel is one
important feature of the protein.
The reason atoms cannot exist for long in the same place at the same time is
sometimes forgotten: nuclei and electrons occupy only a tiny nearly negligible fraction of
the space of an atom. The reason that atoms cannot easily overlap is that their electron
clouds repel so strongly. The electrical interactions of quantum mechanics determine this
mechanical property of atoms.
Similarly, the electrical properties of atoms dominate much of their other behavior,
behavior which is often called structural. The charge on atoms is sufficiently large, and the
distances sufficiently small that the electrical forces dominate all others. This essential fact,
stated so clearly in the first paragraphs of Feynman‘s magnificent textbook on electricity
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

6

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

and magnetism (Feynman, Leighton & Sands, 1963), cannot be reiterated too often,
particularly given how widely it is unknown. Electric forces are exceedingly strong, and so
must always be considered explicitly when studying channels. They often, in one guise or
another, will turn out to dominate the structural properties of systems. The question is how
do we describe these forces. Should we use the structural language of mutual exclusion, of
simple steric effects, or do we need something more sophisticated, like the language of
electrostatics, or quantum chemistry?
The electrical properties of the matter we deal with in channels and proteins are
relatively easy to describe. Currents are tiny and magnetism is not involved. Metals do not
occur and metallic conduction is rare, nearly non-existent. Proteins and channels have
static electric charge, determined by their chemistry, by the solution of Schrödinger‘s
equation. This charge is usually much larger than the induced charge produced by the local
electric field, that is by polarization. It is this fixed charge which is the crucial determinant
of many properties of proteins. And it is this fixed charge we consider in our working
hypothesis: when we say we will consider how well the electrical properties of channel
proteins determine the permeation of ions, what we mean is we consider how well the
structural charge of proteins determines this permeation.
The existence and size of this structural charge is not emphasized as much as I
would wish in elementary textbooks in either electricity and magnetism or molecular
biology. The biology textbooks speak at length of polar chemical bonds and polar amino
acid residues, but they rarely say polar bonds and residues are simply those with significant
(localized) electrical charge. The textbooks of electricity and magnetism pay almost no
attention to the boundary conditions of charged matter: they are focussed on the properties
of the electric field in vacuum or in dielectric materials that do not contain net fixed
charge. And chemistry, physics, and biology textbooks produce considerable confusion by
their use of the word polar (meaning permanent distribution of fixed charge independent of
the local electric field) and polarization (meaning the induced distribution of fixed charge
that is zero when the local electric field is zero).
Education is not helped either by the widespread use of dipoles to describe charge
distributions. As appropriate as this description is when studying an electric field far away
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

7

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

from a charge distribution (of finite size), it is inappropriate close to the charge
distribution, where most of chemistry and nearly all of molecular biology occurs. Close to
a ‗polar‘ molecule (like water), which has zero net charge (i.e., the integral of its charge
density over all space is zero), the electric field is not even crudely approximated by that
produced by a point dipole. Many many terms of a Taylor expansion (called a multipole
expansion when it is constructed from Coulomb‘s law written in polar coordinates) are
needed to describe that field, hundreds or thousands of terms might be needed if a
permeating ion is nearly touching the fixed charge distribution, i.e., if an ion is hydrated by
an adjacent water molecule or solvated by a nearby ‗binding site‘. The dipole term is just
the second term of the multipole expansion and the expansion involves hundreds of terms
of nearly equal size, when considering fields close to distributions of fixed charge.
Although these are strong words, they deal with matters of mathematics and the
convergence of infinite series, which really are not too ambiguous. Simple computations
(e.g., substitution in eq. 3.88-3.91 of Griffiths, 1981, of the multipole expansion for the
case of r  1.01R , where r is the radial coordinate of the edge of a permeating ion, and R is
the radial coordinate of the edge of the charge on the channel) will validate my statements
about the adequacy of dipole models
Boundary conditions for proteins. The boundary condition that describes matter,
particularly the electric field produced by the charge of matter, depends on the resolution
of the description, and high resolution descriptions undoubtedly would benefit by
theoretical analysis beyond that of the mean field. Nonetheless, the fundamental issues are
well illustrated by the mean field boundary condition which describes the electric field at
the edge of a protein produced by fixed charge at that edge, both being averaged over a
long time compared to atomic fluctuations, say averaged over nanoseconds or longer.
Then, the boundary condition is
Fixed Charge

Induced Charge

 0     2    ,  ()    1   ,  () 
 (  )  ( )



n
n



(1)

or equivalently, when induced charge is strictly proportional to the local electric field,

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

8

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Wall ()

 0 
 ()
 ()
  Pore ()

n
n


(2)

 

Here,   is the electric potential on the channel wall, which has a dielectric ‗constant‘
in the range Wall ()  10,30 compared to the dielectric coefficient  Pore  20,80 of the





pore. The induced charge  2   ,  () is on the channel wall  2 (and depends on the





local electric field, of course); the induced charge 1  ,  () is located within the pore,
just next to the wall, at 1.  0 is the permittivity of free space.

 

The interfacial surface charge  0  of these equations is an expression of the
covalent bond structure of the protein and the ionization state of the acidic/basic residues.

 

(Note that here we define  0  to exclude any component of interfacial surface charge
that is proportional to the local electric field. Those components are described by the

 

dielectric constants.) In the context of channels,  0  is a permanent structural charge
that changes only if the ionization state of the protein changes. That can happen, if the
local pH is changed either by changing the pH of the bulk solution, or by changing the
electric field enough to change the local concentration of hydrogen ions and the effects can
be important. But for the purposes of this review, we will assume that the permanent
charge has a fixed value. We have dealt with ionization effects elsewhere (Nonner &
Eisenberg, 1998).

 

The interfacial surface charge  0  of these equations is the main source of the
electric field in most biological and many chemical systems. This fact is not widely
known, unfortunately, and the lack of knowledge has led to significant confusion among
biologists, chemists, and biochemists (in particular), in my opinion.
Biochemists and channologists usually (if not invariably) describe the surface of a
protein as a potential profile (‗potential of mean force‘) and, forgetting that the potential of
mean force is a variable output of the system (Hill, 1956; Hill, 1960; Hill, 1977; Hill,
1985), they treat the potential of mean force as a fixed input or source that does not change
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

9

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

with experimental conditions, as if it arose from a Dirichlet boundary condition (the
precise name for a boundary condition that specifies the potential) that did not change with
experimental conditions. Biochemists and channologists usually (if not invariably) assume
that the potential of mean force (or a rate constant derived from that potential, see eq. (5)
does not vary when the concentration of ions surrounding the protein are varied (as they
often are in experiments). In fact, the electric field arises (mainly) from a boundary
condition (i.e., eq. (1) or (2)) which describes the effects of an unchanging charge (when
induced charge is negligible, as us often the case in proteins and nearly always the case in
channels). If the charge on the surface of a protein does not change with experimental
conditions, then the potential on that surface will change when almost any change is made
in experimental conditions. Indeed, the potential everywhere (not just at the boundary) will
change as experimental conditions change, and that change cannot be expected to be small,
nor is it small in the large number of channels and experimental conditions we have
studied to date.
Biologists and biochemists are often put off by these discussions of boundary
conditions. Boundary conditions sound like mathematical technicalities that are a minor
part of a physical problem, particularly if the listener has not taken a course on differential
equations. Teachers of physics often inadvertently reinforce this view, because they
traditionally emphasize the beauty and generality of the field equations rather than the
significance of nitty-gritty boundary conditions.
Whatever the human considerations, it is a simple fact, easily verified by direct
computation of the solution of almost any differential equation, that boundary conditions are
usually important, often dominant determinants of the properties of physical systems because they describe
the flow of matter, energy, and charge into the system.

It is obvious in the laboratory that one must control the flow of matter and charge
(i.e., the concentration of ions and the flow of current) if one is to do reproducible
experiments. Much of our experimental training and apparatus is designed to control this
flow and provide reproducible results. We should expect neither more nor less of the
theoretical description than experimental reality: if changing the concentration of ions
changes an experimental result (e.g., current) as it nearly always does, or if changing the
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

10

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

electrical potential changes the current, as it nearly always does, we need to be sure that the
variables for concentration and potential are properly described and controlled in any
theory seeking to explain those experiments. Certainly, the theory must contain those
variables. Attempts have been made to compute the current through a channel using
simulations that do not define a transmembrane potential or concentration of permeant
ions (Roux & Karplus, 1991a; Roux & Karplus, 1991b), and such calculations have in fact
been done in large numbers and received substantial support and attention (Roux &
Karplus, 1994).
The surface of a protein cannot be described as an unchanging potential for two
reasons, which are really restatements of each other. First, the potential changes because
the mobile charges near the surface of the protein and on the boundaries change when
experimental conditions are changed. The fixed charge of the surface is fixed, but the
concentration of mobile ions that are attracted to the fixed charge varies as ion
concentrations are varied. That is to say, the shielding of the fixed charge varies with
experimental conditions.
The only way the potential could be maintained is if charge were supplied to the
surface of the protein, i.e., if the fixed charge were changed. In some systems, charge is in
fact supplied in just this way. At a metal electrode connected to a voltage clamp amplifier
or battery, charge is supplied. The amplifier or battery supplies the charge to the metal
electrode necessary to keep the potential constant. In these systems, matter (i.e., the
electrode) cannot be described by a fixed value of charge, but rather by a fixed value of
potential. Of course, in this type of system the electrode must be connected to a source to
maintain the potential: boundary conditions of this type are sources of energy, etc. Or in
mathematical terms, if the potential is independent of experimental conditions, its
derivative (which is more or less proportional to flux) cannot be.
The surface of a protein has no access to a source of charge which would be needed
to maintain the potential. Unlike the electrode just mentioned, or the wires that conduct
electricity in the walls of our buildings, the surface of a protein is not connected to a
generator that ‗makes‘ (i.e., separates) charge by the burning of fossil fuel or the fission of
uranium. Rather, the potential at the surface of a protein is determined (mostly) by the shielding of
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

11

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

the fixed charge on that surface. The extent of shielding is a sensitive function of ionic
conditions and is often the dominant determinant of the electrical properties of ionic
solutions and proteins. It is hardly an exaggeration to say that studying shielding has been
the central theme of electrochemistry for many years, at least since Debye and Hückel
showed that shielding is the dominant determinant of the properties of ionic solutions
nearly a century ago. Shielding has been known to be a crucial determinant of the
properties of proteins for at least 75 years. See Ch. 5 of (Edsall & Wyman, 1958).
The treatment of the surface of a protein as an unchanging potential of mean force
is not compatible with the generally accepted treatment of ionic solutions, and of proteins
in solution, because it ignores the effect of experimental conditions, bath concentrations
and transmembrane potentials, on the potential of mean force. This treatment of a protein
is thus not compatible with the Debye-Hückel, Gouy-Chapman, or Poisson-Boltzmann
theories (Berry et al., 1980; Bockris & Reddy, 1970; Conway et al., 1983; Davis &
McCammon, 1990; Friedman, 1962; Friedman, 1985; Harned & Owen, 1958; Honig &
Nichols, 1995; Newman, 1991; Robinson & Stokes, 1959; Schmickler, 1996) or their
modern replacement, the Mean-Spherical-Approximation (MSA) theories (Bernard &
Blum, 1996; Blum, 1975; Blum & Hoye, 1977; Hoye & Blum, 1978).
Of course, the potential of mean force at the surface of a protein can sometimes be
independent of concentration of reactants, in special circumstances, for example, when the
total ionic strength is held constant, while the substrate concentration is not varied enough
to itself shield the fixed charge of the other reacting species or protein. Nonetheless, these
are special circumstances not likely to be present in most experimental or biological
systems, and they are certainly not present in open channels.
Flux of individual ions. At first, the difficulties arising from the usual description of the
surface of proteins may seem isolated: after all, not many workers or papers are concerned
with that subject. However, many, even most workers and papers concerning enzymes,
channels, and proteins describe the function of these molecules as chemical reactions,
using the ‗law of mass action‘ to describe the function, and that law (as usually used)
depends on the description of the surface of a protein. For example, in the case of channels,
the chemical reaction
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

12

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

L

kf



kb

R

(3)

is widely used to describe permeation, and of course similar statements are found on nearly
every page of a biochemistry textbook. This chemical reaction can be translated, without
approximation, into an equivalent statement of flux, as the ‗law of mass action‘
Unidirectional Efflux

Unidirectional Infflux

J k  d  k f Ck  L  d  kbCk  R 

(4)

where d is the length of the channel, Ck is the concentration of ions on the Left or Right
side of the channel, the rate constants kf, kb have units of sec-1, and Jk is the flux of that ion
(units: concentration per cross sectional area per second).
If equation (4) is used as a definition of a rate constant, with the flux being
determined independently by other equations, no difficulty arises. But if the rate constants
of the chemical reaction are assumed to be independent of concentration, as is nearly
always the case, serious problems arise because then the shielding effect of concentrations
of ions is not included: as we have already discussed, the flux of ions always depends on
the potential, the potential nearly always depends on the concentration of mobile ions,
because the shielding of fixed charge depends on that concentration, and so the rate
constant must depend on concentration in most cases.
This argument is inescapable, because the ‗law of mass action‘ has no life of its
own. It is not an independent physical law, but must be derived from the underlying
physical model of the flux and its dependence on structure, mechanism, etc. In the case of
channels, this derivation can be made explicit under very general conditions (i.e., the
existence of conditional probabilities, Eisenberg, Klosek & Schuss, 1995). The equations
are particularly neat when friction is large and simple in behavior, described by a single
diffusion coefficient, a single number Dk for each species k of ion.

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

13

Bob Eisenberg

k f  k R L 

Ionic Channels

Dk

d2

exp  zkV 
1
d



d

0

exp zk    d



Dk
ProbR L
d2

(5)
kb  k  L R 

Dk
 exp  zkV 
d2

1
1
d



d

0

exp zk    d 



Dk
ProbL R
d2

The rate constant k f  k R L in fact is (nearly) the conditional probability ProbR L
that an ion entering a channel on the left leaves on the right (when absorbing boundary
conditions are placed on the right: see the original paper for the precise specification of the
probability model and physical system) and that conditional probability can be evaluated
either by mathematical analysis (to give the expressions of eq. (5)) or by direct simulation
of the motion of individual ions Barcilon et al. (1993)

computed nearly 2 billion

trajectories) fortunately with identical results: compare their eq. 2.24 and 7.5 with eq. 6.15
of Eisenberg et al., 1995. These expressions use normalized units   x   F  x  RT ;
V  FVappl RT and can be easily generalized if Dk depends on location (Nonner &

Eisenberg, 1998).
The rate constant of equation (5) is very different from the rate constant used in
traditional barrier models of ionic channels
ktrad  kT h

(6)

because the Kramers rate constant includes the effect of friction and ktrad  kT h does not.
(h is Planck‘s constant more usually found in problems of quantum mechanics.) The
implications of this fact are discussed at length in a few pages.
It is important to realize that the description of ionic flux we have just provided is
not a continuum or macroscopic description of ionic motion (although in fact it can all be
described by a diffusion equation, e.g., the Nernst-Planck equation, see (Eisenberg et al.,
1995).

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

14

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

 dC  x  Ck  x  d

 zk eN A  x   k0  
J k   Dk  x  A  x   k

RT dx
 dx


(7)
I   I k   zk FJ k
k

k

The Nernst-Planck equations describe the probability of location of individual atoms,
following random trajectories. The flux J k of ions and the electric current I k carried by
each ion of charge ezk is driven by the (gradient of) concentration and electrical potential,
which together form the chemical potential k  RT loge Ck  x   zk F ( x) . e is the charge
on a proton, NA is Avogadro‘s number, and zk is the valence of the ion.  k0 is the standard
chemical potential that describes energies other than those controlling the electric field and
diffusion, e.g., binding or the difference between dehydration and resolvation. The cross
sectional area of the channel A  x  and the diffusion coefficient Dk  x  can be functions of
location. The expressions for the rate constants (5) are in fact solutions of equation (7) as
shown in detail in Eisenberg et al. (1995).
The averaging, and mean field properties of the models we use arise chiefly in the
description of the electric field.
Poisson’s equation. It seems inescapable then that we must determine how the rate constant
varies with concentration if we are to proceed, and that means determining how the
potential profile varies with concentration. In other words, we cannot use just the law of
mass action to describe flux, but we must also use Coulomb‘s law, or its equivalent
Poisson‘s equation, to show how potential (and rate constants) vary with concentration.
The theory we use to describe an open channel represents the structure of the channel‘s
pore as a cylinder of variable cross sectional area A  x  (cm2) along the reaction path x (cm)
with dielectric coefficient  r  x  and a density of charge   x  (coul cm-1). eNA is the charge
in 1 mole of elementary charges e, i.e. the charge in a Faraday. The charge   x  consists
of

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

15

Bob Eisenberg

(1) the charge eNA

Ionic Channels

 z C  x  of the ions (that can diffuse) in the channel, of species k of
k

k

k

charge zk, and mean concentration Ck  x  ; typically k  Na+, K+, Ca++, or Cl and
–

(2) the permanent charge of the protein P  x  (mol cm-1), which is a permanent part of the
atoms of the channel protein (i.e., independent of the strength of the electric field at x) and
does not depend on the concentration of ions, etc, and so is often called the fixed charge.
Permanent charge is really quite large (~0.11e per atom) for many of the atoms of a
protein. The function P(x) is a one dimensional representation of the full three dimensional
distribution of (fixed) charge in the protein. It includes the integral of the surface charge

 0    of the protein described in eq. (2). More specifically, and more generally
  r  0 d 23D  x 

P( x)   

z
C
x




k
k
3D
dx 2
k
 eNA


(8)

where the dielectric constant  r is assumed independent of location (only for simplicity in
writing) and 3D  x  represents the cross sectional average of the electrical potential
computed from a three dimensional version of PNP (Hollerbach et al., 1999). Ck 3D  x  is
the cross sectional average of the concentration (units: moles/liter) of an ion of type k
computed from a three dimensional version of PNP.
(3) The dielectric charge (i.e., the induced charge which is strictly proportional to the local
electric field) is not included in   x  because it is described by  r  x  . It is generally very
small compared to the structural charge, but might not be in a pore lined with nonpolar
residues (see later discussion of the in-pore in the McK channel).
Next, we make the usual mean field assumptions that the average charge   x 
produces an average potential   x  according to Poisson‘s equation and that the mean
electric field  captures the properties of the fluctuating electric field which are
important on the slow time scale of biology. These assumptions are hardly novel; indeed, it
requires some extraordinary circumstances for them not to be true, on the slow highly
averaged time scale relevant for ion permeation and most biological processes. If the
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

16

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

potential energy of mean electrical force, averaged for 1 msec, did not come from the mean electric
charge, which source could it come from? If there were such a significant force, that did not
come from the mean electric charge, or gradients of chemical potential, it would probably
have been noticed and given a name, e.g., as binding or flux coupling or some such.
Not wishing to assume such a force, we write Poisson‘s equation as

 d 
d 2  d  r  x 
d
 0  r  x  2  
   x  log e A  x   
    x 
dx  dx
dx
 dx 


(9)

where the average charge in the channel‘s pore is given by





  x   eNA  P  x    zk Ck  x 


k

(10)



A  x  describes the cross sectional area of the pore at location x,  r  x  is the dielectric
constant (relative permittivity) at location x, and  0 is the permittivity of free space. The
small dielectric term is neglected.
The boundary conditions for the potential in the real world are set by the
experimental conditions: it has been known since the time of Hodgkin and Huxley
(Hodgkin, Huxley & Katz, 1949) (Cole, 1947) that experiments are most easily interpreted
if done under ‗voltage clamp‘ conditions, so complex uncontrolled effects of voltage are
avoided. Special apparatus is used to control the potentials in the baths surrounding the
channel, i.e., the potential on the left is known and maintained at Vappl and that on the right
is held at zero.

 ( L)       Vapplied
(11)

 ( R)       0
These boundary conditions are maintained by charge supplied to the system at its
boundaries (i.e., by electrodes placed in the bath and/or inside a cell or pipette). The
amount of charge necessary to maintain the potentials depends on the properties of the
system, e.g., of the channels, and the experiment (i.e., whether solutions or transmembrane
potential Vapplied are changed). This is the charge supplied by the voltage clamp apparatus
used in measurements of ionic currents.
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

17

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Of course, the natural activity of membranes and channels does not occur when the
voltage clamp apparatus is used. Nonetheless, natural voltage changes can easily be
reconstructed by solving the Hodgkin-Huxley equations (Hodgkin & Huxley, 1952), which
show how the current through a (voltage clamped) membrane produces the uncontrolled
transmembrane potentials of a normally functioning cell. Weiss (Weiss, 1996) is a nice
description of the classical biophysics and physiology which arose from the work of
Hodgkin, Huxley, and Katz, more than anyone else. All modern systems for studying the
current through one channel protein use the voltage clamp, e.g., the ―patch clamp‖ of
Sakmann and Neher (Sakmann & Neher, 1995), see also Levis & Rae (1992,1995).
The concentrations of ions must also be controlled if the properties of channels are
to be easily understood, implying the boundary conditions

Ck  L   Ck   ,

Ck  R   Ck  

(12)

Special apparatus is not available to maintain this boundary condition, but the large
volume of the baths surrounding channels, and the relatively small amounts of charge
transferred through a single channel (in many cases) often guarantees that concentration
changes produced by flux are not significant. Such is not always the case, indeed such may
never be the case for Ca++ channels functioning in their normal mode, and certainly the
absence of noticeable concentration changes must always be verified experimentally for
any channel. Nonetheless, the checks are easily done and usually satisfied.
These boundary conditions (11) and (12) (at x   of the three dimensional
problem), do not map obviously and easily into boundary conditions at the ends of the
channel x  0, x  d . We have used a particular well–precedented equilibrium mapping
called the built-in potential in semiconductor physics or the Donnan potential in parts of
biology (see Barcilon, 1992; Barcilon, Chen & Eisenberg, 1992; Chen, Barcilon &
Eisenberg, 1992; Chen & Eisenberg, 1993a). Other treatments of the ends of the channel
are used in the later versions of PNP (Nonner, Chen & Eisenberg, 1998; Nonner &
Eisenberg, 1998) and three dimensional versions of the model have been constructed that
have no arbitrary boundary conditions (Hollerbach et al., 1999). Preliminary results
suggest that the simple boundary conditions yield surprisingly adequate representations of
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

18

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

the current and spatially averaged properties of the channel, although of course any
averaged treatment misses atomic details of considerable interest and importance.
Coupling and solving: the Gummel iteration. The electrical potential is described by
Poisson‘s equation, as we have seen; and the flux is described by the Nernst-Planck
equations, or by rate constants (which are precisely equivalent if defined as in eq. (5)). But
neither equation can be solved by itself. The concentrations of ions that flow in the NernstPlanck equation are the same concentrations of charge that produce the electric field in the
Poisson equation, and the electric field of the Poisson equation modifies the flow. The
equations are coupled, and must be solved together.
The Gummel iteration (Gummel, 1964; Scharfetter & Gummel, 1969) was
discovered decades ago by the semiconductor community (Bank et al., 1990; Bank, Rose
& Fichtner, 1983; Hess, 1991; Hess, Leburton & Ravaioli, 1991; Jerome, 1995;
Kerkhoven, 1988; Kerkhoven & Jerome, 1990; Kerkhoven & Saad, 1992; Lundstrom,
1992) and was discovered in my lab independently by Duan Chen, some years later (e.g.,
Chen & Eisenberg, 1993a). The iteration is a general method for producing a selfconsistent solution of coupled equations closely related to the self-consistent field methods
used in quantum mechanics to compute orbitals. It is described at some length in our
publications (loc. cit.) and code implementing it is available on our ftp site ftp.rush.edu in
directory /pub/Eisenberg.
Comparison with experiments. The PNP equations form a map between the structure of the
channel protein, represented crudely by the function P(x) and the current voltage curves
measured experimentally.
Different types of channels have different pores made with linings of different
charge. A useful and productive working hypothesis assumes that the only difference
between different types of open channels is their different distributions of fixed charge

Pi  x  , as defined in eq.(8), where the subscript i identifies the type of channel protein,
e.g., a voltage activated Na+ channel, a stretch activated channel and so on (Conley, 1996a;
Conley, 1996b; Conley, 1997; Peracchia, 1994; Schultz et al., 1996). Of course, this
working hypothesis cannot always be true: specific chemical interactions, not captured in
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

19

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

this simple mean field theory, will no doubt be important in ways we do not yet
understand. Nonetheless, as we write these words, the current voltage relations of some 7
types of channels in a wide range of solutions can be predicted by simple distributions of
fixed charge Pi(x) (Chen et al., 1998a; Chen et al., 1997a; Chen, Lear & Eisenberg, 1997b;
Chen, Nonner & Eisenberg, 1995; Nonner et al., 1998; Nonner & Eisenberg, 1998; Tang et
al., 1997). The data from the porin channels is of particular interest because the locations
of the atoms of that protein are known by x-ray crystallography (Cowan et al., 1992;
Jeanteur et al., 1994; Schirmer et al., 1995) and the analysis using PNP recovers the correct
value of charge when a mutation is made in the protein.
One particular kind of channel (the calcium release channel CRC from cardiac
muscle) has been the object of extensive experimentation. This channel also appears to be
strikingly simple: a fixed charge Pcardiac  x   P0 independent of position, with P0 equal to
~1e, predicts the currents measured in solutions containing a single species of each of the
monovalent cations (i.e., Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+, Cs+, as the chloride salt) from 20 mM to 2

M

concentration, and potentials in the range ±150 mV, assuming each ion has a different
diffusion coefficient (Chen et al., 1998b). The value of the diffusion coefficients inside the
channel are estimated by fitting theoretical predictions to the experimental data. Typically,
the diffusion coefficients inside the channel found to be some 10 less than in free
solution. The Li+ data is not fit as well as the other ions‘, but a small change in the theory,
required in any case to fit data in mixed solutions, improves the fit significantly, as
described later in this paper.
This result surprised us considerably, because it shows that the same permanent
charge and structural parameters (e.g., diameter and length) can fit an enormous range of
data, implying that the channel is much the same whether an ion with a diameter of around
1.4Å (Li+ ) or 3.9Å (Cs+) fills the channel‘s pore. Of course, that is something of an
overstatement, since the value of the diffusion coefficient inside the channel is different for
each ion and can be determined only by estimation from the experimental data. But the
value of the diffusion coefficient for an ion is the same in all solutions, no matter what
their concentration or composition, and at all potentials, and so the naïve interpretation
seems safe to me: the CRC channel is much more rigid than any of us have expected (as
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

20

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

measured by the average value of the properties that determine flux on the biological time
scale). The data seems to show that all monovalent ions interact with the same mean
electric field, which does not depend on the diameter or chemical nature of the permeating
ion. I hasten to add, however, that this result, while clearly true for the CRC channel may
not be true for other channel types.
Selectivity: properties in mixtures of ions. The experiments just described were performed
in homogeneous solutions of the different types of ions, e.g., 20 mM NaCl on one side of
the channel with 200 mM Na+ on the other, or 50mM CsCl on one side and 500 mM CsCl
on the other. A more common (but complex) way to study selectivity is to make mixtures
of ions and apply them to both sides of the channel, e.g., 20 mM NaCl and 20 mM CsCl on
one side and 200 mM NaCl and 200 mM CsCl on the other. The ability of channels to
select between ions is one of their most important and characteristic properties and so
experiments of this type have received much attention, with probably hundreds of papers
being written in the last few years on the different selectivity of different channels under
varying conditions.
Before we consider to the properties of channels in such mixtures, it seems sensible
(following Chen, 1997) to examine the properties of mixed solutions in the bulk (Anderson
& Wood, 1973; Robinson & Stokes, 1959), i.e., in the absence of channels. Those
properties are much more complex than imagined in most channel texts, particularly when
concentrations are large. Since 1 ion in a region 7  10 Å is a concentration of around 5 M,
ions in channels must be expected to resemble ions in highly concentrated (nearly
saturated) solutions, not ions in highly dilute solutions. In highly concentrated bulk
solutions, the movement of ions is highly correlated, linked by the electric field and does
not resemble independent movement at all.
The image of ions moving independently in ionic solutions (or in channels for that
matter) can only be true when they are so far apart that their electric fields do not interact;
this image is not true even in the very dilute solutions which can be adequately described
by the Debye-Hückel/Gouy-Chapman/Poisson-Boltzmann theories, because the essence of
these theories is electrostatic interaction, i.e., shielding. That is to say, ionic concentrations

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

21

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

have to be much lower than micromolar for the image of independent ionic movement to
have any validity, if it has any validity at all.
The properties of highly concentrated ionic solutions and mixtures in bulk solution
can be quite complex and yet can be well described by a remarkable modern theory, called
the MSA (mean spherical approximation) developed by many workers over the last few
decades, but by Lesser Blum, more than anyone else (Bernard & Blum, 1996; Blum, 1975;
Blum et al., 1996; Blum & Hoye, 1977; Durand-Vidal et al., 1996; Hoye & Blum, 1978).
This is not the place, nor am I the person to review this theory. Suffice it to say that by
describing the packing of spherical ions correctly, and the consequent effect of the
excluded volume directly on the free energy, and separately on the electric field, the MSA is
able to predict the activity of ionic solutions from infinite dilution to saturation, even when
saturation occurs at many molar! The properties of these solutions are very different from
the properties of particles moving independently that pervades the traditional physiological
literature.
The case of the CRC channel we have already discussed (when bathed in
homogeneous solutions) is particularly striking. Here, PNP has been used in a wide range
of mixed solutions (Chen, et al. 1998a). The theory must be slightly modified to
accommodate mixtures: the smaller ions (Li+ and perhaps Na+, the data is not clear in the
latter case) have an excess free energy beyond that computed from the Poisson equation.
Some 1-2 kT of energy (i.e.,  Li0 ) must be added to the electrical energy for Li+ to account
for the experimental data, but remarkably this number is a constant that does not change
significantly over the whole range of conditions examined experimentally, in a range of
mixtures of ions. (Everything is not perfect, of course, this being biology, and scientists
being human. In one asymmetric solution, there is a systematic misfit we do not
understand, and thus call a conformation change. In other solutions, there are small but
reproducible misfits. But investigation of these in the absence of a three dimensional
structure seems not a useful exercise.)
The existence of an extra energy (i.e.,  k0 ) is hardly a surprise; it is this type of
energy that is needed to explain the selectivity properties of highly concentrated bulk
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

22

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

solutions. In channels, additional chemical energies is present beyond those in bulk
solution: the process of dehydration from bulk solution, resolvation by channel protein and
channel water, which accompanies the movement of any ion into (or out of) a channel
involves energies 50 to 100 larger (i.e., some hundred kT) than the excess energy we find
to be present in CRC. Indeed, we have been expecting to find signs of such phase boundary
‗potentials‘ (i.e., energies) since long before we wrote the PNP equations. What is striking
is not the existence of such excess free energy, but rather how little is needed (to fit a wide
range of experimental data) and how simple its properties seem to be. Simulations
(Dieckmann et al., 1999) suggest that dehydration/resolvation energies are 2 kT or less, a
result that is in welcome support of our curve fitting. It seems that the mean field electric
forces described by PNP dominate the properties of the open channel, even when other
forces are present.
The reasons for the dominance of the electric field are not known for certain, and
the role of the atomic interactions traditionally thought to be so important in ionic channels
(i.e., single filing phenomena, ion-ion repulsion, etc) are not known either. Both issues are
important and need investigation. What is known is that in closely related, but not identical
systems, physical chemists and physicists have already shown that mean field terms
dominate. For example, Henderson, Blum and co-workers (Blum, 1994; Bratko,
Henderson & Blum, 1991; Henderson, Blum & Lebowitz, 1979) show that when fixed
charge densities are large, as they are in channels, the mean field dominates the properties
of systems in a variety of geometries, e.g., the planar geometry of lipid bilayers analyzed in
(for example) Gouy-Chapman theory. Indeed, when fixed charges (and the accompanying
concentration of counter ions) are 0.5

M,

which is one-tenth of the value likely to be

present in ionic channels, the mean field is strong enough to swamp ion-ion interactions
other than mean field. Experimental evidence (Ben-Tal et al., 1996) shows clearly that
mean field theories (Gouy-Chapman) work in the biological domain in planar systems, as
predicted by theory. Of course, narrow single file channels are not planar systems; their
geometry enforces correlations different from those in planar systems, but these
geometrical properties of channels have been reported to make the mean field more (not
less) dominant in the other systems studied up to now (van den Brink & Sawatzky, 1998).
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

23

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Clearly, analyses must be done for structures reminiscent of channels before they can be
fully convincing. Nonetheless, it seems likely that the high charge density and nearly one
dimensional geometry of biological channels are what make most of their properties
predictable by a mean field theory like PNP, even in the face of single filing. The recent
paper of Nelson and Auerbach (1999) seems very important in this context since it is
apparent the first to analyze and simulate single file systems of finite length. Nelson and
Auerbach show that particle displacements fall into three domains depending on the time
scale. A short time domain, in which diffusion occurs much as it does in free solution; an
intermediate time scale, comparable to the first passage time of a particle across the
channel, in which diffusion behaves much as it does in an infinitely long single file system;
finally, a long time domain, in which diffusion occurs much as it does in free solution, but
with an apparent diffusion coefficient much less than that in free solution (or in the short
time domain, just mentioned). It seems clear that both the measurement and function of
biological channels falls into the long time domain. This work would be definitive, in my
view, if were extended to analyze ratios of unidirectional fluxes, and the properties of
charged particles, moving in the presence of a gradient of electrical potential.
Anomalous Mole Fraction Effect. The main signature of single file behavior in single ionic
channels is called the anomalous mole fraction effect AMFE (Eisenman, Latorre & Miller,
1986), also known as the mixed alkali effect in synthetic crystalline channels (Wilmer et
al., 1994). The AMFE can be easily be explained by the PNP model if a bit of localized
chemical binding is introduced (Chen, 1997; Nonner et al., 1998).
Interestingly, the mechanism by which the AMFE arises in a PNP system is novel,
not proposed previously as far as I know. The AMFE arises in a way that depends entirely
on the properties of the Poisson equation: the binding region of the channel accumulates
charge. That charge repels all nearby mobile charges of similar sign. The repulsion creates
a depletion layer in series with the binding region which has few ions and thus high
resistance. Conduction is determined by the region of high resistance even though it is
spatially small. The binding region decreases conductance in this indirect way, not by
decreasing the diffusion coefficient or mobility. (To keep things simple, in this calculation, the
diffusion coefficient of the bound ion is the same as it is in bulk solution and everywhere
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

24

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

else.) The repulsion that creates the depletion layer would not occur in a system forced to
be electrically neutral or forced to have a prescribed electric field (i.e., a system that did
not follow Poisson‘s equation).
The depletion layer is important because it provides an obvious way that a spatially
localized property of a protein under easy genetic control (e.g., the charge on a particular
residue of a protein) can dominate conduction through the pore. Changes in the size of the
depletion layer can easily modulate or gate the conductance of a channel in a protein just as
they modulate and gate the conductance of a channel in a Field Effect Transistor (which
obeys quite similar equations). Indeed, in transistors, which are three terminal devices,
variations in the depletion layer allow amplification of currents (i.e., flux coupling). It will
be interesting to see if this mechanism is actually used by mediated transporters, which
may prove to be three terminal devices (Chen & Eisenberg, 1992; Eisenberg, 1996a).
Perhaps voltage gated channels should be viewed as three terminal devices, with voltage
sensor of traditional electrophysiology (Hille, 1992) being the gate controlling flow
through the channel, the gating charge of traditional electrophysiology being analogous to
the nonlinear capacitive charge necessary to change the potential on the gate of a field
effect transistor. The steep voltage dependence of voltage dependent channels would then
arise from the transconductance that allows a small movement of (capacitive) charge on
the gate to control a large flow of (ionic) current through the channel.
L-type calcium channels. The AMFE of L-type calcium channels has received a great deal of
attention (e.g., Almers & McCleskey, 1984; Almers, Palade & McCleskey, 1984;
Armstrong & Neyton, 1992; Chen, Bezprozvanny & Tsien, 1996; Dang & McCleskey,
1998; Heinmann et al., 1992; Hess, Lansman & Tsien, 1986; Hess & Tsien, 1984; Lee &
Tsien, 1983; Tsien et al., 1987). Indeed, it is probably not an exaggeration to say that the
properties of these channels have formed the paradigm (Almers & McCleskey, 1984; Hess
& Tsien, 1984; Hille, 1975; Hille, 1992) taught to most students of permeation for nearly
twenty years. Thus, it is important to see whether PNP can account for this data.
The properties of calcium channels are quite complex and so are discussed in detail
elsewhere (Catacuzzeno et al., 1999a; Nonner & Eisenberg, 1998). Blocking has not been
addressed yet with a self-consistent theory, because that requires a time dependent
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

25

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

selfconsistent theory not yet available, although the underlying stochastics have been
examined in cases where the potential profile has been assumed, and not calculated from
an underlying distribution of charge (Barkai, Eisenberg & Schuss, 1996).
When reading the literature of calcium channels, it is important to realize that the
data on the L-type calcium channel (Almers & McCleskey, 1984; Hess & Tsien, 1984) do
not establish the existence of an AMFE in conductance, but rather describe a complex
concentration dependence of current, that might be called a mole fraction effect MFE, to
distinguish it from the AMFE of conductance. The distinction between current and
conductance is not purely semantic; it has been as central to channology since 1952
(Hodgkin & Huxley, 1952) as it has been to the physics of electricity since 1826 when
Ohm introduced the idea (according to p. 90 of Whittaker, 1951).
Conductance is a much more direct measure of the properties (e.g., mobility) of
ions in a channel than is current, since current depends on many other variables besides
mobility, e.g. voltage. It is not surprising then that the MFE of current found in L-type
calcium channels, bathed in mixtures of Ca++ and Na+, is much easier to explain than the
AMFE of conductance found in K+ channels. The MFE of calcium channels (as viewed by
PNP) does not involve a depletion layer but is a consequence of spatially uniform fixed
charge (Nonner & Eisenberg, 1998). Given the importance both logically and historically
of the AMFE in calcium channels, it is surprising that more experiments along the lines of
(Eisenman et al., 1986; Friel & Tsien, 1989), have not been performed measuring the I-V
relations of these channels in a wide range of solutions, seeking conditions in which an
AMFE is present as well as an MFE.
The MFE effect is easily explained in a selfconsistent model of calcium channels.
Nonner & Eisenberg (1998) modifies PNP (into PNP2) by including binding of calcium and
sodium as an excess chemical potential Ca0 , as first suggested by Chen, 1997 . The excess
chemical potential of calcium might arise from dehydration of the ion (from the water of
bulk solution) and resolvation (by the channel protein and channel water) or from effects of
the finite volume of the ions (Bernard & Blum, 1996; Blum, 1975; Blum, 1994; Blum et
al., 1996; Blum & Hoye, 1977; Durand-Vidal et al., 1996; Hoye & Blum, 1978) as

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

26

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

described in the Mean Spherical Approximation (MSA) of physical chemistry. Ca0 is
described in PNP2 by a single number, at all concentrations, at all potentials and in all
solutions as long as the pH does not change. A binding of some 3-4 kT for calcium, and a
repulsion of 2-3 kT for sodium are enough to predict the MFE found in calcium channels
(see Fig. 5 & 6 of Nonner & Eisenberg, 1998). The binding/repulsion is supposed to arise
from the glutamates of the channel and the pH dependence of the channel expresses the
variable ionization (i.e., a fixed charge that changes with pH) resulting from both the pKa
of their carboxyls (in bulk) and the local electrical potential energy. We are currently
trying to show how the excess chemical potential of channels can be explained by excluded
volume effects, using the MSA (Catacuzzeno et al., 1999a; Catacuzzeno, Nonner &
Eisenberg, 1999b).
Another useful approach may be the density functional theory (DFT) of
heterogeneous systems, e.g., channels in membranes in ionic solutions (Henderson, 1992).
Asymptotic analysis (Blum, 1994; Bratko et al., 1991; Henderson et al., 1979) shows that
the high charge density lining channels will have a dramatic simplifying effect on the
theory, as will the nearly one dimensional distribution of charge (van den Brink &
Sawatzky, 1998). Frink & Salinger (1999) has shown that full numerical analysis using
DFT is feasible, at least in the largest computers available today.
Traditional explanations for the MFE. Traditional explanations of the MFE of calcium
channels are examined in the Appendix of Nonner & Eisenberg, 1998. Traditional models
suffer from two significant problems. They ignore friction and they miscalculate the
electric field.
Consider the electric field. Traditional models of the MFE (Almers & McCleskey,
1984; Almers et al., 1984; Armstrong & Neyton, 1992; Heinmann et al., 1992; Hess et al.,
1986; Hess & Tsien, 1984; Lee & Tsien, 1983; Tsien et al., 1987) use ad hoc repulsion
factors to describe the electrostatic interaction of ions and constant field theory to describe
the interactions of ions with the transmembrane potential. Both are clearly incorrect.
The electric field along a channel cannot be constant either in space or in
experiments, as conditions change (Eisenberg, 1998b; Eisenberg, 1996a; Eisenberg, 1996b;
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

27

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Syganow & von Kitzing, 1999). A constant electric field can occur only if the lining of the
channel‘s pore is connected to a source of energy and charge and that is clearly not the
case. Or, to put the same thing another way, the lining of the channel‘s wall is a region of
fixed charge, not a region of maintained potential. However justified by history (Goldman,
1943; Hille, 1992; Hodgkin & Katz, 1949), the constant field approximation must be
replaced because it mistakes the essential property of the electric field in channels, namely
that the electric field varies in experiments and space. The variation of the electric field
contributes importantly to the biological functions of channels and ignoring that variation
makes those functions hard to understand.
Traditional models of the MFE have another difficulty in their treatment of the
electric field. Traditional theories use arbitrary repulsion factors to describe electrostatic
interactions in a way not used by physical scientists for many years. Indeed, the absence of
a permittivity of any form in the repulsion factors of traditional theories shows that
traditional theories ignore electrical interactions altogether. Coulomb‘s law (whether
written as an integral or in the differential form called Poisson‘s equation) has been the
customary formulation used to describe the repulsive (or attractive) forces produced by
electric charge for 173 years (p. 57 of Heilbron, 1979; Whittaker, 1951). Using other
treatments of repulsion implies the existence of forces not described by Coulomb‘s law,
i.e., nonelectrical forces.
Such novel forces may exist, of course; for example, effects of the finite volume of
ions create forces, in effect; but postulating new physical forces is not the first step one
should take in analyzing experiments on channels, at least in my opinion. Few physical
scientists would justify the invocation of new physical forces at all; none would justify the
invocation of a physical force that has no origin and that follows no specific general rule. If
such forces are postulated, it should be at the end of a long line of investigation, and (of
course) the forces should be described in such a way that they can be sought in physical
systems better defined and more easily studied than open ionic channels.
Barrier models deal even worse with friction than they do with electrostatic
repulsion. They ignore friction altogether even though ions move through channels in a
condensed phase containing (almost) no empty space. Nothing can move in a condensed
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

28

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

phase like a channel‘s pore without collision and friction. Friction is an invariable
concomitant of flux in any condensed phase, and friction is particularly important on small
length scales such as in channels (Berg, 1983; Purcell, 1977).
Traditional barrier models do not contain friction, either as a phenomenon or as a
parameter, as was pointed out in this journal some 11 years ago (Cooper, Gates &
Eisenberg, 1988a). I hasten to add that we were certainly neither alone nor the first to
realize the significance of this problem. In the biological literature, see Andersen &
Koeppe, 1992; Barcilon et al., 1993; Chiu & Jakobsson, 1989; Cooper, Jakobsson &
Wolynes, 1985; Cooper et al., 1988a; Cooper, Gates & Eisenberg, 1988b; Crouzy, Woolf
& Roux, 1994; Eisenberg et al., 1995; Läuger, 1991; Roux & Karplus, 1991a). In the
chemical literature, the appropriate form for barrier theory in the presence of friction has
been known for more than 50 years in chemistry as part of the diffusion theory of chemical
reactions (Berne, Borkovec & Straub, 1988; Chandler, 1978; Cho et al., 1993; Coffey,
Kalmykov & Wladron, 1996; Dresden, 1987; Eisenberg et al., 1995; Fleming & Hänggi,
1993; Fleming, Courtney & Balk, 1986; Friedman, 1985; Gardiner, 1985; Haar, 1998;
Han, Lapointe & Lukens, 1993; Hänggi et al., 1990; Hynes, 1985; Hynes, 1986; Kramers,
1940; Laidler & King, 1983; Murthy & Singer, 1987; Nitzan & Schuss, 1993; Pollak,
1993; Pollak, 1996; Risken, 1984; Tyrrell & Harris, 1984).
Barrier Models. It is natural to wonder whether discussion of traditional barrier models is
still necessary. After all, incorrect theories often take a generation to be replaced, but
science eventually moves on. The reason I write at such length is that the stakes here are
large enough to justify the effort, in my opinion. If the tools of physical science are applied
to the molecules of biology, it may be possible to create a biotechnology of channels as
extensive and efficient as semiconductor technology, but one that operates directly on ions
in solution. This technology might allow the manipulation of ions with the complexity and
control by which integrated circuits control electrons; yet it would use substrates (ions in
water) directly relevant life. The medical and economic consequences of such a technology
are obvious.

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

29

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Technology of this sort depends on an underlying theoretical understanding:
integrated circuits would not be possible if the drift diffusion equations (that we call PNP)
were an inaccurate model.
Until the old verbal models of traditional biology are replaced with physical
models, theoretical understanding will be impossible and the technology of channels will
be hard to develop. The great majority of workers continue to use barrier models, despite
eleven years of criticism. So it seems that we must continue to try to inform biologists of
the appropriate form of barrier models which comes from the diffusion theory of chemical
reactions.
Brief History of Diffusion Theory of Chemical Reactions. The theory of chemical reactions as
diffusion of reactants over an energy barrier has been found in textbooks of chemical
kinetic for some time (Berry et al., 1980; Coffey et al., 1996; Eu, 1992; Friedman, 1985;
Gardiner, 1985; Han et al., 1993; Risken, 1984; Schuss, 1980b; Steinfeld, Francisco &
Hase, 1989a; Tyrrell & Harris, 1984; van Kampen, 1981). These theories have several
names. Eyring rate theory, transition state theory, activated complex theory, are names
found in the chemistry literature. I call them barrier theories here following the channology
convention.
The diffusion theory of chemical reactions was introduced, as far as I know, to the
biophysical/channel literature by Kim Cooper, then a graduate student of the biophysicist
Eric Jakobsson and physical chemist Peter Wolynes (Andersen & Koeppe, 1992; Barcilon
et al., 1993; Chiu & Jakobsson, 1989; Cooper et al., 1985; Cooper et al., 1988a; Cooper et
al., 1988b; Crouzy et al., 1994; Eisenberg et al., 1995; Läuger, 1991; Roux & Karplus,
1991a). Wolynes (Skinner & Wolynes, 1978; Wolynes, 1980) had an important role in
popularizing and extending Kramers‘ approach to chemical reactions.
Diffusion theory of chemical reactions was more or less started by Kramers
(Coffey et al., 1996; Dresden, 1987; Haar, 1998; Kramers, 1940; Laidler & King, 1983).
Since then, the diffusion theory of chemical reactions has been one of the pillars of
physical and theoretical chemistry. In the last 58 years, some 700 papers have re-derived,

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

30

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

extended, simulated, and experimentally tested Kramers‘ original description of chemical
reactions (Fleming & Hänggi, 1993; Hänggi et al., 1990).
There is no controversy in the chemical literature about Kramers‘ work. Exactly the
same results are found throughout the literature of experiments, theory, and simulation,
whether the authors come from the Kramers‘ tradition of diffusion theory (e.g., Fleming &
Hänggi, 1993; Hänggi et al., 1990) or from the Eyring tradition of equilibrium statistical
mechanics (e.g., Berne et al., 1988; Chandler, 1978; Hynes, 1985; Hynes, 1986; Johnson,
Eyring & Stover, 1974; Laidler & King, 1983; Levine & Bernstein, 1987; Pechukas, 1976;
Robinson & Holbrook, 1972; Steinfeld, Francisco & Hase, 1989b). These traditions have
in fact been united in an elegant and rigorous manner by Schuss, Pollak and co-workers
(Pollak, 1993; Pollak, 1996; Pollak, Berezhkovskii & Schuss, 1994). The difficulties about
recrossings that concerned Frauenfelder and his colleagues (Fleming & Wolynes, 1990;
Frauenfelder, Sligar & Wolynes, 1991; Frauenfelder & Wolynes, 1985)—following
Eyring, (e.g., Wynne-Jones & Eyring, 1935)—have been resolved now that the
transmission factor has been evaluated by purely mathematical means (Klosek, Matkowsky
& Schuss, 1991; Pollak et al., 1994; Schuss, 1980a; Schuss, ) in the case relevant for us
(high friction). Chemical reactions in one dimension (i.e., diffusion over a one dimensional
barrier) can be considered a closed subject when friction is simple enough to be
characterized by a single number, the diffusion coefficient. Applications of chemical
kinetics to channels are made easier by the recent finding of simple analytical expressions
for the flux over potential barriers of any shape or height (Eisenberg et al., 1995).
The description of chemical reactions in high dimensional phase space, when
friction is complex, is certainly not a closed subject (see, for example, Berne et al., 1988;
Eu, 1992; Fleming & Hänggi, 1993; Hynes, 1985; Hynes, 1986; Keizer, 1987). Indeed,
quite refined diffusion theories cannot capture the realistic detail typical of even a simple
chemical reaction, hydration of Na+ (Rey & Hynes, 1996). Fortunately, permeation
through channels is likely to be described well by a one dimensional model with simple
friction, because channels are so narrow, and the biological time scale is so slow. Recent
experimental work shows that a one dimensional theory with simple friction is surprisingly
able to describe many aspects of permeation and selectivity (Chen et al., 1998a; Chen et
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

31

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

al., 1998b; Chen et al., 1997a; Chen et al., 1997b; Chen et al., 1995; Nonner et al., 1998;
Tang et al., 1997). It may turn out that channel permeation is better described as a chemical
reaction than most functions of enzymes (Eisenberg, 1990) because the reaction coordinate
of enzymes occurs in a high dimensional phase space, and thus can be tortuous or even illdefined, whereas the reaction coordinate of ion movement in a channel is simply a line
(Elber et al., 1995).
If ions moving through a channel cross a large barrier, the Kramers expression can
easily be used. It is barely more complicated or difficult than the traditional expression of
channology. Indeed, the more general expression for ionic motion over a barrier of
arbitrary shape (not just the high barrier of Kramers theory) is quite simple (eq. (5) above)
and can be computed almost as easily as the Kramers expression using Gaussian
quadrature formulas. There seems to be no justification for using the traditional barrier
expression (6); it offers no significant simplification and the errors involved are enormous,
a factor of some 20,000 (Chen et al., 1997a; Cooper et al., 1988a)
How could such a wrong theory continue to be used? It might seem strange that a barrier
theory with such a large error would survive. How could a theory in error by a factor of
some 20,000 fit the data at all? The logical answer is clear. The error produced by ignoring
friction was more or less compensated by the error in assuming, instead of computing the
electric field. Together both errors allowed the prediction of a current of the right order of
magnitude. In my opinion, barrier theory continues to be used other reasons, more
sociological and psychological, than logical. It is difficult for biologists to change
paradigms, when they do not understand the physics underlying the original paradigm or
its replacement.
On a more practical level, it is difficult to replace the traditional barrier expression
with the Kramers expression because barrier models do not come close to fitting
experimental data once the Kramers‘ expression is used. Currents in that case can hardly
exceed 0.1 pA (see Appendix of Nonner & Eisenberg, 1998). Few channels have been
found that conduct this little current (although many may exist) because such small
currents are hard to measure in the background instrumentation noise of patch clamp
amplifiers that we use today (Levis & Rae, 1992; Levis & Rae, 1995; Rae & Levis, 1992).
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

32

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Thus, the experimentalist has faced a dilemma. He (or she) cannot use the correct version
of barrier theory to analyze data because it does not fit. Until a theory that fit the data was
available, he could either use an incorrect theory, or abandon quantitative analysis
altogether, adopting verbal models of permeation.
Verbal Models in Molecular Biology. While to physical scientists, verbal models (e.g., of
molecules) are superficial popularizations not worthy of professional attention or
discussion, verbal models of molecules are used widely in channels and proteins, nearly to
the exclusion of quantitative treatments. Sadly, there are distinguished papers, of great
quality and importance (e.g., see Doyle et al., 1998) that include such discussions at length.
The wide spread use of verbal models in molecular biology and channology forces me to
discuss them explicitly here, hoping to discourage their future use, although I am fully
aware that physical scientists will be bored by the following words, while molecular
biologists will offended, hearing the words as invective, rather than as the analysis that
they are intended to be.
Molecular biologists prefer verbal models because most biologists are untrained in
applied mathematics and so are unable to deal with quantitative models. This is hardly
surprising. The magnificent success of molecular techniques requires much training and
hard work and it is rare that any one person can fulfill the demands of molecular biology at
all, let alone with time to spare to study physical sciences and applied mathematics. The
study of those quantitative sciences takes time and training (and aptitude) just as does the
study of molecular biology. And the effort involved in the study of mathematical and
physical science is considerable, particularly given their long history and large literature.
But as difficult as the quantitative sciences may be, they must be used if ionic
channels or proteins are to be understood, even qualitatively. Structure is a set of numbers
specifying the density of electrons (when determined by x-ray crystallography) and is
measured in units of centimeters. Permeation is a set of numbers specifying how current
varies with potential and concentration. Permeation is measured in units of amps. Words
cannot measure densities nor can they compute currents. Numbers and equations are
needed for that. Words are simply unable to describe channel structures and permeation

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

33

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

with sufficient objectivity and precision to allow unique predictions or scientific testing of
alternative models.
The Necessity of Numbers. Numbers are needed to understand qualitative properties as well
as quantitative properties of channels. If a property (e.g., the current through a channel) is
determined by two effects, by the difference of two terms, or the ratio of two factors, then
qualitative understanding of the two effects is not enough. The effects may act in opposite
directions, and each effect is likely to change in response to some experimental
manipulation. The qualitative properties of the system, and the nature of its response to the
experimental intervention, is determined by the relative size of the effects. For this reason,
predicting the qualitative function of open channels requires a quantitative theory. Words
cannot evaluate the size of effects. Numbers evaluate the size of effects.
Barrier models illustrate these generalities and they show how easily verbal models
can be distorted so they more or less have to fit data. The barrier model of Hille (Hille,
1992; Hille & Schwartz, 1978) has often been modified in an arbitrary way by other
workers. Instead of using kT/h as a prefactor, as does Hille, the prefactor is often chosen
arbitrarily to fit the data.
The sad reality is that most many molecular biologists believe it is acceptable to
‗scale‘ a theory, without realizing the absurdity of this view. What is special about
multiplication by a constant? Why not allow arbitrary addition, or exponentiation, or use of
some other function?
Obviously, traditional barrier models can fit experimental data taken in one
solution if the prefactor is chosen arbitrarily.
If one wishes simply to fit equations to data, scaling or almost any other
mathematical manipulation is fine, as long as it fits the data and provides a unique result.
But uniqueness is a real issue when arbitrary prefactors are used. Choosing different
conditions to determine the prefactor would produce different estimates of barrier height
and thus different physical conclusions. What is surprising is that barrier models rarely can
fit the current measured over a wide range of potentials and concentrations even if used with
an arbitrary prefactor (that is held constant over the range of potentials and concentrations).
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

34

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Physical theories cannot be fiddled. This misapplication of barrier models is a symptom of
a general problem. Barrier models are physical theories, with parameters and functions that
are supposed to mean something. They are not supposed to represent the arbitrary fits of
functions, nor are they used that way. Barrier models are widely used precisely for the
purpose of linking physical properties of molecules (e.g., their structure) with experimental
measurements of current. They therefore cannot be arbitrarily manipulated or fiddled.
Unless we are vitalists, physical theories must be used as given us by physical
scientists, who have gone to no small effort to derive and test them. We cannot take
physical theories and multiply them by constants (or add constants or change them in any
arbitrary way). We can of course behave as physical scientists and make up new theories or
approximations, appropriate for our systems, but then they must be derived, simulated, and
tested with the discipline of physical science, in papers refereed and published in the
journals of those sciences.
Barrier models of channels and biochemical kinetics have certainly not been tested
in this way, by derivation, simulation, or independent experimental check. Indeed, one
characteristic of the literature on ‗Eyring‘ models of enzymes, and barrier models of
channels, is the nearly complete lack of references to the physical literature, certainly of
the last 30 years, despite the enormous amount of work in this field, well over 700 papers
(Fleming & Hänggi, 1993; Hänggi et al., 1990). What has happened is simply a bad turn in
the history of science, caused (in my personal view) by the enormous financial and
professional pressures for productivity that have led to an oversight, an ignoring of the
relevant physical literature by molecular biologists.
It seems clear that traditional barrier models of permeation must be replaced. How
to do that is of course another question altogether.
Towards the future. The obvious candidate to replace verbal models is molecular dynamics,
the direct computation of the motion of the atoms of channels.
The difficulties with molecular dynamics have been discussed before by me
(Eisenberg, 1996a; Eisenberg, 1996b) following many others (Allen & Tildesley, 1987;
Frenkel & Smit, 1996; Gaspard, 1998; Ott, 1997; Ott, Sauer & Yorke, 1994; Rapoport,
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

35

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

1997), but they too need reiteration because the evident visual appeal of molecular cinema
in atomic detail tends to overwhelm one‘s critical faculties; certainly mine.
The fundamental difficulties of molecular dynamics are:
1) Present calculations are restricted to equilibrium. Thus, current cannot be predicted:
attempts to predict a current that has already been assumed to be zero are not selfconsistent, not unique, and frankly don‘t make sense. Much work is going on to
remove these restrictions, in systems without electric charge (Heffelfinger & Swol,
1994; MacElroy, 1994), and no doubt that work will eventually succeed, but as of now,
no one has published simulations of the dynamics of systems involving charged
particles away from equilibrium.
2) Present calculations of the molecular dynamics of proteins rarely include ions in the
surrounding solution. Since the properties of both proteins and channels are known
experimentally to depend on the presence, concentration, and type of ion in the bath,
simulations that do not contain ions there pose certain difficulties. Proteins need ions,
and so simulations of proteins need them, too, particularly the simulations of protein
folding and drug binding that are performed so often because of their evident
importance.
Simulations have not included ions because the systems simulated have been too small
to define a definite concentration (with reasonable fluctuations) and because no one has
known how to calculate the electric field when concentrations of ions are present. I
believe systems must be large enough to define a concentration; and ions must be
treated realistically enough to reproduce the relevant experimental properties of bulk
solutions (i.e., the activity and conductivity actually measured in those solutions).
Otherwise the simulations cannot hope to deal with a real biological system embedded
in such solutions. Real biological systems are known experimentally to depend
sensitively on the properties of the solution and so the solution must be included
realistically in simulations of biological systems.
3) Simulations must extend long enough in time to calculate phenomena of biological
interest. If the phenomena take seconds, it seems likely that the simulation must extend
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

36

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

to seconds. If the simulation does not extend this long, the simulation must be extended
artificially, either by argument or theory, and then has lost most of the advantages
claimed for molecular dynamics. If the phenomena is found to occur more quickly in
simulations than in life, the simulation is giving results different from the experiment,
and it is unlikely to be useful.
4) Simulations must correctly sample the system being modeled. Since only a tiny subset
of possible trajectories are computed, one must be sure that this subset represents the
trajectories that are biologically and experimentally relevant. One must be sure the
trajectories do not fall into one isolated domain, near one local minimum, which
happens not to produce the biological behavior of interest.
The importance of this problem must be emphasized. The equations of molecular
dynamics exhibit all the symptoms of chaotic mechanical systems. It is easy to verify
that after a few picoseconds trajectories diverge exponentially and are exponentially
sensitive to the choice of initial conditions. It is not true that the average properties of
trajectories of chaotic systems reproduce the thermodynamic properties observed from
such systems, because it is common to find that trajectories computed from chaotic
systems are trapped in particular unrepresentative regions of phase space. Trajectories
computed in such systems rarely sample the same space that real trajectories sample.
Thus, the simulations of molecular dynamics are likely to miss many of the domains of
biological interest.
Difficulties of this sort are, of course, not unique to biological systems and they are
the main reasons that theories of lower resolution than molecular dynamics are so widely
used in the physical sciences. Indeed, the great tradition of physics is to construct the
theory of minimal complexity that accounts for the detail of experimental results, using as
much atomic resolution as necessary, but not more. The work of John Bardeen (see April,
1992, issue of Physics Today, viz, Vol. 45(4), 1-136) illustrates this approach, and it is the
approach adopted in PNP.
The problem is, of course, how to construct such a lower resolution theory and how
to use it. One such theory, the (nonlinear) Poisson-Boltzmann (PBn) theory of proteins has

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

37

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

had much success (Davis & McCammon, 1990; Forsten et al., 1994; Honig & Nichols,
1995) and has recently been extended to channels (Weetman, Goldman & Gray, 1997).
The difficulty here is that channels do little at equilibrium, and thus calculations confined
to equilibrium can not show what channels do. These ideas have been said before in an
abstract way (e.g., Eisenberg, 1998b; Eisenberg, 1996b) but it seems that an argument by
example is needed as well.
Of course, close enough to equilibrium, a conductance can be determined (in terms
of the structure of the channel and physical parameters) from a quasi-equilibrium theory. If
the reversal potential of the linear I-V characteristic can also be determined by the theory
(in terms of the structure of the channel and physical parameters), then the quasiequilibrium description is complete and fully satisfactory, for our purposes. As long as the
conductance and reversal potentials are enough to describe the channel (over a range of
concentrations and potentials); the near equilibrium is useful. Most open channel I-V
curves are not that linear, however, and expressions for the reversal potential, and its
variation with concentrations are not easily derived from quasi-equilibrium theories. In my
opinion, near equilibrium descriptions are rarely useful, and never (to the best of my
knowledge) over a reasonable range of experimental conditions, including asymmetrical
solutions, with unequal concentrations of permeating ions on the sides of the channel.
Why equilibrium calculations cannot predict or approximate flux. Calculations at equilibrium
using (for example) PBn predict a potential profile through the channel and the
accompanying profile of concentration (i.e., the probability of location of ions). These
calculations have to be done under conditions of equilibrium, i.e., with bath concentrations
and transmembrane potentials that produce zero flux of each ionic species, because PBn
assumes equilibrium. If nonequilibrium conditions are substituted into the PBn equations,
e.g., unequal concentrations with zero transmembrane potential, the equations cannot be
solved, because flux must occur and be described by a nonzero number, but the theory
assumes flux is zero. Indeed, no variable describing flux appears in the equations. If a
computer program implementing PBn appears to give a result when run under
nonequilibrium conditions, it must be incorrectly programmed, or it must not have
converged.
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

38

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

The physical reason for these difficulties is that the potential and concentration
profiles within the channel change when bath concentrations and/or transmembrane
potentials are moved from their equilibrium values and produce current flow. The profiles
have to be different, of course; otherwise, why would the current flow?
Specifically, imagine a perfectly selective Na+ channel with 100 mM NaCl on one
(left or in)side and 10 mM NaCl on the other (right or out)side. When the electrical
potential is the Nernst potential, here around –60 mV, there will be no current flow, and
PBn can be used to compute the potential profile   x  .
However, if the concentration of NaCl on the left side is changed to any other
value, say for example 10 mM NaCl, and the electrical potential is not changed, i.e., it
remains at –60 mV, the potential profile   x  clearly must change (because the average
contents of the channel must change, i.e., shielding changes, and this must change the
potential profile   x  ). PBn cannot calculate this new potential profile, because PBn
assumes equilibrium, i.e., no flux of any species. Indeed, it does not contain a variable for
flux. Thus, it must predict zero flux even when the boundary conditions guarantee that flux
must flow.
This is the essential point and this is what we mean when we say that PBn or other
equilibrium theories or simulations cannot be used to predict I-V curves.
The question then arises whether an equilibrium calculation might approximate the
current that flows in nonequilibrium situations. It is easy to see that this cannot be so in the
great majority of cases, although in special cases it might be possible (Dieckmann et al.,
1999). Consider what would happen if in the previous example, the concentration of ions
on both sides of the channel are raised but the channel is kept at equilibrium. For example,
imagine the Na+ channel with 200 mM NaCl on one (left or in)side and 20 mM NaCl on
the other (right or out)side, still with a transmembrane potential of –60 mV. It is obvious
that the concentration of ions at the ends of the channel will be quite different from that
present when the channel is surrounded by 100 mM NaCl and 10 mM NaCl (at the same
transmembrane potential). It is obvious that if a nonequilibrium situation were used with

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

39

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

say 200 mM NaCl on the left or inside, then the concentration of Na+ inside the channel on
that side would be more or less what it is in the equilibrium case with 200 mM NaCl on the
same side. So we can use the effect of concentration on equilibrium properties to (crudely)
estimate its effect on nonequilibrium properties. In this way, it is clear that changing the
concentration can have a large effect on the concentration at the end of channels and thus
on their properties. Part of the reason is because of the Ohm‘s law effect (i.e., the current
flow is accompanied by a separation of charge and thus a change in potential); but part is
also simply because the concentrations of ions in nonequilibrium situations that produce
flux are different from the concentrations present in equilibrium situations that do not
produce flux.
Another way to see this is to consider two cases of the same channel (i.e., perfectly
selective) with equal concentrations of salt on both sides, but different electrical potentials.
For example, compare 100 mM NaCl || 100 mM NaCl and 0 mV membrane
potential and 100 mM NaCl || 100 mM NaCl and 100 mV membrane potential
PBn can predict the potential profile   x  in the first place. Clearly PBn cannot
predict the potential profile   x  ) in the second place. Can PBn approximate the effect of
the potential change? The size of the effect can be estimated by simply looking at the
change in membrane potential. The membrane potential in the channel near the bath will
change more or less as much as the bath potential changes. Thus, one would expect even a
10 mV change in transmembrane potential to have a large nonlinear effect on the potential
profile   x  , because 10 mV is a substantial fraction of kT/e which is some 25 mV at
room temperature. And calculations with PNP indeed show such a substantial effect.
Another way to estimate the size of the effect is to use Ohm‘s law, and determine how
much change in potential accompanies the currents that are measured experimentally.
Again the potential changes within the channel are nearly always a substantial fraction of
kT/e and so have substantial nonlinear effects.
The crucial point is that the potential profile   x  is not just a function of the
channel at hand (i.e., its structure and fixed charge, etc) but also a function of the average
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

40

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

concentration of ions in the baths, in the channel‘s pore, and of the transmembrane
potential.
How could it not be? If the potential profile were not a significant function of bath
concentration and transmembrane potential, the free energy for moving an ion through a
channel would be independent of the average concentration of ions in the baths, in the
channel's pore, and of the transmembrane potential.
These variables—average concentration of ions in the baths, in the channel's pore,
and the transmembrane potential—are substantially different in equilibrium and
nonequilibrium situations. Thus, equilibrium calculations do not approximate the
nonequilibrium situation in which channels function. Or to put it baldly, Ohm‘s law and
Fick‘s law (or their equivalent) are needed to describe open ionic channels and those laws
do not appear in, nor can they be derived from equilibrium calculations.
Appropriate Models Now and in the Future. The natural question then arises, what
nonequilibrium models should be used to describe ion permeation? What can be used,
given that direct simulation by molecular dynamics seems impractical?
One possibility is the PNP theory presented here, but that theory has its limitations.
As presented, PNP represents the one dimensional average of a full three dimensional
theory. The equations of one dimensional PNP were not just written down, but rather were
derived by a professional mathematician (Barcilon, 1992) in three distinct ways, two
independent perturbation methods and one matched asymptotic expansion. All three
methods were carefully checked in the refereeing process and all give the same result. The
one dimensional equations can also be derived by direct spatial averaging (Chen et al.,
1992). Thus, the one dimensional equations of PNP have been more strictly derived than
most models of chemical kinetics (loc. cit.) in which one dimensional reaction paths are
more or less written down (without derivation, and certainly without estimation of error
terms) as approximations to behavior in a high dimensional phase space, (Chandrasekhar,
1943).
When the structure of a channel protein is not known, the one dimensional theory
seems the appropriate model, at this level of resolution, and it has done reasonably well, so
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

41

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

far (Chen et al., 1998a; Chen et al., 1999; Chen et al., 1997b; Chen et al., 1995; Nonner et
al., 1998; Nonner & Eisenberg, 1998; Tang et al., 1997). But when the three dimensional
structure is known, clearly one should use it, and that requires a three dimensional theory,
even if the one dimensional theory is its well defined spatial average.
Fortunately, three dimensional versions of PNP are becoming available. As I write,
two groups are computing them, using independent but related numerical methods:
Kurnikova et al. 1999, has completed a lattice calculation of gramicidin and shown
qualitative agreement with the measured properties of gramicidin. Hollerbach et al., 1999,
accurately predict the I-V relations of gramicidin directly from the structure, using an
independently determined estimate of the diffusion coefficient of Na+ in the channel. It is
clear even from this early work that the three dimensional calculations are feasible and that
they give results similar to the one dimensional average. But differences will no doubt
emerge as the calculations are pursued, compared, and checked in a range of conditions
and channels.
The PNP model suffers from at least three difficulties, even in three dimensions
(Eisenberg, 1998a; Eisenberg, 1998b; Eisenberg, 1996b; Horn, 1998): it lacks chemistry
and single filing, it lacks spatial resolution, and it does not deal with protein conformation
changes thought to underlie gating.
Specific chemical interactions clearly occur in binding sites of proteins and it never
occurred to me, or anyone else I know, that similar effects would be absent in channels:
enzymes and channels are both proteins created by the same evolutionary process and
subject to the same laws. It is a tautology (but also an oxymoron) to describe channels as
enzymes (Eisenberg, 1990).
Classical models of channels are based on the idea that specific binding, essentially
analogous to that found in enzymes, is the direct determinant of permeation: ―more bound
is more permeant.‖ Specific binding of this type is not naturally described by an
electrostatic mean field theory although (in the absence of covalent bond changes) the
underlying forces are clearly electrostatic and can be described by Coulomb‘s law used in
atomic detail (Feynman, 1939; Mehra, 1994, p. 71-79).

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

42

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

When binding is described in the simplest possible way (Chen, 1997), and
combined with PNP, we (Nonner et al., 1998; Nonner & Eisenberg, 1998) were amazed to
find complex behavior that cannot be at all described as ‗more bound, more permeant‘. (I
hasten to add that in all these calculations mobility and diffusivity are kept constant
(Nonner et al., 1998; Nonner & Eisenberg, 1998), have found that the bound ions produce
such an enormous local potential that no ions of the same sign can move. Ions of the
opposite sign (the unbound ions!) determine the reversal potential. Of course, this was a
particular calculation and not a general analysis. Nonetheless, it is clear that the
combination of binding and electrostatics will give results very different from those
previously assumed.
Predicting function from structure. This same approach, PNP plus binding, can be used to
predict the properties of channels in general. In particular, it can be used to predict the
properties of the McK channel from Streptomyces lividans whose structure has recently
been reported (Doyle et al., 1998): see structure 1BL8 of the Protein Data Bank at
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton NY 11973-5000 (web site http://pdb.pdb.bnl.gov).
Catacuzzeno, Nonner, Blum, and I (Catacuzzeno et al., 1999b) are building a PNP model
from this structure, and it is already apparent that a wide range of the properties of K+
channels are easily and naturally predicted in this way. For example, a one dimensional
representation of the charge distribution gives a surprisingly good prediction of the I-V
relations of K+ channels, including the AMFE, if it is used with binding sites described by
the MSA and Nonner‘s mean field flow model of single filing: the non-independent flux
ratio arises naturally as do the quite complex and highly voltage dependent I-V relations,
found in single channels in mixed divalent/monovalent solutions.
Structural basis of selectivity, gating and modulation. The structure of the McK channel is
striking because it contains three elements, which seem likely to produce three of the more
complex permeation properties of channels, namely, selectivity, gating and modulation.
The narrow pore on the extracellular side of the protein seems ideally suited to
provide selectivity between ions, and our preliminary analysis (Catacuzzeno et al., 1999b)
suggests that the MSA can account for the selectivity observed in other K+ channels (see p.
1301 of Nonner & Eisenberg, 1998). Although the parameters of the MSA appropriate for
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

43

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

the channel environment are not known directly, and must be adjusted to fit selectivity
data, it seems clear that a treatment based on an MSA with fitted parameters is preferable to
the alternative of biologists trying to create their own theory of selectivity independent of
the work of physical chemists in bulk solution and has already been reasonably successful,
as previously described (Catacuzzeno et al., 1999b).
The narrow pore of the McK channel empties into a roughly spherical central
cavity which then joins another pore, on the cytoplasmic side of the channel. This in-pore,
as I like to call it, is formed by nonpolar amino acids. The nonpolar lining of the in-pore
was not expected: most workers have thought all pores would be lined with polar
hydrophilic amino acids.
Non-polar pores as modulation sites. I suggested (at the Liblice Statistical Mechanics
Conference, August, 1998: Nonner & Eisenberg, 1999) that nonpolar pores are likely to be
the main sites of channel modulation. A nonpolar pore is a structure that seems designed to
allow modulation of open channel current by nearby charges.
Electric charges near a nonpolar pore produce large changes in the potential profile
inside a nonpolar pore. The nonpolar lining has low fixed charge and a low dielectric
constant and thus provides little dielectric shielding and little permanent charge to swamp
the effect of charged structures outside the pore. Anything that changes the charge
distribution outside the nonpolar pore changes the potential profile inside it, thereby
changing current. For example, binding of charged or polar molecules to nearby proteins
would modulate current flow this way.
A polar lined pore is totally different: the fixed charge is large—as is the dielectric
constant—and so charges outside the polar pore are both shielded and swamped, thus
having little effect on the potential or permeation in the pore lumen. In contrast to nonpolar
pores, the potential profile in polar pores is quite independent of nearby charges.
Interestingly, nonpolar pores are less likely to be well described by mean field
theories. The fixed charge which helps the mean field dominate in polar pores (Blum,
1994; Bratko et al., 1991; Henderson et al., 1979) is hardly present. For those reasons,

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

44

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

single file phenomena (etc.) are more likely to be important in the in-pore than in the
selectivity filter of the McK channel, in my opinion.

-helices as gating particles. We have speculated (Nonner & Eisenberg, 1999) that the 
helices of the McK channel might form the structural basis of the gating particles proposed
for sometime (Hodgkin & Huxley, 1952) even though voltage dependent gating does not
occur in this particular K+ channel. These  helices seem ideally placed to be push rods,
that move slightly in response to the electric potential difference between the two ends of
the channel (i.e., the transmembrane potential) while being reasonably independent of the
local electrical potential inside the cavity or pore itself. Thus, these  helices seem to have
the properties long expected of the ‗delayed rectifier‘ (Cole, 1947; Hodgkin et al., 1949;
Hodgkin & Huxley, 1952), the voltage dependent system that opens and controls many K+
channels. We imagine that this rectification is suppressed in the McK channel phenotype
because of special properties of this particular channel that will not be found in classical
voltage gated K+ channels.
Simulations with electrostatics and atomic resolution. So far, the only theory able to fit a
wide range of I-V curves is one dimensional PNP, a mean field theory without atomic
resolutions (Note that the three dimensional version of PNP (Hollerbach et al., 1999;
Kurnikova et al., 1999) has atomic resolution in space, but not time, and so does not deal
correctly with single filing). It also remains a mean field theory that does not describe ions
as spheres, even though it is solved in three dimensions. Everyone would prefer a theory of
permeation with atomic resolution and single filing. The attraction, even seduction of
atomic structures is felt by me, just as much as everyone else. As discussed previously,
direct simulations of motion are not possible because of inherent limitations in present day
methods of molecular dynamics. But perhaps one could simulate with lower time
resolution, preserving atomic spatial resolution, while computing the electric field from the
charges present
One way to do this is to represent atomic motion the way Einstein and
Smoluchowski did, as Brownian motion, using Langevin equations. I shall not cite the
extensive literature of this field, but just point out that apparently no one in the chemical

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

45

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

literature has done simulations of Langevin motion in which the charged atoms create their
own electric field (Coffey et al., 1996). That is to say, all the Langevin simulations of ionic
solutions that I know about; e.g., (Canales & Sese, 1998) calculate the motion of atoms in
a predefined profile of potential, and do not calculate the profile from the charges of the
system. Self-consistent Langevin calculations have been done in the semiconductor
literature (Arokianathan, Asenov & Davies, 1996), and have been shown to give useful and
reliable results (Arokianathan, Asenov & Davies, 1998a; Arokianathan, Asenov & Davies,
1998b). It seems to me that such calculations are clearly needed to understand the atomic
basis of permeation. A number of groups are working on this problem and results seem
possible.
These self-consistent Langevin calculations promise to deal with the greatest
surprise of PNP, the lack of clear sign of single file phenomena. Measurements of
unidirectional flux through K+ channels clearly show behavior different from that of the
PNP theory. Chen & Eisenberg, 1993, discuss this issue at length, provide an introductory
definition and analysis of unidirectional fluxes (see their Appendix) and provide extensive
literature references. Measurements of unidirectional flux are made in ensembles of
channels on time scales some 1011 – 1018 slower than the atomic collisions that produce
single filing, i.e., in 10-100 seconds, compared to 10-16 –10-12 seconds, and so allow plenty
of time for complex unexpectedly correlated three dimensional trajectories, in which tracer
ions might interchange positions and fluxes might behave in unexpected ways.
Nonetheless, I certainly agree with the common wisdom that the ratios of fluxes observed
are prima facie evidence for single filing. Nonner has in fact created a mean field flow
model of single filing so it can be included self-consistently in PNP2.
Finally, it may be possible to do self-consistent molecular dynamics incorporating
the electric field directly, using the methods of computational electronics (e.g.,
DAMOCLES, ; Hess, 1991; Hess et al., 1991; Kersch & Morokoff, 1995; Lundstrom,
1992; Reggiani, 1985; Venturi et al., 1989). While semiconductors are certainly not ionic
solutions, or ionic channels, their holes and electrons are quasi-particles that move
according to laws similar to those governing electrons (Assad & Lundstrom, 1998), on
similar time scales, posing (if anything) more complex computational challenges (because
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

46

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

the quasi-particles have finite lifetime, experience much more complex friction, and follow
ballistic trajectories whose duration must be computed literally on the fly). The physics of
ions in water is very different from the physics of quasi-particles in semiconductors, but
the mathematical descriptions are quite similar, because the mathematics is an expression
of conservation laws, more than anything else. Thus, the computational procedures of
semiconductor physics should certainly be useful tools for studying ions and channels.
Simulations of the motion of holes and electrons are in many ways more advanced
than those of ions; e.g., simulations of holes and electrons are always done away from
equilibrium, in the presence of substantial fluxes, and they always include macroscopic
electric fields resulting from bias potentials more than analogous to the transmembrane ‘
potentials of channels. (Otherwise, the simulations could not be used to design real
transistors, which require bias potentials to function usefully.) Physicists familiar with
these methods might find them revealing if applied to systems of ions and channels
(Eisenberg, 1998a).
Gating and Conformation Change. PNP is a theory of the stationary properties of open
channels, and as such is not concerned with gating or conformation change. Nonetheless,
gating and conformation change are important determinants of channel function and it is
natural to wonder how they can be treated in a self-consistent theory. The criticisms of
barrier models of permeation do not directly apply to barrier models of gating, of course.
There, it is clear that high barriers exist, because many, if not most gating processes follow
exponential time courses at a given transmembrane potential (Magleby & Pallotta, 1983a;
Magleby & Pallotta, 1983b). Nonetheless, one must wonder what prefactor is actually used
in theories of activation that apply at a range membrane potentials (Schoppa & Sigworth,
1998; Zagotta, Hoshi & Aldrich, 1994). One must wonder whether the distressingly large
number of states in those models reflects the complexities of the gating process or the
inadequacy of the models and basis functions (exponentials) being used to describe it.
Recently, Sigg, Hong, and Bezanilla (1999) have described gating current as the
result of the electrodiffusion of a gating particle over an assumed potential landscape,
much as we once treated electrodiffusion of permeating ions moving over a potential
landscape in the channel‘s pore (Barcilon et al., 1993; Cooper et al., 1988a; Cooper et al.,
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

47

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

1988b; Eisenberg et al., 1995). If Sigg et al., computed their potential profile from an
assumed distribution of fixed charge, the motion of their gating particle would be
described self-consistently, as we try to describe the motion of permeating ions in PNP. Of
course, until a self-consistent theory of gating current is actually constructed, it cannot be
clear that such a theory would work. Conceivably, it could fail to fit data reasonably well
described already by Sigg et al., .
The theories of gating just described are rather abstract, because the mechanism(s)
of gating are not known; indeed, the structures involved are not known. One should point
out, however, that there are some clues to the physical basis of the gating transitions that
produce rectangular single channel currents. (Other forms of gating are likely to come from
different structures and have a different physical basis, e.g. some surely arise from
conformational changes and steric effects.) Rectangular currents are known to arise when
ions jump onto binding sites in insulating regions of field effect transistors (Kirton & Uren,
1989) and similar currents occur in ‗Coulomb blockade‘ (Grabert & Devoret, 1992). If a
tiny (0.1%) time independent conformation change is put into a time dependent version of
the PNP equations, currents are computed that turn on and off as channel currents do
(Gardner, Jerome & Eisenberg, 1998). It will be interesting to see whether any of these
physical analogies form a useful model of the opening and closing of single channels.

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

48

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Acknowledgement
Duan Chen and I have been exploring open channels now for many years. It has
been a joy to share the journey with him. Many gifted collaborators and friends have
helped us find the way: Victor Barcilon, John Tang, Kim Cooper, Mark Ratner, Ron Elber,
Zeev Schuss, Joe Jerome, Chi-Wing Shu, Steve Traynelis, Eli Barkai, Jurg Rosenbusch,
Tilman Schirmer, Raimund Dutzler, Jim Lear, Le Xu, Ashutosh Tripathy, Gerhard
Meissner, Carl Gardner, Wolfgang Nonner, Dirk Gillespie, Uwe Hollerbach, and Lesser
Blum, have been particularly important contributors (listed more or less in chronological
order). I am most grateful for their interest and contributions.
The work was made possible by the steadfast and generous support of the NSF and
DARPA (grant N65236-98-1-5409).

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

49

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

REFERENCES
Allen, M.P., Tildesley, D.J. 1987. Computer Simulation of Liquids. Oxford, New
York
Almers, W., McCleskey, E.W. 1984. J.Physiol. 353:585-608
Almers, W., Palade, P.T., McCleskey, E.W. 1984. J. Physiol. 353:565-583
Andersen, O.S., Koeppe, R.E. 1992. Physiological Reviews 72:S89-S157.
Anderson, H.L., Wood, R.H. 1973. In: Water. F. Franks, editor. Plenum Press, New
York
Aristotle. 1961. Parts of Animals; Movement of Animals; Progression of Animals.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA
Armstrong, C.M., Neyton, J. 1992. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 635:18-25
Arokianathan, C.R., Asenov, A., Davies, J.H. 1996. J Appl Phys 80:226-232
Arokianathan, C.R., Asenov, A., Davies, J.H. 1998a. Semicond. Sci. Technol.
13:A173-A176
Arokianathan, C.R., Asenov, A., Davies, J.H. 1998b. VLSI Design 6:243-246
Assad, F., Banoo, Kausar, Lundstrom, M. 1998. Solid State Electronics 42:283-295
Bank, R.E., Burgler, J., Coughran, W.M., Jr., W. Fichtner, Smith, R.K.
1990.International Series of Numerical Mathematics 93:125-140
Bank, R.E., Rose, D.J., Fichtner, W. 1983. Numerical Methods for Semiconductor
Device Simulation. IEEE Trans. on Electron Devices ED-30:1031-1041
Barcilon, V. 1992. SIAM J. Applied Math 52:1391-1404
Barcilon, V., Chen, D., Eisenberg, R., Ratner, M. 1993. J. Chem. Phys. 98:1193–
1211
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

50

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Barcilon, V., Chen, D.P., Eisenberg, R.S. 1992. SIAM J. Applied Math 52:14051425
Barkai, E., Eisenberg, R.S., Schuss, Z. 1996. Physical Review E 54:1161-1175
Ben-Tal, N., Honig, B., Peitzsch, R.M., Denisov, G., McLaughlin, S. 1996.
Biophysical Journal 71:561-575
Berg, H.C. 1983. Random Walks in Biology. Princeton University Press, Princeton
NJ
Bernard, O., Blum, L. 1996. Journal of Chemical Physics 104:4746-4754
Berne, B.J., Borkovec, M., Straub, J.E. 1988. J. Phys. Chem. 92:3711–3725
Berry, S.R., Rice, S.A., Ross, J. 1980. Physical Chemistry. John Wiley & Sons,
New York
Blum, L. 1975. Molecular Physics 30:1529-1535
Blum, L. 1994. Journal of Statistical Physics 75:971-980
Blum, L., Holovko, M.F., Protsykevych, I.A. 1996. J. Stat. Phys. 84:191–203
Blum, L., Hoye, J.S. 1977. Journal of Physical Chemistry 81:1311-1316
Bockris, J., Reddy, A.M.E. 1970. Modern Electrochemistry. Plenum Press, New
York
Bratko, D., Henderson, D.J., Blum, L. 1991. Physical Review A 44:8235-8241
Canales, M., Sese, G. 1998. J Chem Phys 109:6004-6011
Catacuzzeno, L., Nonner, W., Blum, L., Eisenberg, B. 1999a. Biophysical Journal
76:A259
Catacuzzeno, L., Nonner, W., Eisenberg, B. 1999b. Biophysical Journal 76:A79
Chandler, D. 1978. J Chem Phys 68:2959-2970
Chandrasekhar, S. 1943. Rev. Modern Physics 15:1-89
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

51

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Chen, D., Tripathy, A., Xu, L., Meissner, G., Eisenberg, B. 1998a. Biophys. J.,
74:A342
Chen, D., Tripathy, A., Xu, L., Meissner, G., Eisenberg, B. 1998b.

Biophys. J.,

74:A342
Chen, D., Xu, L., Tripathy, A., Meissner, G., Eisenberg, B. 1999. Biophysical
Journal 76:1346-1366
Chen, D., Xu, L., Tripathy, A., Meissner, G., Eisenberg, R. 1997a. Biophys. J.
73:1337-1354
Chen, D.P. 1997. In: Progress of Cell Research: Towards Molecular Biophysics of
Ion Channels. M. Sokabe, A. Auerbach, and F. Sigworth, editors. pp.
269-277. Elsevier, Amsterdam
Chen, D.P., Barcilon, V., Eisenberg, R.S. 1992. Biophys J 61:1372–1393
Chen, D.P., Eisenberg, R. 1992. J. Gen. Physiol. 100:9a
Chen, D.P., Eisenberg, R.S. 1993a. Biophys. J 64:1405–1421
Chen, D.P., Eisenberg, R.S. 1993b. Biophys. J. 65:727-746
Chen, D.P., Lear, J., Eisenberg, R.S. 1997b. Biophys. J. 72:97-116
Chen, D.P., Nonner, W., Eisenberg, R.S. 1995. Biophys. J. 68:A370.
Chen, S.H., Bezprozvanny, I., Tsien, R.W. 1996.. J Gen Physiol 108
Chiu, S.W., Jakobsson, E. 1989. Biophys. J. 55:147–157
Cho, M., Hu, Y., Rosenthal, S.J., Todd, D.C., Du, M., Fleming, G.R. 1993. In:
Activated Barrier Crossing: Applications in Physics, Chemistry and
Biology. G. Fleming and P. Hänggi, editors. pp. 143-163. World
Scientific Publishing, New Jersey

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

52

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Coffey, W.T., Kalmykov, Y.P., Wladron, J.T. 1996. The Langevin Equation, with
Applications in Physics, Chemistry, and Electrical Engineering. World
Scientific, New Jersey
Cole, K.S. 1947. Four lectures on biophysics. Institute of Biophysics, University
of Brazil, Rio De Janeiro.
Conley, E.C. 1996a. The Ion Channel Facts Book. I. Extracellular Ligand-gated
Channels. Academic Press, New York
Conley, E.C. 1996b. The Ion Channel Facts Book. II. Intracellular Ligand-gated
Channels. Academic Press, New York
Conley, E.C. 1997. The Ion Channel Facts Book. III. Inward Rectifier &
Intercellular Channels. Academic Press, New York
Conway, B.E., Bockris, J.O.M., Yaeger, E. 1983. Comprehensive Treatise of
Electrochemistry. pp. 472. Plenum, New York
Cooper, K., Jakobsson, E., Wolynes, P. 1985. Prog. Biophys. Molec. Biol. 46:51–
96
Cooper, K.E., Gates, P.Y., Eisenberg, R.S. 1988a. J. Membr. Biol. 109:95–105
Cooper, K.E., Gates, P.Y., Eisenberg, R.S. 1988b.. Quarterly Review of Biophysics
21: 331–364
Cowan, S.W., Schirmer, T., Rummel, G., Steiert, M., Ghosh, R., Pauptit, R.A.,
Jansonius, J.N., Rosenbusch, J.P. 1992. Nature 358:727-733.
Crouzy, S., Woolf, T.B., Roux, B. 1994. Biophys. J. 67:1370-1386
DAMOCLES. 1999. Damocles. http://www.research.ibm.com/0.1um/laux/dam.html
Dang, T.X., McCleskey, E.W. 1998. J Gen Physiol 111:185-193
Davis, M.E., McCammon, J.A. 1990. Chem. Rev. 90:509–521

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

53

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Dieckmann, G.R., Lear, J.D., Zhong, Q., Klein, M.L., DeGrado, W.F., Sharp, K.A.
1999. Biophysical Journal 76:618-630
Doyle, D.A., Cabral, J.M., Pfuetzner, R.A., Kuo, A., Gulbis, J.M., Cohen, S.L.,
Chait, B.T., MacKinnon, R. 1998. Science 280:69-77
Dresden, M. 1987. H.A. Kramers, Between Tradition and Revolution. Springer,
New York
Durand-Vidal, S., Turq, P., Bernard, O., Treiner, C., Blum, L. 1996. Physica A
231:123-143
Edsall, J., Wyman, J. 1958. Biophysical Chemistry. Academic Press, NY
Eisenberg, B. 1998a.Contemporary Physics 39:447 - 466
Eisenberg, B. 1998b. Accounts of Chemical Research 31:117-125
Eisenberg, R.S. 1990. J. Memb. Biol. 115:1–12
Eisenberg, R.S. 1996a. In: New Developments and Theoretical Studies of Proteins.
R. Elber, editor. pp. 269-357. World Scientific, Philadelphia
Eisenberg, R.S. 1996b. J. Membrane Biol. 150:1–25.
Eisenberg, R.S., Klosek, M.M., Schuss, Z. 1995. J. Chem. Phys. 102:1767–1780
Eisenman, G., Latorre, R., Miller, C. 1986. Biophys. J. 50:1025-1034
Elber, R., Chen, D., Rojewska, D., Eisenberg, R.S. 1995. Biophys. J. 68:906-924.
Eu, B.C. 1992. Kinetic Theory and Irreversible Thermodynamics. John Wiley,
New York
Feynman, R.P. 1939. Physical Review 56:340-343
Feynman, R.P., Leighton, R.B., Sands, M. 1963. The Feynman: Lectures on
Physics,

Mainly Electromagnetism and Matter. Addison-Wesley

Publishing Co., New York
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

54

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Fleming, G., Hänggi, P. 1993. Activated Barrier Crossing: applications in physics,
chemistry and biology. World Scientific, River Edge, New Jersey
Fleming, G., Wolynes, P.G. 1990. Physics Today 43:36-43
Fleming, G.R., Courtney, S.H., Balk, M.W. 1986. J Stat Phys 42:83-104
Forsten, K.E., Kozack, R.E., Lauffenburger, D.A., Subramaniam, S. 1994. J. Phys.
Chem. 98:5580-5586
Frauenfelder, H., Sligar, S.G., Wolynes, P.G. 1991. Science 254:1598-1603
Frauenfelder, H., Wolynes, P. 1985. Science 229:337-345
Frenkel, D., Smit, B. 1996. Understanding Molecular Simulation. Academic Press,
New York
Friedman, H.L. 1962. Ionic Solution Theory. Interscience Publishers, New York
Friedman, H.L. 1985. A Course in Statistical Mechanics. Prentice Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, New Jersey
Friel, D.D., Tsien, R.W. 1989. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
86:5207-5211
Frink, L.J.D., Salinger, A.G. 1999. Density Functional Theory for Classical Fluids
at Complex Interfaces. pp. 1-77. Sandia National Laboratory,
Albuquerque New Mexico
Gardiner, C.W. 1985. Handbook of Stochastic Methods: For Physics, Chemistry
and the Natural Sciences. Springer-Verlag,, New York.
Gardner, C.L., Jerome, J.W., Eisenberg, B. 1998. submitted to SIAM J Appl Math
Gaspard, P. 1998. Chaos, Scattering, and Statistical Mechanics. Cambridge
University Press, New York
Goldman, D.E. 1943. J. Gen. Physiol. 27:37–60

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

55

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Grabert, H., Devoret, M.H. 1992. Plenum, New York
Griffiths, D.J. 1981. Introduction to Electrodynamics. Prentice Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ
Gummel, H.K. 1964. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices ED-11:445-465
Haar, D.t. 1998. Master of Modern Physics. The Scientific Contributions of H.A.
Kramers. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ
Han, S., Lapointe, J., Lukens, J.E. 1993. In: Activated Barrier Crossing:
Applications in Physics, Chemistry and Biology. G. Fleming and P.
Hänggi, editors. pp. 241-267. World Scientific Publishing, New Jersey
Hänggi, P., Talkner, P., Borokovec, M. 1990. Reviews of Modern Physics 62: 251341
Harned, H.S., Owen, B.B. 1958. The Physical Chemistry of Electrolytic Solutions.
Reinhold Publishing Corporation, New York
Heffelfinger, G.S., Swol, F.v. 1994. Journal of Chemical Physics 100:7548-7552
Heilbron, J.L. 1979. Electricity in the 17th and 18th Centuries. University of
California Press, Los Angeles
Heinmann, S.H., Terlau, H., Stuhmer, W., Imoto, K., Numa, S. 1992. Nature
356:441-443
Henderson, D. 1992. Fundamentals of Inhomogeneous Fluids. Marcel Dekker,
New York
Henderson, D., Blum, L., Lebowitz, J.L. 1979. J. Electronal. Chem. 102:315-319
Hess, K. 1991. Monte Carlo Device Simulation: Full Band and Beyond. pp. 310.
Kluwer, Boston, MA USA

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

56

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Hess, K., Leburton, J.P., Ravaioli, U. 1991. Computational Electronics:
Semiconductor Transport and Device Simulation. pp. 268. Kluwer,
Boston, MA USA
Hess, P., Lansman, J.F., Tsien, R.W. 1986. J Gen Physiol 88:293-319
Hess, P., Tsien, R.W. 1984. Nature 309:453-456
Hill, T.L. 1956. Statistical Mechanics. Dover, New York
Hill, T.L. 1960. An Introduction to Statistical Thermodynamics. Dover, New York
Hill, T.L. 1977. Free Energy Transduction in Biology. Academic Press, New York
Hill, T.L. 1985. Cooperativity Theory in Biochemistry. Springer-Verlag, New York
Hille, B. 1975. J Gen Physiol. 66:535-560
Hille, B. 1992. Ionic Channels of Excitable Membranes. Sinauer Associates Inc.,
Sunderland
Hille, E., Schwartz, W. 1978. J. Gen. Physiol. 72:409-442
Hockney, R.W., Eastwood, J.W. 1981. Computer Simulation Using Particles.
McGraw-Hill, New York
Hodgkin, A., Huxley, A., Katz, B. 1949. Arch. Sci. physiol. 3:129-150
Hodgkin, A.L., Huxley, A.F. 1952. J. Physiol. 117:500-544.
Hodgkin, A.L., Huxley, A.F., Katz, B. 1952. J. Physiol. (London) 116:424-448
Hodgkin, A.L., Katz, B. 1949. J. Physiol. 108:37–77
Hollerbach, U., Chen, D., Nonner, W., Eisenberg, B. 1999. Biophysical Journal
76:A205
Honig, B., Nichols, A. 1995. Science 268:1144-1149
Horn, R. 1998.. Biophysical Journal 75:1142

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

57

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Hoye, J.S., Blum, L. 1978. Molecular Physics 35:299-300
Hynes, J.T. 1985. Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem 36:573–597.
Hynes, J.T. 1986. In: Theory of Chemical Reactions. M. Baer, editor. pp. 171–
234. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida,
Jeanteur, D., Schirmer, T., Fourel, D., Imonet, V., Rummel, G., Widmer, C.,
Rosenbusch, J.P., Pattus, F., Pages, J.M. 1994. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 91:10675-10679.
Jerome, J.W. 1995. Mathematical Theory and Approximation of Semiconductor
Models. Springer-Verlag, New York
Johnson, F.H., Eyring, H., Stover, B.J. 1974. The Theory of Rate Processes in
Biology and Medicine. John Wiley, New York
Keizer, J. 1987. Statistical Thermodynamics of Nonequilibrium Processes.
Springer-Verlag, New York,
Kerkhoven, T. 1988. SIAM J. Sci. & Stat. Comp. 9:48-60
Kerkhoven, T., Jerome, J.W. 1990. Numer. Math. 57:561-575
Kerkhoven, T., Saad, Y. 1992. Numer. Math 57:525-548
Kersch, A., Morokoff, W.J. 1995. Transport Simulation in Microelectronics.
Birkhauser, Boston MA USA
Kirton, M.J., Uren, M.J. 1989. Advances in Physics 38:367-468
Klosek, M.M., Matkowsky, B.J., Schuss, Z. 1991. Berichte der Bunsen Gesellschaft fur Physikalishe Chemie 95:331-337
Krager, J., Ruthven, D.M. 1992. Diffusion in Zeolites. John Wiley, New York
Kramers, H.A. 1940. Physica 7:284–304

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

58

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Kurnikova, M.G., Coalson, R.D., Graf, P., Nitzan, A. 1999. Biophysical Journal
76:642-656
Laidler, K.J., King, M.C. 1983. J. Phys. Chem. 87:2657-2664
Läuger, P. 1991. Electrogenic Ion Pump. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA.
Lee, K.S., Tsien, R.W. 1983. J Physiol 354:253-272
Levine, R.D., Bernstein, R.B. 1987. Molecular Reaction Dynamics and Chemical
Reactivity. Oxford University Press., New York
Levis, R.A., Rae, J.L. 1992. In: Methods in Enzymology. L. Iverson and B. Rudy,
editors. pp. 66-92. Academic Press, NY
Levis, R.A., Rae, J.L. 1995. In: Patch-clamp Applications and Protocols. W. Walz,
A. Boulton, and G. Baker, editors. Humana Press., Totowa, NJ
Loewenstein, Werner R. 1999. The Touchstone of Life. Oxford University Press,
NY.
Lundstrom, M. 1992. Fundamentals of Carrier Transport. Addison-Wesley, NY
MacElroy, J.M.D. 1994. Journal of Chemical Physics 101:5274-5280
Magleby, K.L., Pallotta, B.S. 1983a. J. Physiol. 344:605-623.
Magleby, K.L., Pallotta, B.S. 1983b. J. Physiol. 344:585-604
Mehra, J. 1994. The Beat of a Different Drum. Oxford, New York
Murthy, C.S., Singer, K. 1987. J. Phys. Chem. 91: 21-30
Nelson, P. H., and S. M. Auerbach. 1999. Journal of Chemical Physics. 110:92359243.
Newman, J.S. 1991. Electrochemical Systems. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

59

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Nitzan, A., Schuss, Z. 1993. In: Activated Barrier Crossing: Applications in
Physics, Chemistry and Biology. G. Fleming and P. Hänggi, editors. pp.
42-81. World Scientific Publishing, New Jersey
Nonner, W. 1969. Pflugers Arch. 309:176-192
Nonner, W., Chen, D.P., Eisenberg, B. 1998. Biophysical Journal 74:2327-2334
Nonner, W., Eisenberg, B. 1998. Biophys. J. 75: 1287-1305.
Nonner, W., Eisenberg, B. 1999. Journal of Molecular Fluids (in the press)
Ott, E. 1997. Chaos in Dynamical Systems. Cambridge University Press, New
York
Ott, E., Sauer, T., Yorke, J.A. 1994. Coping with Chaos. Wiley, New York
Paul, A. 1982. The Chemistry of Glasses. Chapman and Hall, London
Pechukas, P. 1976. In: Dynamics of Molecular Collisions. Part B. W.H. Miller,
editor. pp. 269-322. Plenum Press
Peracchia, C. 1994. Handbook of Membrane Channels. pp. 580. Academic Press,
New York
Perram, J.W. 1983. The Physics of Superionic Conductors and Electrode
Materials. Plenum Press, New York
Pollak, E. 1993.

In: Activated Barrier Crossing: applications in physics,

chemistry and biology. G. Fleming and P. Hänggi, editors. World
Scientific, River Edge, New Jersey
Pollak, E. 1996. In: Dynamics of Molecules and Chemical Reactions. R.E. Wyatt
and J.Z.H. Zhang, editors. pp. 617-669. Marcel Dekker, New York
Pollak, E., Berezhkovskii, A., Schuss, Z. 1994. J Chem Phys 100:334-339
Purcell, E.M. 1977 Amer. J. Phys. 45:3-11

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

60

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Rae, J.L., Levis, R.A. 1992. In: Methods in Enzymology. L. Iverson and B. Rudy,
editors. pp. 66-92. Academic Press, NY
Rapoport, D.C. 1997. The Art of Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Cambridge
University Press, New York
Reggiani, L. 1985. Hot-electron Transport in Semiconductors. Springer-Verlag,
New York
Rey, R., Hynes, J.T. 1996. J Phys Chem 100:5611-5615
Risken, H. 1984. The Fokker-Planck Equation: Methods of Solution and
Applications. Springer-Verlag, New York
Robinson, P.J., Holbrook, K.A. 1972. Unimolecular Reactions. John Wiley, New
York
Robinson, R.A., Stokes, R.H. 1959. Electrolyte Solutions. Butterworths Scientific
Publications, London
Roux, B., Karplus, M. 1991a. J. Phys. Chem. 95: 4856-4868.
Roux, B., Karplus, M. 1991b. Biophysical Journal 59:961-981
Roux, B., Karplus, M. 1994. Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 23: 731-761
Sakmann, B., Neher, E. 1995. Single Channel Recording. Plenum, New York
Scharfetter, D.L., Gummel, H.K. 1969. IEEE Trans Electron Devices:64-77
Schirmer, R.H., Keller T.A., Y.F., W., Rosenbusch, J.P. 1995. Science 267:512514
Schmickler, W. 1996. Interfacial Electrochemistry. Oxford University Press, NY
Schoppa, N.E., Sigworth, F.J. 1998. Journal of General Physiology 111:313-342

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

61

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Schultz, S.G., Andreoli, T.E., Brown, A.M., Fambrough, D.M., Hoffman, J.F.,
Welsh, J.F. 1996. Molecular Biology of Membrane Disorders. Plenum,
New York
Schuss, Z. 1980a. SIAM Review 22:116-155
Schuss, Z. 1980b. Theory and Applications of Stochastic Differential Equations.
John Wiley & Sons, New York
Schuss, Z. 1989. Equilibrium and Recrossings of the Transistion State: what can be
learned from diffusion? Unpublished Manuscript available by
anonymous ftp from ftp.rush.edu in /pub/Eisenberg/Schuss/Rate
Theory
Sigg, D., Qian, H., Bezanilla, F. 1999. Biophysical Journal 76:782-803
Sigworth, F. 1995. Electronic Design of Patch Clamp. In: Single Channel
Recording. B. Sakmann and E. Neher, editors. pp. 95-128. Plenum, New
York
Simonin, J.-P. 1997. Journal of Physical Chemistry 101:4313-4320
Simonin, J.-P., Blum, L., Turq, P. 1996. Journal of Physical Chemistry 100:77047709
Skinner, J.L., Wolynes, P.G. 1978. J. Chem. Phys. 69:2143-2150.
Steinfeld, J.I., Francisco, J.S., Hase, W.L. 1989a. Chemical Kinetics and
Dynamics. Prentice-Hall, Englewod Cliffs, NJ
Steinfeld, J.I., Francisco, J.S., Hase, W.L.N.J. 1989b. Chemical Kinetics and
Dynamics. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ
Syganow, A., von Kitzing, E. 1999. Biophysical Journal 76:768-781
Tang, J., Chen, D., Saint, N., Rosenbusch, J., Eisenberg, R. 1997. Biophysical
Journal 72:A108
Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

62

Bob Eisenberg

Ionic Channels

Tsien, R.W., Hess, P., McCleskey, E.W., Rosenberg, R.L. 1987. Annual Review of
Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry 16:265-290
Tyrrell, H.J.V., Harris, K.R. 1984. Diffusion in Liquids. Butterworths, Boston.
Valdiosera, R., Clausen, C., Eisenberg, R.S. 1974.Biophys. J. 14:295-314
van den Brink, J., and G. A. Sawatzky. 1998. In: Electronic Properties of Novel
Materials - Progress in Molecular Nanostructures. H. Kuzmany,
editor. American Institute of Physics, New York. 152.
van Kampen, N.G. 1981. Stochastic Processes in Physics and Chemistry. North
Holland, New York
Venturi, F., Smith, R.K., Sangiorgi, E.C., Pinto, M.R., Ricco, B. 1989. IEEE Trans.
Computer Aided Design 8:360-369
Weetman, P., Goldman, S., Gray, C.G. 1997. Journal of Physical Chemistry
101:6073-6078
Weiss, T.F. 1996. Cellular Biophysics. MIT Press, Cambridge MA USA
Whittaker, E. 1951. A History of the Theories of Aether & Electricity. Harper,
New York
Wilmer, D., Kantium, T., Lamberty, O., Funke, K., Ingram, M.D., Bunde, A. 1994.
Solid State Ionics 70-71:323
Wolynes, P. 1980. Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 31:345-376.
Wynne-Jones, W.F.K., Eyring, H. 1935. Journal of Chemical Physics 3:492-502
Zagotta, W.N., Hoshi, T., Aldrich, R.W. 1994. Journal of General Physiology
103:321-362.

Journal of Membrane Biology 1999, 171, 1-24

63

