Macroscopic model of self-propelled bacteria swarming with regular reversals
Richard Gejji1,2 , Pavel M. Lushnikov3 , and Mark Alber1∗
1

arXiv:1101.1287v1 [physics.bio-ph] 6 Jan 2011

Department of Applied and Computational Mathematics and Statistics,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46656, USA
2
Mathematical Biosciences Institute, Ohio State University, 1735 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210
3
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA
(Dated: January 7, 2011)
Periodic reversals of the direction of motion in systems of self-propelled rod shaped bacteria enable
them to effectively resolve traffic jams formed during swarming and maximize their swarming rate. In
this paper, a connection is found between a microscopic one dimensional cell-based stochastic model
of reversing non-overlapping bacteria and a macroscopic non-linear diffusion equation describing
dynamics of the cellular density. Boltzmann-Matano analysis is used to determine the nonlinear
diffusion equation corresponding to the specific reversal frequency. Macroscopically (ensemble-vise)
averaged stochastic dynamics is shown to be in a very good agreement with the numerical solutions
of the nonlinear diffusion equation. Critical density p0 is obtained such that nonlinear diffusion is
dominated by the collisions between cells for the densities p > p0 . An analytical approximation
of the pairwise collision time and semi-analytical fit for the total jam time per reversal period are
also obtained. It is shown that cell populations with high reversal frequencies are able to spread
out effectively at high densities. If the cells rarely reverse then they are able to spread out at lower
densities but are less efficient at spreading out at at higher densities.
PACS numbers: 87.18.Ed, 05.40.-a, 05.65.+b, 87.18.Hf, 87.10.Ed; 87.10.Rt

I.

INTRODUCTION

Many bacteria including species found in diverse soil and water environments are able to spread rapidly over
surfaces by the process of swarming which is the collective motion of many thousands of cells. The bacteria capable of
swarming span the gamut of utilit and range from innocuous carbon-cycle organisms to harmful pathogens. Swarming
can be achieved by directional movement from pulling with type IV pili and either propulsion from rotating flagella
or pushing from secretion of slime [1]. In certain cases, these mechanisms work together and allow the cells to swarm
at a rate faster than each individual type of motility [2, 3].
For example, Myxococcus xanthus, ubiquitous bacteria found in soil, are very efficient swarmers. These bacteria
have elongated rod-type shapes (about 7µm in length and 0.5µm in width) and they move by gliding over a substrate
in the direction of their longer axis [1, 2, 4, 5]. They align and travel together in the same direction (see Figure 1a)
as well as reverse direction of their motion about every eight minutes [1, 5, 6]. Mutant species of Myxobacteria that
are unable to reverse are also unable to swarm [5, 7].
After agar plate is inoculated in the center with M. xanthus, they start growing and moving, and the swarm expands.
90% of the expansion is caused by cell movement and only 10% by growth [3]. It has been shown that a reversal period
of 8.8min maximizes the expansion rate for a given average cell velocity of 4µm/min [5]. Such motion is limited by
new cells moving out from the center. Therefore, a cell in many cases can not move full 8 minutes in the direction
towards the center. When encountering a cell moving in opposite direction cell stops and waits till it is time to start
moving again away from the center. The swarm grows symmetrically in all directions (see Figure 1b). The symmetry
dictates that there is a net movement only in radial directions.
The expansion rate of a wild type M. xanthus (A+S+) swarm (which moves using both pili VI and slime engine)
is ∼ 1.4µm/min while the average velocity of individual myxobacteria is ∼ 4µm/min [5]. Because cells reverse
periodically, it is possible to say that 80% of their energy is used for swarming. Also, large aspect ratio of cells and
their ability to bend promote bacterial alignment which also increases swarming. Velocities of mutants (A-S+) and
(A+S+) are equal to the velocity of the wild type bacteria (A+S+).
Recent two-dimensional (2D) off-lattice microscopic stochastic model (MSM) described in [2], has been able to
predict optimal reversal rates for specific choices of bacterial velocities and aspect ratios leading to the maximal
swarming rates of the colony, which were confirmed in experiments [5]. It has been also shown in [5] that such
choice of the optimal reversal rate allows cells to align better and resolve traffic jams resulting in the maximal
order of alignment. The model takes into account cell shape and direction of motion of each Myxobacteria in the
colony determined by the two motility mechanisms: pili VI and slime production. Such detailed cell description is
computationally intense and makes any analytical description difficult.
Experimental observations suggest that the capacity to swarm depends less on the motility engine employed by
individual cells and instead on the behavioral algorithms that enhance the flow of densely packed cells [1, 5]. Because

2

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 1: a) Myxobacteria aligned together into a cluster. Picture obtained in Dr. Shrout’s lab by Cameron Harvey.
b) Swarm of M. Xanthus, picture taken by Lotte Jelsbak. The edge of the swarm displays a single layer of cells that
are spreading outwards away from the cell center [1] c) Distribution of cells at the swarm edge [5]. The multicellular
structures, slime trails, mounds, and rafts are labeled. The swarm is expanding in the radial direction, which is to
the right of the image.

of that we focus in this paper on the study of self-propelled motion of rod shaped bacteria without specifying motility
engines. We do not incorporate cell division, the directional effects of slime, or the social motility governed by pili
into the model. Instead we use a basic model for studying mechanism of swarming caused by the cell-cell collisions
(jams) and regular cell reversals, in a small part of the colony near the edge of the swarm where motion of bacteria
is nearly one-dimensional in the radial direction (see Fig. 1). We assume that cells cannot climb onto each other and
that no more than one cell could be positioned at any moment in time at specific location in space (by using excluded
volume constraint). Cells are modeled as self-propelled bending rods which glide on slime on the substrate with the
same constant velocity. They reverse direction of their motion periodically in time which serves as a mechanism for
diffusion of spatial positions of cells.
The main result of the paper is an establishment of a connection between one-dimensional (1D) microscopic and
macroscopic models and and their parameters, describing swarming of bacteria reversing at different frequencies.
Microscopic 1D discrete stochastic model is a 1D simplified version of the full 2D model [2]. 1D macroscopic model
is a nonlinear diffusion equation for cellular density describing dynamics of self-propelled non-overlapping rods with
regular reversals. Combination of a stochastic discrete model and its continuous limit in the form of a nonlinear
diffusion equation constitutes a multi-scale modeling environment which allows one to zoom in and study individual
bacteria and then zoom out and investigate emerging behavior of a large number of bacteria in a swarming colony.
Although, only few continuous models based on biological cell behavior exist which take volume of cells into account
and prevent cells from overlapping, such models are more biologically relevant and can provide novel insights. Recently
continuous limit models describing dynamics of cellular density were derived from the microscopic motion of randomly
moving cells exhibiting volume exclusion and chemotaxis [8–10]. In particular, the Ref. [10] introduces a nonlinear
diffusion equation model with chemotactic term for describing amoeba aggregation without blow up of solution in
finite time [11]. This is in contrast with the standard but biologically less realistic Keller-Segel equation (sometimes
also called Patlak-Keller-Segel equation) with constant diffusion coefficient [12, 13] which neglects the size of bacteria
resulting in solution (bacterial density) having a blow up (collapse) in finite time [14–16].
Another 1D continuous limit equation was recently derived from a model of cells that interact using Hooke’s Law
[17]. This equation also displays nonlinear fast diffusion, and looks similar to the porous medium equation but with
a negative exponent. This model agrees well with the discrete system from which it is derived and it is capable of
effectively making biological predictions for cells that can be modeled as stiff springs.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II a Microscopic Stochastic Model (MSM) of cellular dynamics is
introduced which describes 1D motion of sell-propelled rods with periodic in time reversals of the direction of their
motion. In Section III general settings for MSM simulations are presented and results of multiple 1D dynamics MSM
simulations with initially localized distributions of bacterial colonies are described. In Section IV elementary laws
of collisions (jams) between cells are derived and equilibrium motion of cells is determined in the limit of zero noise
of the reversal period. Without interactions (in a vanishing cell density limit) each cell experiences almost periodic
motion in space and time. Without a noise in the reversal time that motion would be strictly periodic. However,
the experimentally observed [19] small noise in the reversal time results in the random walk of the average position
(averaged over time period 2T ) of the center of mass of each cell at time scales above 2T . Here T is the average
reversal time for each cell. For finite cellular densities we introduce different types of collisions (jams) between cells
including pairwise jam and cluster jam. We also find the critical density p0 below which cellular diffusion is dominated
by the diffusion (random walk) of individual cells while above p0 the diffusion is dominated by the collisions between

3
cells. In Section VI multiple collisions and cell clustering for large cellular densities are studied. In Section VII a
nonlinear diffusion equation of the general form
h
i
(1)
∂t p = ∂x D(p)∂x p ,

is introduced, where p(x) is a local cell density (measured in units of volume fraction, i.e. the ratio of volume occupied
by cells to the total volume of space), x is the spatial coordinate and D(p) is the nonlinear diffusion coefficient
determined by using Boltzmann-Matano (BM) analysis [18] of ensemble averaged MSM simulations of cells moving
with different reversal frequencies. The equation (1) gives microscopically averaged dynamics of cellular density vs.
microscopic description of MSM model. We compare the dynamics of cellular density from MSM simulations with
the numerical solutions of the equation (1) for different reversal frequencies and find very good agreement between
these two types of simulations for p > p0 . This confirms that the dynamics of cellular density is indeed of a nonlinear
diffusion type (1). In Section VIII an analytical approximation for pairwise collision time and semi-analytical fit for
the total jam time per reversal period are described. In Section IX main results of the paper and future directions
are discussed. In Appendix A Boltzmann-Matano analysis is reviewed. Appendix B provides additional testing of the
accuracy of Boltzmann-Matano approach for the cellular distributions of finite size.
II.

MICROSCOPIC STOCHASTIC MODEL OF BACTERIAL MOTION

In this section we introduce a computational discrete microscopic stochastic model (MSM) of cellular dynamics
describing motion of self-propelled rods on a 1D lattice with periodic in time reversals of the direction of their motion.
We simulate constant number of cells of length L that move back (left) and forth (right) in a spatial domain along
the coordinate x with periodic boundary conditions and velocity v. We assume that each cell reverses the direction
of its motion in average time T after previous reversal. The reversal period experiences fluctuations with the variance
∆T02 which are sharply peaked near T , i.e. ∆T0 /T ≪ 1 in accordance with the observed in experiments [19]. Assume
that the positive integer n corresponds to the nth reversal of the given cell. We chose the probability distribution for
the stochastic realizations of the reversal time Tn for nth reversal to be defined through the Poisson distribution
f (k) =

λk e−λ
,
k!

k = 0, 1, 2, . . .

(2)

as follows
Tn = k∆T1 ,

(3)

where λ = T 2 /∆T02 and ∆T1 = ∆T02 /T . Because the statistical averages for (2) are hf (k)i = λ and h(f (k)−hf (k)i)2 i =
λ we obtain that hTn i = T and h(Tn − hTn i)2 i = ∆T02 . With that definition the stochastic realizations of Tn can
take only discrete values 0, ∆T1 , 2∆T1 , . . .. But because we assume ∆T0 /T ≪ 1 we conclude that this is a good
approximation of the Myxobacteria reversals with continues set of values of the reversal time.
To quantify the difference between reversal times of neighboring bacteria we introduce the reversal phase for each
bacteria defined as follows. We define time periods (0, 2T ), (2T, 4T ), (4T, 6T ) etc. Inside each of these intervals each
cell (bacteria) has an assigned reversal phase, φ, between 0 and 2T corresponding to the time when cell reverses from
moving to the right to the motion to the left (i.e. cell reverses from right-directed motion to the left-directed at times
t = φ, 2T + φ, 4T + φ, . . .). Reversal in opposite direction occurs at at times t = φ, T + φ, 3T + φ, . . .. The initial
phase of each cell is chosen at random. Here the phase φ is not constant but changes after each reversal because of
fluctuations of Tn . The condition ∆T0 /T ≪ 1 ensure that the change of φ at the time scale T is small. Respectively,
at much larger time scale t ≫ T the phase φ experiences the random walk. These random walks are independent for
for each of N cells in the system.
In dimensionless units we assume that L = 1 and v = 1. Unless otherwise specified we choose T = 8. Each cell
is represented by a finite number of lattice sites on a 1D grid. In a typical simulation, each cell includes 10 lattice
sites, i.e. distance between neighboring lattice sites is △x = 0.1 (see Figure 2 a). Time step in dimensionless units is
1/△x to keep the velocity v = 1. However, we also ran multiple simulations with smaller values of △x to make sure
that increasing number of lattice sites per cell (but keeping L = 1 and decreasing time step to keep v = 1) does not
significantly change our results . In other words, we look at the continuous limit as △x → 0.
The following three dimensionless parameters completely determine the dynamics of cells in continuous limit △x →
0. The first parameter is vT /L, which is the ratio of the average distance traveled by cells between reversals and the
cell length. That parameter is vT /L = 8 for the typical value T = 8. The second dimensionless parameter is the local
cellular density p(x) measured in units of volume fraction p, i.e. the ratio of volume occupied by cells to the total

4
volume of space (in 1D, volume is simply the length). The third parameter is ∆T0 /T , i.e. relative size of the reversal
time fluctuations.
For example, we can choose the velocity, the reversal period, the fluctuation of the reversal period and the cellular
length as vdim = 10µm/min, Tdim = 8min, ∆T0,dim = 0.9min and Ldim = 10µm, respectively, in dimensional units.
This yields vdim Tdim /Ldim = 8 similar to the typical dimensionless values chosen above. This choice is consistent
with cell lengths and reversal period used in previous computational models [2, 5] and observed in experiments [7].
Below unless otherwise specified we choose ∆T1 = 0.1. For T = 8 it corresponds to ∆T0 ≃ 0.9. Experiments
with Myxobacteria typically show only small fluctuations of the reversal period T so that probability distribution
function is sharply peaked near average reversal period T [19]. Our typical choice ∆T0 ≃ 0.9 reflects that smallness
of fluctuations. We also checked that if there is no noise added to the reversal period, the simulations fails to match
the nonlinear diffusion equation (1). This suggests that noise (although small) in the reversal period of bacteria
contributes to their macroscopic behavior by allowing them to behave diffusively.

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 2: a) Diagram of a single cell with marks designating absolute location versus lattice index. b) Sample
movement in a single time step where one cell is chosen twice and the other is not chosen at all. c) Sample
movement of three cells where each cell is chosen exactly once.
At each time step, the model determines cell movement based on the occupancy of the next lattice site in the
direction the cell is moving (direction is determined by φ at the given time t). If this location is free, the cell is moved
1 lattice site in that direction (keeping constant length L = 1). If the location is not free, the cell does not move.
The model itself is stochastic. During each time step, a sequence of N randomly chosen cells attempt to move one
at a time, where N is the total number of cells. It is possible that the same cell may move more than once during a
time step, and as a result some other cells may not move at all. Also, note that random selection of cells may create
gaps between cells that are following each other (see Figures 2b and 2c for examples of possible cellular movement).
Creation of such gaps is equivalent to the extra diffusion each cell experiences in addition to the directed motion with
the speed v. That diffusion is a pure artefact of the finite width △x of each lattice site which vanishes as △x → 0.
We checked in simulations that reduction of △x from 0.1 to 0.001 gives only small changes in the cellular density
dynamics (see Section VII B for more discussion on that). However, the collision time between cells is more sensitive
to the value of △x so for these type of simulations in Section VIII we also used grid spacing down to △x = 0.001.
Generally, in all quantities plotted in all Figures of the paper we choose △x = 0.1 unless we explicitly specify a
different value of △x.

5
Unless otherwise specified, the simulations are run on a one-dimensional lattice domain of length 4, 000 centered at
x = 0 starting with an initial top-hat distribution of cells of width 1, 000 also centered at x = 0 (i.e. density of cells is
approximately constant p ≡ pmax for −500 < x < 500 and zero everywhere else). See curve for t = 0 in Figure 3a as
example of a top-hat boundary condition. Because the domain is symmetric between x and −x it replicates a no-flux
boundary condition at x = 0 after averaging over the statistical ensemble of simulations. Generally, we choose lattice
domain of length large enough to have no influence of the periodic boundaries (i.e. to have zero cellular density at
both right and left boundaries).
III.

MSM SIMULATIONS

Swarming of bacterial colony similar to the one shown in Figure 1a can be analyzed by averaging over angles, i.e. as
an average over dynamics of many nearly 1D (in the radial direction) distributions of Myxobacteria. In what follows
we assume that motion along radius is a dominant one while rotation is only a correction which we neglect here.
We performed multiple MSM simulations of 1D dynamics of initially localized distributions of bacterial density and
performed ensemble averaging over these simulations. The ensemble serves to approximate averaging over angles or
the full 2D problem. We choose the ”top-hat” initial distribution (constant density around the center of the domain
and zero density to the left and to the right of the center). Initial top-hat density profile was typically obtained by a
dense initial packing of bacteria in the domain of width 1000 around x = 0. The typical size of a statistical ensemble
was 20, 000. We determined the cellular density (volume fraction) by calculating the average number of times the
given location was occupied (see Figure 3a). Qualitatively, the cell densities spread out symmetrically away from the
center of the top hat. For later times a steep slope develops around density p0 = 0.2, which implies that the rate
at which the density spreads out depends on the local cell density. The cells’ movement frequently causes them to
collide with each other. When two cells are trying to move into each other’s space, they stall (jam) until at least one
reverses. This stalling, on average, shifts the mean location of their oscillatory movement away from the location at
which they stall. If no other cells are nearby, the cells may collide again or separate further away due to fluctuations
in the mean location of their oscillatory movement. If other cells are nearby, these outer cells have their mean location
shifted outwards while the original cells’ mean locations are shifted closer together. Through these shifts, the cells
steadily spread away from each other.
In highly packed situations, the cells cluster together. Two cells can jam together forming two-cell cluster, and if
another cell is moving in a direction of a that two-cell cluster then it may join the cluster forming three-cell cluster
etc. To measure the amount of clustering, we calculated the frequencies of cluster sizes at different moments of time
which is shown in log-log plots in Figure (3b) for MSM simulations with top-hat initial conditions. It is seen that the
frequency of cluster sizes follows −2 power law. It is seen that the average cluster size decreases over time as initially
densely packed cells expand. Figure (3c) shows that this decrease follows a power law decay over time with calculated
exponent −0.4965 which is close to −1/2 power laws expected from diffusion.
This suggests that during early times, many of the cells are found in large clusters where they cannot move. At
later times, the large clusters rapidly break up into smaller clusters allowing cells to move. Also, the individual cells
near the boundaries spend a significantly greater percentage of their time moving.
Figure 3a shows that the dynamics of the cellular density is smooth and slow compare with the velocity v = 1 of
individual cell motion. It suggests the ensemble averaged distribution of cells at each moment of time and at each
point in space is in statistical quasi-equilibrium. Below we study dependence of quasi-equilibrium on local cellular
density, cellular collision times and cluster sizes. We also performed a second type of MSM simulations with periodic
boundary conditions and uniform average densities to study statistical equilibrium of cellular motion.
IV.

ELEMENTARY LAWS OF COLLISIONS (JAMS) BETWEEN CELLS AND EQUILIBRIUM
MOTION OF CELLS IN THE LIMIT OF ZERO NOISE OF THE REVERSAL PERIOD

If the noise in the reversal time T is absent then in a vanishing cell density limit each cell experiences periodic
motion in space and time with its center of mass not moving on average (after averaging over time period 2T ).
However, the experimentally observed [19] small noise in the reversal time results in the random walk of the average
position (averaged over time period 2T ) of the center of mass of each cell at time scales above 2T . That random walk
results in collisions of cells for any finite density. As density goes to zero these collisions become more and more rear
because it takes more time for cells to span the average distance between them through random walk. Below in this
Section we consider the limit when we completely neglect that random walk, i.e. we neglect the noise in T .
For nonzero density of cells, there is a finite probability for two neighboring cells to collide (jam). By jam, we
mean that one cell tries to move where another cell is located, but the excluded volume principle prevents them from

6

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 3: Results of MSM simulations of rods reversing every T=8 performed 20, 000 times. (a)-(c) to correspond to
simulations with top-hat initial conditions and (d) corresponds to simulations with initial constant average density.
(a) Average cell density at different times. (b) Expected cluster frequencies for different times, i.e. the average
number of clusters of a given size obtained in the simulations. (c) Average cluster size over time on a log-log scale.
(d) Expected cluster frequencies at end time 50, 000, after cooking initial conditions, for constant density
simulations of ensemble size 2, 000, where the vertical bars signify the average cluster size.

moving. The term ”jam” in this paper is similar to the term ”collision”. The subtle difference is that by collision we
mean that a cell jams with another cell with subsequent unjamming, i.e. the cell is free to move after a jam.
We distinguish two types of jams. First type is a “pairwise jam”. It occurs when two neighboring cells are
jammed directly because they try to move in opposite directions towards each other but that motion is prevented
by the excluded volume principle. Second type of jam occurs when a cell 1 tries to move in the same direction as a
neighboring cell 2 but that cell 2 is jammed by another cell(s) (e.g. by cell 3). We refer to such type of a jam of cell
1 as “indirect jam”. Such jam is an indirect one because there is no direct (pairwise) jam between cells 1 and 2. A
typical example is when cell 1 moves towards neighboring cell 2 while cells 2 and 3 have a pairwise jam. After cell
1 touches cell 2 they together (cells 1,2 and 3) form three-cell cluster with pairwise jam between cells 2 and 3 and
indirect jam with cell 1. We also say that a given cell is in a “cluster jam” if it is either pairwise or indirect jam. The
pairwise collision time τpair is always smaller or equal to T because of reversal of the direction of cellular motion.
In contrast, the cluster jam time τcluster can be arbitrary large if cells stay inside of a large cluster. Also in Section
VIII we use total jam time τ per period T , i.e. the time during which a given cell remains jammed (either directly or
indirectly) per period T . With such definition τ never exceeds T .

7
Assume that density is small so that mostly pairwise jams occur. In such a case jamming of two cells lasts until
one of the cells reverses. After that they move together in the same direction until the second cell reverses. After
the second cell reversal, cells move in opposite directions away from each other. Assume that all other cells are still
far away. Then after the first cell reverses for a second time both cells will move in the same direction, and after the
second reversal of the second cell they will move towards each other. Exact calculation shows that these two cells will
never jam again in the absence of other cells. Instead, exactly at the moment when these two cells touch each other,
the first cell will reverse for a third time and they will move in the same direction again. This pattern of periodic
motion without jamming of these two cells will continue for arbitrary long time (or until another, third cell, would
approach them close enough to jam with one of these two cells). It means that any two isolated cells jam only once
and after that both cells will experience periodic motion without disturbing one another.
A similar interaction pattern occurs if we consider a system of three or more cells moving in an infinite spatial
domain. After several collisions (jams) between these three or more cells, they will also end up in the state where
they will not jam any more and all cells will experience periodic motion without touching each other. A center of
mass of each cell participating in a jam shifts relative to its average position at a distance vτpair to the left or to
the right (depending on which side it has a jam), where τpair is the collision time. However, after all collisions are
over, center of mass of each cell experiences periodic motion and no average motion (averaged over the period 2T ) is
observed. We refer to such state as an equilibrium motion of Myxobacteria. Note that equilibrium motion is quite
different from the equilibrium distribution (Gibbs distribution) in statistical mechanics [20] because Myxobacteria are
always self-propelled and are not subject to any type of thermal equilibrium. Starting with a finite number of initially
densely packed Myxobacteria, after finite number of collisions and provided Myxobacteria divisions are neglected, the
bacterial colony expands to such size that there will be no more collisions between cells. After that the average size
of the colony remains the same with bacteria moving periodically at equilibrium.
We now calculate the density of Myxobacteria p0 at which a transition occurs from motion with collisions to
equilibrium motion. First, consider two neighboring cells and assume that they have phases φ1 and φ2 , respectively.
Generally −2T ≤ φ1 − φ2 ≤ 2T but assuming periodicity over time 2T we can always add a multiple of 2T to each
of the phases, φ̃j ≡ φj + nj 2T , j = 1, 2 (nj are integers), to keep the difference of modified phases inside a twice
smaller interval: −T ≤ φ̃1 − φ̃2 ≤ T . For p = p0 cells do not jam but during a part of the time interval 2T they move
together (attaching to each other) in the same direction until one of them reverses. After that, they move in opposite
directions from each other for the time interval |φ̃1 − φ̃2 |. After that second cell reverses and both cells move in the
same direction etc. Minimum separation between centers of mass of these two cells is L and maximum separation is
L + 2v|φ̃1 − φ̃2 |. So the distance Ldist between the average positions of centers of mass is Ldist = L + v|φ̃1 − φ̃2 |. Now,
to calculate the average density p0 of many cells we average Ldist over phase differences 0 ≤ |φ̃1 − φ̃2 | ≤ T resulting
in the critical density
p0 ≡

L
hLdist i

"

= T

−1

Z

0

T

#−1

(L + vφ)dφ

=

L
.
L + vT /2

(4)

For the standard values v = L = 1, T = 8 it yields that p0 = 0.2.
If initially there is a localized distribution of cells with the average density p > p0 , then these cells will spread out
with collisions until their density reaches p = p0 . If initially p < p0 , then some redistribution of cellular density may
occur when the average distance between centers of mass of two neighboring cell is Ldist < L + v|φ̃1 − φ̃2 |. Because
average density is low, this would result only in a local redistribution of the positions of cells without much change in
the macroscopic cellular density. After initial spreading out no collisions or cellular density transport will be observed.
We conclude that in order to observe transport of a system of self-propelled rods without noise in the reversal period
T at long times one needs to incorporate in the model a source of the density gradient. In Myxobacteria swarms, such
a source is present because of division of cells in the center of the bacterial colony. Thus any transport of self-propelled
rods without noise in T is a collective phenomena with the threshold density p0 required for transport.
V.

RE-INTRODUCTION OF THE NOISE OF THE REVERSAL PERIOD IN THE SMALL DENSITY
LIMIT

We now take into account the noise of the reversal period T in the analysis of the previous Section. In that case
collisions between cells occurs even for p < p0 because random walk of the average position of cells causes them to
move at arbitrary large distance until finally colliding with other cells. When density approaches to zero the frequency
of collisions also goes to zero. But if p → p0 from below then cells collide typically at each period 2T with the collision
time ∼ ∆T0 (so that for ∆T0 → 0 that collision time would vanish). Thus p0 separates two regime of collisions: for

8
p < p0 rare collisions primary occur because of the noise of T while for p > p0 collisions are dominated by frequent
collisions. At the transition densities p ∼ p0 the contributions of both of these effects are comparable.
Thus a transport of Myxobacteria is a mixture of two effects. First effect is the diffusion of individual cells due to the
noise in the reversal period T which dominates for small densities p < p0 . Second effect is due to the frequent collision
of cells during each period 2T making that effect essentially collective one. These two regimes make Myxobacteria
quite distinct from bacteria like E. Coli or amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum which experience diffusion as random
walk of Brownian-like particles [8–10] without any periodic motion.
VI.

MULTIPLE COLLISIONS AND CELL CLUSTERING FOR LARGE CELLULAR DENSITIES

If the cellular density p is not small (p > p0 ) so that cells typically experience collisions during each period 2T , then
cell motion is more complicated than described in Section IV which is based on rare pairwise collisions. In addition we
assume here and below that there is nonzero noise in T as in Section V. Figures 4(a-d) show pairwise jam time (jam
duration) versus collision number that occur between three adjacent cells for the average cellular density p = 0.95. In
that case cells occupy 95% of total volume and between two reversals each cell can cover up to vT /L = 8 cell volumes
meaning that it could collide with multiple cells if allowed to. It is shown in Figure 4 that distribution of pairwise
jam time τpair is random. Such regime typically occurs closer to the bacterial colony center where cell flux caused
by cell divisions is large and it keeps the system far from equilibrium motion state as described in Section IV. There
are at least two situations where such a far from equilibrium state is possible. First is the high density gradient case
caused by bacterial division (as mentioned above). The second case occurs if no-flux boundary conditions maintain
a large density of Myxobacteria in a domain with fixed volume. In both cases the rate of bacterial jamming is high
and the collision times are randomly distributed.
Another effect which occurs in case of large densities is the high probability of formation of clusters consisting of
more than two bacteria. As density of bacteria approaches one, all bacteria jam in large clusters. Unjamming bacteria
from large cluster might take a lot of time because leftmost or rightmost bacteria in the cluster need to move away
providing space for the bacteria in the center of the cluster to move in. As a result, many cells stay jammed in a
cluster for a long time for large densities. Figure 5 shows that the average cluster collision time τcluster (averaged
over ensemble of MSM simulations) diverges for p → 1. Values of τcluster for different ∆x show good convergence to
the continuous limit ∆x → 0. E.g., curves for ∆x = 0.01 and ∆x = 0.001 are almost indistinguishable.
Figure 3b shows the distribution of cluster sizes for MSM simulations starting from a top-hat initial condition.
Figure 3d shows the cluster size distribution for different densities p for MSM simulations with uniform average
density and periodic boundary conditions (second type of MSM simulations is described in Section III.
VII.

MACROSCOPIC NONLINEAR DIFFUSION MODEL AND MSM SIMULATIONS
A.

Nonlinear Diffusion Model and Its Limitations

If collisions are frequent and, additionally, the distribution of the reversal phases and initial position of cells are
random, then we assume that collective dynamics of cells is diffusion-like and it is described by the equation of the
general type (1). In this section, we obtain a numerical approximation of the diffusion coefficient D(p) in (1) to match
the results of MSM simulations. This is achieved by running MSM simulations with a top-hat initial distribution and
using Boltzmann-Matano (BM) analysis [18] applied to the ensemble-averaged MSM density profile on the right half of
the spatial domain at time t = tD . Here and below tD describes the time at which we apply BM analysis. (Description
of the BM analysis is given in Appendix A). Then we demonstrate that numerical solutions of (1) with D(p) obtained
using BM analysis, yield density dependence on space and time which are in a very good agreement with the one
obtained using MSM simulations, justifying initial assumption of collective dynamics of cells being diffusion-like.
Results of MSM simulations unavoidably have noise due to the finite size of stochastic ensemble used to determine
cellular densities. BM analysis relies on calculating derivatives of density and we apply Gaussian filter to the MSM
density data to smooth out both p and all its derivatives [21]. We checked that the change of parameters of the
Gaussian filter resulted in only small corrections without any systematic error.
Typically, to perform BM analysis we run MSM using an initial top-hat distribution of length 1, 000 in a domain
of size 4, 000 (see the end of Section II for more details). For most of our simulations, the top-hat is wide enough so
that during simulation time the density at the middle of the domain remains close to the initial density pmax (in most
simulations pmax = 1). It means that cells mostly move near the boundary of initial top-hat distribution while at the
middle of the domain the cellular density is almost constant. This allows us to ignore the left half of the domain and
treat the cell distribution as if it were step-wise shaped in an infinite domain. This is necessary in order to perform

9

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 4: (a-d) Four stochastic realizations of the pairwise jam time that a single cell experiences with its two
adjacent neighbors. Collisions with the left and right neighbors are colored blue and green respectively for a total of
1,000 different collisions at average cellular density 0.95 and △x = 0.001.

BM analysis which is exact for infinite spatial interval with step-wise initial conditions only. In Appendix B we study
the accuracy of BM analysis for a finite width of top-hat initial conditions.
Another limitation of the BM analysis is that it requires calculating (dp(x)/dx)−1 . Due to the presence of the
regions where the density is constant, singularities of (dp(x)/dx)−1 may be generated in the calculation of the nonlinear diffusion coefficient near the end of the diffusion curves where p is close to 0 or pmax . These artificial singularities
result from a loss of numerical precision near singularity of (dp(x)/dx)−1 which is clearly seen near p = 0 and p = 1
in all Figures below that include D(p). To reduce such loss of numerical precision we only perform BM analysis in
the neighborhood of the interface that encompasses the initial step of a top-hat instead of the entire right half of the
domain. It can be also mitigated by performing a cubic spline interpolation of D(p) from the domain 0 < p < 1 to
values around p = 0 and p = 1. This, however, appears to be not necessary because the loss of precision does not
affect prediction of the density dynamics in (1) in any significant way.
Since the BM analysis approach for calculating the diffusion coefficient assumes that the nonlinear diffusion equation
(1) is solved on an infinite domain, there will be errors in calculating the diffusion coefficient if there is significant
density near the boundaries of our finite computations domain. So if were to choose tD that is too large, the analysis
would fail. Also, if were to choose tD that is too small, then not enough cells would reverse to generate diffusion. We
found that any time between tD = 125 and tD = 10, 000 appears to be sufficient for generating reasonably universal
diffusion curves for T = 8 as shown in Figure 6a. In other words, diffusion coefficient curves D(p) generated at

10

FIG. 5: Average cluster collision time τcluster as a function of density p for different values of ∆x. It is seen that
τcluster → ∞ for p → 1.

different times tD , are close to each other. This near-independence of D(p) from tD justifies our assumption of the
collective dynamics of cells being diffusion-like and described by (1).
Small difference between different diffusion curves D(p) generated at different times tD , is due to the absence of
diffusion for p < p0 , where the critical density p0 is defined in (4). For p < p0 there are practically no jams between
cells (see Section IV) and, subsequently, there is no diffusion. (Some occasional jams are still possible only because
cells are not in fully quasi-equilibrium and because of finite value of △x.) BM analysis assumes that D(p) is an
analytical function. But a sharp drop of diffusion to zero for p < p0 breaks that analyticity. Therefore, in BM analysis
approach a drop of D(p) from finite value at p → p0 + 0 to the zero value at p → p0 − 0 is replaced by a smooth
function shown in Figures 6a and b (see also Section VIII for more relevant discussion on this subject). Thus, nonzero
values of D(p) for p < p0 in Figures 6a and b are artifacts of the BM method. Also, finite values of △x contribute to
nonzero value of D(p) for p < p0 but that contribution is small for △x ≤ 0.1 in comparison with contribution of BM
analysis. In the limit △x → 0 there is no average macroscopic motion of cells for p < p0 . MSM simulations indicate
this by the sharp drop of density for p < p0 . (Such drop is not completely vertical because of finite sizes of cells in
the MSM.) In addition, macroscopic averaging requires taking into account a finite spatial width of that sharp drop
of density. We conclude that the difference between MSM and PDE curves in Figure 6c for p < p0 is due to the
limitation of applicability of BM analysis for p < p0 .
Unless otherwise specified below we use tD = 500 to generate the diffusion curves.
To demonstrate that there is little difference in the solutions of (1) with diffusion coefficients D(p) chosen based
on BM analysis with tD = 500 versus tD = 10, 000, we compare the resulting numerical solutions with the densities
obtained using microscopic stochastic model simulations (see Figure 6c). Figure 6c shows that PDE density profiles
p(x) are almost indistinguishable for both values of tD . Furthermore, the difference between the numerical solutions
of the nonlinear diffusion equation and stochastic simulation results are negligible except for the region p < p0 .
Diffusion curves for different reversal periods T were also calculated (see Figure 6b). Large reversal periods T
produce high diffusion at low densities, and low diffusion at high densities. Small reversal periods produce low
diffusion at low densities and high diffusion at high densities. In the former case the cells move left or right until they
collide and they stay jammed for a long time. In the later case, the cells rapidly oscillate left and right. Once the
cells spread out, collisions become infrequent.

11

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 6: (a) Diffusion coefficient D(p) generated by BM analysis at different times tD for T = 8. (b) D(p) generated
by BM analysis for varying reversal periods T for diffusion curves calculated from BM analysis at tD = 500. (c)
Density profiles from MSM simulations vs. PDE density profiles (solutions of (1)) at t = 60 and t = 30, 000 obtained
using diffusion coefficients from (a) with tD = 500 and tD = 10, 000. It is seen that the fit between two types of
density profiles is very good except the region of small density p < p0 = 0.2.

FIG. 7: Numerical solution of the diffusion equation (1) (with D(p) from BM analysis) plotted against the
ensemble-averaged MSM results at t = 60 and t = 5, 000 for different reversal periods T . PDE and MSM results are
almost indistinguishable.

12

FIG. 8: Comparison of ensemble-averaged MSM simulations with numerical solution of (1) (with D(p) from BM
analysis) using different initial densities. MSM densities are not smooth because of finite size of statistical ensemble.
It is seen that PDE results are well approximations for MSM for p > p0 if we average over fast fluctuations of MSM
densities. Simulations results were taken at t = 50, 000

B.

Testing accuracy of the nonlinear diffusion model and macroscopic limit of MSM

To test that the diffusion curves in Figure 6b actually predict the diffusion in the stochastic model, we compared
numerical solutions of the diffusion equation (1) with D(p) derived using BM analysis of MSM simulations with
different reversal periods at an early and a later times (see Figure 7). Very good match is demonstrated for p > p0 ,
where the critical density p0 is defined in (4).
To test whether the dynamics of the discrete stochastic system is consistently well approximated by the diffusion
equation, independently of initial density, we compared the numerical solutions of the diffusion equation with the
MSM simulations for T = 8 reversal period and different initial conditions (different amplitudes of densities in the
initial top-hat profile). We first generated random initial conditions with constant average density and periodic
boundary conditions and allowed cells to move in the MSM simulations for t = 50, 000 to reach statistical equilibrium.
After that we inserted the obtained equilibrium distribution as a top part of top-hat initial condition and run MSM
simulations starting with these spatially nonuniform initial conditions. Figure 8 shows a very good match between
these simulations and numerical solutions of the nonlinear diffusion equation. Matching is not as good for smaller
densities due to the qualitative change of diffusion and lack of collisions for p < p0 as was explained above.
Since cells move on a discrete grid at discrete time steps, we test convergence of the system to a continuous description of cell movement by decreasing the grid spacing △x, and by scaling the lengths and time steps appropriately.
The results of the ensemble-averaged MSM simulations for the spatial profile of density are shown in Figure 9. It is
seen that the reduction of △x from 0.1 to 0.001 results only in small changes in the cellular density dynamics with
density curves for different △x practically indistinguishable in Figure 9. It suggests ∆x = 0.1 is already a quite good
approximation for the cellular dynamics in continuous limit.
The diffusion curves obtained from BM analysis are more sensitive to the change of ∆x compare with the sensitivity
of p(x) at Figure 9. Figure 10 shows the diffusion curves from BM analysis obtained at tD = 500 from the same MSM
simulations as in Figure 9. It is seen that D(p) is relatively well converges for ∆x . 0.01. These changes in D(p)
do not change the efficiency of BM analysis for the prediction of density dynamics as in Figure 6. For all values of
∆x = 0.1 the corresponding diffusion curves from BM analysis work well for the density dynamics. The effect of finite

13

FIG. 9: Spatial distribution of density at t = 30, 000 from the ensemble-averaged MSM simulations with different
∆x. Initial condition had a form of top-hat distribution of width 1000.

∆x is only to modify the diffusion through additional ∆x-dependent fluctuations of the reversal time T . The cause
of such modification is discussed in Section II.

FIG. 10: Diffusion coefficient D(p) generated by BM analysis at tD = 500 for the same simulation as in Figure 9.
We now address the effect of different values of ∆T0 . In Myxobactera colony, the fluctuations of T are possible with
probability density function for T sharply peaked near average reversal period T [19]. We study the role of noise in
the reversal period by changing the value of ∆T0 . For each ∆T0 we determine the nonlinear diffusion coefficient D(p)
using BM analysis [18] of ensemble averaged MSM simulations. We found that D(p) changes with ∆T0 as shown in
Figure 11. Then we compared the density dynamics from MSM simulations and the nonlinear diffusion equation (1).
For finite values of noise (typically for ∆T0 /T0 & 0.1) the agreement between (1) and MSM simulations is very good,
similar to shown in Figure 6c. When no noise is added (∆T0 = 0), we found that (1) is not a good approximation of
the density dynamics, i.e. MSM density no longer follows (1) with D(p) from BM analysis as shown in Figure 12.
We conclude that the finite noise appears necessary for the nonlinear diffusion approximation to work. Also note
that that finite value of ∆x creates the effective noise in T as discussed above. It means that generally effects of finite
∆T0 and finite ∆x add up. To distinguish these effects one can reduce ∆x.

14

FIG. 11: Diffusion curves D(p) for different values of variance ∆T0 of the reversal time T fluctuations (see the
equation (3) and after it for definitions) obtained from BM analysis of ensemble-averaged MSM simulations.

FIG. 12: Density curves for MSM simulations with ∆T0 = 0 and attempted PDE fit using BM analysis at
T = 30, 000 and TD = 500. Initial condition had a form of top-hat distribution of width 1000.

VIII.

ANALYTICAL APPROXIMATIONS OF THE PAIRWISE AND TOTAL COLLISION TIMES

In this section an analytical approximation of the pairwise collision time and semi-analytical fit to the total collision
times are derived. We mostly focus on a limit of intermediate cellular density when p > p0 but p is not very close to
one so that many collisions between cells are still pairwise and they do not result in larger clusters. Assume that a cell
experiences on average jam(s) of total duration τ1 from the left and τ2 from the right during each reversal period 2T .
We include both pairwise jams and indirect jams into definition of τ (see Section IV for detailed definitions of jams).
In such a case a shift of the center of mass of a given cell per period 2T is (τ1 − τ2 )v. The average collision time τ in
a given direction (left or right) must be a slow function of x (i.e. τ1 ≃ τ2 ≡ τ ) to avoid large microscopic gradients.
Typically τ can be viewed as the average (ensemble or time average) over many collisions (jamming events) for each
given cell. It is necessary to stress that τ in this section is the (total) jam time (from both direct and indirect jams)
per period T. This quantity is different from τcluster from Section IV because τ never exceeds T by its definition.
Although jam times can fluctuate strongly from collision to collision (as seen in Figure 4), after averaging over
several collisions τ becomes slow function of x and t. We also neglect for now the influence of the fluctuations of

15
the reversal time, i.e. we assume that all reversal phases are constant. Below in this Section we also separately
discuss the effect of these fluctuations. Taking into account finite value of τ we estimate the local cellular density
as p = L/hLdist i, where the average distance between neighboring cells is Ldist = L + v|φ̃1 − φ̃2 | − vτ and h. . .i
means statistical averaging over the uniformly distributed phases φ̃1 and φ̃2 . This expression is, however, only true
for |φ̃1 − φ̃2 | ≥ τ because distance between centers of mass of two neighboring cells is ≥ L. For pairs of cells with
smaller difference in phases |φ̃1 − φ̃2 | ≤ τ we have to take into account simultaneous collisions (jams) of three and
more cells. During each triple collision two neighboring cells have pairwise jams and third one has an indirect jam.
If τ is small |φ̃1 − φ̃2 | ≤ τ then cells 1 and 2 move most of the time parallel to each other, either attached to each
other or separated by a typical distance 2v|φ̃1 − φ̃2 |. After reversing direction cell always alternates between these two
possibilities. A distance between average positions of the centers of mass of these two cells is ∼ v|φ̃1 − φ̃2 |. Cells 1
and 2 move almost all the time together separated by that average small distance between them. After colliding with
another (third) cell on the left (referred to as cell 0) or with a cell on the right (referred to as cell 3) they quickly form
3-cell cluster. Assume that lifetime of each such cluster is about τ . Then pairwise jam time for cells 0 (with cell 1) or
cell 3 (with cell 2) is ≃ τ . For cell 1 and 2 each collision is either a pairwise jam with the jam time ≃ τ or a cluster
jam with the jam time ≃ τ . So the average jam time is ≃ τ in both cases. The distance between average positions of
cells 0 and 1 (or between cell 2 and 3) is ≃ L + v(|φ̃1 − φ̃2 | − τ ). Based on that we obtain the following approximate
expression for the average distance between two neighboring cells combining contributions from |φ̃1 − φ̃2 | ≥ τ and
|φ̃1 − φ̃2 | ≤ τ :
"Z
#


Z τ
T
τ 
T
−1
hLdist i = T
(L + v[φ − τ ])dφ +
[L + vO(φ)]dφ = L + v
,
(5)
− τ + vτ O
2
T
τ
0
where we included the contribution of the average distance ∼ v|φ̃1 − φ̃2 | between cells 1 and 2 for |φ̃1 − φ̃2 | ≤ τ into
O(φ) term. Here and below by O(x) we mean O(x) = c1 x + c2 x2 + c3 x3 + . . . with constants c1 , c2 , . . . generally
∼ 1. Terms ∝ vτ 2 /T, vτ 3 /T 2 , vτ 4 /T 3 , etc. in (5) result from the 3-cell, 4-cell, 5-cell, etc. cluster contributions,
respectively. To establish scaling associated with the number of cells in a cluster we note that probability to have
n-cell cluster is roughly proportional to the probability Pn−2 of n − 2 neighboring cells simultaneously having small
differences in phases |φi − φi+1 | . τ, i = 1, 2. . . . , n − 2. Here Pn−2 ∝ (τ /T )n−2 because phases are statistically
independent. n-cell cluster is formed by these n − 2 cells together with two surrounding cells involved in pairwise
jams with the average time τ . Similar to the case of 3-cell cluster, the n − 2 cells inside of a cluster have average
jam time τ dominated by the indirect jams. So the resulting contribution to the hLdist i is ∼ vτ Pn−2 . Of course for
densely packed clusters such approximation is oversimplifies but the general form of O(x) remains the same. These
qualitative arguments do not affect the quantitative calculations described below and yield qualitative understanding
of the MSM dynamics.
The equation (5) results in the following relation between cellular density and the collision time
pan =

L
L
=
.
hLdist i
L + vT /2 − vτ + vτ O(τ /T )

After solving the equation (6) for τ we obtain the analytical approximation for the average collision time


L
L
T
−
+ + τ O(τ /T ) Θ(p − p0 ),
τ (p) =
2
vp
v

(6)

(7)

where p0 is given by (4), Θ(y) is the Heaviside step function (Θ(y) = 1 for y > 0 and Θ(y) = 0 for y < 0) and the
factor Θ(p − p0 ) results from the condition that τ ≥ 0 (recall that it is shown in Section IV that jams are absent for
p < p0 if we neglect the fluctuations of the reversal time).
Neglecting τ O(τ /T ) in (7) means that we take into account pairwise jams only and neglect indirect jams resulting
in the average pairwise collision time τpair :


T
L
L
τpair (p) =
Θ(p − p0 ).
(8)
−
+
2
vp
v
Figure 13a compares τpair (p)/T simulations obtained using MSM with simulations from (8). MSM simulations were
performed with the periodic boundary conditions at the spatial interval of length 1000 and initial random placement
of N cells (avoiding configurations forbidden by excluded volume principle). We used △x = 0.05 and △x = 0.005.
N was chosen for each simulation to match given p (i.e. N = 1000 p). All types of collision times were calculated by
running simulations till the final simulation time tf inal = 106 . We also assumed ergodicity and recorded collisions of

16

(a)

(b)

FIG. 13: (a) Dependence of τpair (p)/T from MSM simulations with lattice size ∆x = 0.05 (dash-dotted line) and
∆x = 0.005 (dashed line) in comparison with the analytical expression (8) for τpair /T (solid line) where T = 8. (b)
Relative time cells spend non-moving per period T = 8 (dashed line) vs. relative total jam time τ /T (solid line) with
∆x = 0.005. τ includes both indirect and pairwise collisions. Decrease of △x results in better match between each
pairs of curves.

all cells during each such simulation. Convergence was tested by comparing the results from a subset of densities to
results obtained with tf inal = 107 and a good match was demonstrated. Ergodicity was also tested by comparing the
collision time results from several different stochastic realizations with tf inal = 106 and a very good match was shown
for tested density values.
Figure 13a shows that MSM simulations and (8) are in a reasonably good agreement for p > p0 . For p < p0 we
generally need to modify (8) to include the fluctuations of the reversal time. Such modification is outside the scope
of this paper. We however can immediately estimate the order of such modification. E.g., for p = p0 cells do not
collide without fluctuations of T but they often come to zero distance between them and move in parallel as explained
in Section IV. It means that if we include fluctuations of T then the typical pairwise collision time will be ∼ ∆T0 .
Respectively τpair (p0 ) takes a value τpair (p0 ) ∼ ∆T0 (in contrast with τpair (p0 ) = 0 in (8)) in good agreement with
Figure 13a (∆T0 /T = 0.09 for the parameters of MSM of Figure 13a while τpair (p0 )/T ≃ 0.1 for the dashed curve of
Figure 13a). For p < p0 such modification is decreased because for smaller density cells collide only due the random
walk from the fluctuations of T . Smaller the density, more time it takes for random walk to ensure collisions. It results
in the decay of τpair (p) to zero as p → 0. For p > p0 the fluctuations of T results in more efficient exploration of the
space by cells which increase τpair compare with (8). This explains the difference between solid curve and dashed
curve in Figure 13a.
We also performed simulations with decreasing values of △x to demonstrate that △x = 0.05 is already small enough
to give a good approximation of τpair (p) compare with the continuous limit △x → 0. Figure13a shows that with
dashed and dotted curves corresponding to τpair (p) for △x = 0.005 and △x = 0.05, respectively.
The same MSM simulations were used to calculate the total collision time per period T . In simulations we distinguish
two types of the total collision time. The first type is the total collision time τ itself (total jam time per period T )
which includes both pairwise jams and indirect jams. The second type is the average time (per period T ) cells
spend without movement which includes pairwise jams, indirect jams and jams due to finite value of △x. The third
contribution occurs when two cells are attached to each other and move in the same direction. If a cell which moves
behind second one, is chosen by the MSM algorithm then its movement is prevented by the second cell. This artificial
effect is due to discretization and finite value of △x. It disappears for △x → 0 so that both types of the total collision
time are the same in that limit. Figure 13b shows the time cells spend without movement per period T versus τ . It
demonstrates that these total collision times (normalized to T ) are very close to each other for △x → 0.005.
In contrast to the pairwise collision time used in (8), the equation (7) includes an extra term τ O(τ /T ) which
corresponds to the total jam time τ per period T . Dashed line in Figure 14 shows τ (p) dependence in MSM simulations
with the noise in T (with the standard ∆T0 = 0.9). We now approximate the term τ O(τ /T ) in the equation (7) in

17

FIG. 14: Plots of the total collision time per period τ /T from MSM simulations (dashed line 1) and from the
analytic approximation of τapprox (9) (solid line 2). The lattice size is △x = 0.005 and T = 8.
the simplest possible way neglecting noise in T as O(x) = c1 x with c1 = 2 which yields


τpair (p)
τapprox (p) = τpair (p) 1 + 2
Θ(p − p0 ),
T

(9)

where τpair (p) is given by (8). Θ-function reflects the neglect of noise in T similar to (8). We choose c1 = 2 here
to ensure correct asymptotic value τapprox (1) = T for p = 1 because all cells are jammed all the time in that case.
Figure 14 shows a reasonably good fit between (9) (solid line 2) and the total collision time per period τ /T from
MSM simulations with ∆T0 = 0.9 (dashed line 1). It suggests that if we add an effect of noise in (9) then it might
become very good fit. Exact analytical theory is needed in order to verify this hypophysis which is quite a challenging
problem and which is outside the scope of this article.
IX.

CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

In this paper, a connection was established between stochastic 1D model of microscopic motion of the system of
regularly reversing self-propelled rod-shaped cells and a nonlinear diffusion equation describing macroscopic behavior of
this system. Macroscopically (ensemble-vise) averaged stochastic dynamics was shown to be in a very good agreement
with the numerical solutions of the nonlinear diffusion equation (1), where the diffusion coefficient was obtained using
BM analysis. Critical density p0 was found such that for p < p0 the cellular diffusion is dominated by the diffusion
(random walk) of individual cells while for p > p0 the diffusion is dominated by the collisions between cells. p0 was
determined (4) from the condition that cells do not jam with each other in the no noise limit. We found that the role
of noise in the reversal period is crucial. Without noise, BM analysis cannot reproduce the MSM dynamics which
means that nonlinear diffusion is not a good approximation for the MSM dynamics. However, even relatively small
level (∆T0 /T ≃ 0.1) of such noise produces excellent agreement between BM based nonlinear diffusion and MSM
simulations. The primary role of such small noise is to ensure randomization of collisions between different cells in
the system at large in comparison with the reversing period T times.
An analytical approximation of the pairwise collision time τpair (8) and semi-analytical fit for the total jam time
per reversal period τapprox (p) (9) have been also obtained. Frequent collisions for p > p0 are responsible for the
nonlinear diffusion of the cellular density. For p < p0 cells tend to spread out so their collisions are possible only if
we take into account the fluctuations of the reversal time. Without such fluctuations there are no collisions and no
cellular transport is possible because cells experience periodic motion in space and time. There still remains quite
a challenging problem of developing a full statistical theory of 1D self-propelled rod dynamics with reversals which
would be applicable for all densities. Such theory would require a detailed description of formation and interaction
of large cellular clusters.
It was also shown that nonlinear diffusion coefficient D(p) used to describe the macroscopic process, changes
depending on the reversal period. Small and large reversal periods yield diffusion coefficients that favor high and low
density diffusion respectively as is shown in Figure 7. Since dynamics of the system is determined by the dimensionless
parameters vT /L (the ratio of distance traveled by cells between reversals and the cell length) and p, increase of the

18
speed at which cells move is equivalent to the increase of the reversal period. Thus, cell populations with small T are
able to spread out effectively at high densities while large T promotes cell population swarming at smaller densities.
An interesting problem to be studied in future work is to determine the optimal choice of reversal time T maximizing
the swarming rate of Myxobacteria colony using nonlinear diffusion equation, and compare it with the one obtained
in [5] using stochastic model.
Appendix A: Boltzmann-Matano Analysis

In this appendix we review Boltzmann-Matano (BM) Analysis (see [18] for details) for the readers convenience.
Assume that the process we are studying can be modeled using the nonlinear diffusion equation (1) with some unknown
nonlinear diffusion coefficient D(p).
BM analysis allow to recover D(p) from the 1D dynamics of the cellular density p with the stepwise initial condition
(
pL ,
if x < xM
p(x, 0) =
.
(A1)
pR
if x > xM
at infinite 1D domain. Here we assume that pL > pR .
Special property of the stepwise initial condition is that it does not have any spatial scale (spatial size of system
is infinite and spatial scale of jump at x = xM is zero. Then the only possible solution has a self-similar form ρ(ζ)
which was found by Boltzmann in 1894. Here
ζ = (x − xM )/t1/2

(A2)

which is motivated by a self-similar solution of a heat equation (for D = const). xM is a reference point also known
∂
1ζ ∂
as the Matanos interface. Assuming that p(ζ) does not depend on t explicitly, we obtain that
p(ζ) = −
p(ζ)
∂t
2 t ∂ζ
1 ∂
∂
p(ζ) = 1/2
p(ζ) which allows to reduce (1) to
and
∂x
t ∂ζ
−

ζ ∂
∂ i
∂ h
D(p) p .
p=
2 ∂ζ
∂ζ
∂ζ

(A3)

Since the solutions to a non-linear diffusion equation with stepwise initial conditions are monotonic, it follows that for
any given fixed time the function p(x) is invertible with respect to x. Below we use the notation x(p) for the inverse
of p(x). Integrating both sides of (A3) with respect to ζ yields
Z p
1
− 1/2
(x(p) − xM )dp = D(p)pζ
2t
pL
where the left hand side follows from
Z ζ

−∞

Since

∂p
∂ζ

ζ

∂p
dζ =
∂ζ

Z

p

ζ(p)dp =

pL

1
t1/2

Z

p

(x(p) − xM )dp.

pL

∂p
= t1/2 ∂x
, the equation can be rewritten as

 −1 Z p
1 ∂p
(x(p) − xM )dp,
D(p) = −
2t ∂x
pL
which gives the Boltzmann description of the diffusion equation. Now it is possible to calculate the appropriate value
of the interface, xM , to ensure that the diffusion calculation is consistent. Specifically, since mass diffuses from the
left to the right across the interface, there is a mass conservation equation where the mass lost on the left of the
interface should equal the mass gained on the right of the interface,
Z ∞
Z xM
(p(x) − pR )dx.
(pL − p(x))dx =
−∞

xM

19
Again inverting p(x), we can calculate the area under of the integrals in terms of x(p) to get the following equivalent
expression
Z pM
Z pL
(xM − x(p))dp,
(x(p) − xM )dp =
pR

pM

which simplifies to
Z

pR

(x(p) − xM )dp = 0.

pL

Mass conservation occurs precisely when
xM =

R pR
pL

x(p)dp

pL − pR

,

(A4)

which is the Matano’s result to determine xM if it is unknown in advance.
In our simulations we know xM in advance so in fact we use Boltzmann analysis, but not BM analysis (except
additional tests discussed in Appendix B). Also in our simulations pL = pmax and pR = 0.
Appendix B: Accuracy of Boltzmann-Matano Analysis

BM analysis, described in Appendix A, is defined on infinite spatial interval with step-wise initial conditions only.
Assume now that we apply BM analysis for top-hat initial conditions as described in Section II. In that case BM
analysis is only approximate one because initial conditions include spatial scale xwidth , which is the spatial width of
top-hat. Self-similar solution of Appendix A does not agree with top-hat. That solution is only approximately valid
in the neighborhood of each of two steps of top-hat. Because of spatial symmetry it is enough to consider any of
these two steps. To estimate the accuracy of BM analysis in that case we note that if the density at x = 0 (middle of
top-hat) remains nearly constant then BM analysis is still applicable (except small unavoidable corrections because
for any t > 0 density is never exactly constant). Assuming that the diffusion coefficient D(p) ∼ 1, we roughly estimate
that the width of initial top-hat doubles with time when D(p)t0 /x2width ∼ 1 which gives t0 ∼ 106 for xwidth = 1000.
For t ≪ t0 a change of density in the middle of top-hat is small in agreement with Figure 6. A similar limitation
of BM analysis is that the total spatial width of the simulation domain must exceed the width of top-hat in several
times to make sure that the cellular density remains low at boundaries as seen in Figure 6.
As additional test of BM analysis we varied the domain length and width of the initial top-hat distribution calculating diffusion coefficient by BM analysis from MSM simulations (Figure 15a). We observed that small top-hat
width ∼ 100 is not enough for applicability of BM analysis(dash-dotted curve in Figure 15a) while top-hat widths
& 1000 total domain lengths & 4000 are far enough for such applicability. Figure 15b compares D(p) obtained from
PDE simulation (solid line) and MSM simulations (dashed line) for top-hat initial conditions of width 600. Difference
between these curves is almost indistinguishable. This indicates that our statistical ensemble in MSM simulations
is large enough to avoid influence of noise in the data on the diffusion curve. We also tested MSM data with and
without the Gaussian filter and obtained the same diffusion curves. Larger widths were also tested and proven to
match very well, but the results are not displayed here. From these observations, we can conclude that the generated
diffusion curves are independent of the width of the top hat used if the top hat is sufficiently long enough in such a
way that the center and boundaries have constant density.
We would like to point out to avoid confusion that we need BM analysis only to determine the diffusion curves at
reasonably small times (t ≪ t0 ). After that we run PDE simulations with these diffusion curves for much longer time
(when density is changing both at the middle of top-hat and at boundaries). For these much larger times we also see
very good agreement between MSM simulations and PDE simulations (see e.g. Figures 3 and 7).
As discussed in Section VII, another limitation of BM analysis is the loss of numerical precision near p(x) = const
because BM analysis requires calculating (dp(x)/dx)−1 . Many Figures (6 and 15) have jumps of D(p) near p = 1
which is due to such loss of numerical precision which can be fixed by the polynomial extrapolation. That is however
not necessary because these jumps do not change results of PDE simulations in any significant way.
We also tested BM analysis vs. Boltzmann analysis as shown in Figure 15c. Although we know xM from top-hat
initial conditions, but for finite width of top-hat we can ask if allowing xM to be located not exactly at the step of
top-hat could improve the accuracy of BM analysis to determine D(p). In that sense we can consider xM as additional
fitting parameter to accomodate finiteness of top-had width. Figure 15c compares diffusion curves obtained from BM
and Boltzmann analysis vs. exact diffusion curve. We see that difference in accuracy between BM and Boltzmann
analysis is very small. It appears the advantage of using BM analysis vs. Bolztmann analysis is not significant in our
case.

20

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 15: (a) The nonlinear diffusion coefficient D(p) determined from BM analysis of MSM simulations with
different initial top-hat widths. The density profiles at tD = 500 were used for all curves. It is seen that curves for
the widths 1000 and above are almost undistinguishable. (b) D(p) obtained from MSM simulations (dashed line curve 1) and PDE simulation (solid line - curve 2) for top-hat initial conditions of width 600. Density profile at time
tD = 1, 000 is used for BM analysis. (c) Comparison of BM analysis with Boltzmann analysis from PDE density
profile at tD = 500. Dashed line is D(p) used to produce density profiles from PDE simulations. All curves at (b)
and (c) are almost indistinguishable.

Acknowledgments

Work of P.L. was supported by NSF grant DMS 0719895 and UNM RAC grant. R.G. was supported by the
University of Notre Dame’s CAM Fellowship and partially supported by NSF grant DMS 0931642. M.A. was partially
supported by the NSF grants DMS 0931642 and BCS 0826958.

[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]

D. Kaiser, Curr. Bio. 17, 561 (2007).
Y. Wu, D. Kaiser, Y. Jiang, and M. Alber, PLoS Computational Biology 3, e253 (2007).
A. Kaiser and C. Crosby, Cell Motility 3, 227245 (1983).
R. Yu and D. Kaiser, Molecular Microbiology 63, 454 (2007).
Y. Wu, D. Kaiser, Y. Jiang, and M. Alber, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 1222 (2009).
T. Mignot, J. Merlie, and D. Zusman, Science 310, 855 (2005).
D. E. Whitworth, ed., Myxobacteria Multicellularity and Differentiation (ASM Press, 2008).
M. Alber, N. Chen, T. Glimm, and P. M. Lushnikov, Phys. Rev. E 73, 051901 (2006).
M. Alber, N. Chen, P. M. Lushnikov, and S. A. Newman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 168102 (2007).
P. M. Lushnikov, N. Chen, and M. Alber, Physical Review E 78, 061904 (2008).
M. Alber, R. S. Gejji, and B. Kazmierczak, Appl. Math. Lett. 22 (2009).

21
[12] C. S. Patlak, Bull. Math. Biophys. 15, 311 (1953).
[13] E. F. Keller and L. A. Segel, J. Theor. Biol 26, 399 (1970).
[14] M. P. Brenner, P. Constantin, L. P. Kadanoff, A. Schenkel, and S. C. Venkataramani, Nonlinearity 12, 1071 (1999), ISSN
0951-7715.
[15] P. M. Lushnikov, Physics Letters A 374, 1678 (2010).
[16] S. Dejak, P. Lushnikov, Y. Ovchinnikov, and I. Sigal, Submitted to Physica D (2010).
[17] P. J. Murray, C. M. Edwards, M. J. Tindall, and P. K. Maini, Phys. Rev. E 80, 031912 (2009).
[18] D. Gupta and T. J. Watson, Diffusion processes in advanced technological materials (Birkhäuser, 2005).
[19] R. Welch and A. D. Kaiser, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 14907 (2001).
[20] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics (Butterworth-Heinemann; 3rd edition, 1980).
[21] M. Nixon and A. Aguado, Feature extraction and image processing (Academic Press, 2008).

