Computational modeling of differences in the quorum sensing induced luminescence
phenotypes of Vibrio harveyi and Vibrio cholerae
Andrew T Fenleya, Suman K Banikb , Rahul V Kulkarnia,∗
a Department

of Physics, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24061-0435, USA
of Chemistry, Bose Institute, 93/1 A P C Road, Kolkata 700 009, India

arXiv:1101.5216v1 [q-bio.MN] 27 Jan 2011

b Department

Abstract
Vibrio harveyi and Vibrio cholerae have quorum sensing pathways with similar design and highly homologous components including multiple small RNAs (sRNAs). However, the associated luminescence phenotypes of strains with sRNA deletions differ
dramatically: in V. harveyi, the sRNAs act additively; however, in V. cholerae, the sRNAs act redundantly. Furthermore, there are
striking differences in the luminescence phenotypes for different pathway mutants in V. harveyi and V. cholerae. However these
differences have not been connected with the observed differences for the sRNA deletion strains in these bacteria. In this work, we
present a model for quorum sensing induced luminescence phenotypes focusing on the interactions of multiple sRNAs with target
mRNA. Within our model, we find that one key parameter – the fold-change in protein concentration necessary for luminescence
activation – can control whether the sRNAs appear to act additively or redundantly. For specific parameter choices, we find that
differences in this key parameter can also explain hitherto unconnected luminescence phenotypes differences for various pathway
mutants in V. harveyi and V. cholerae. The model can thus provide a unifying explanation for observed differences in luminescence
phenotypes and can also be used to make testable predictions for future experiments.
Keywords: Vibrio harveyi, Vibrio cholerae, quorum sensing, sRNA, luminescence

1. Introduction
Bacterial survival is critically dependent on regulatory networks which monitor and respond to environmental fluctuations. An important example of such a regulatory network is
the pathway responsible for bacterial “quorum sensing”, commonly defined as the regulation of gene expression in response
to cell density [6]. Quorum sensing bacteria produce, secrete and detect signalling molecules called autoinducers (AIs)
which accumulate in the surroundings as the cell population increases. Differential expression of certain sets of genes occurs
when the local concentration of AIs exceeds a critical threshold. Several processes critical to bacterial colonization and virulence e.g. biofilm formation, bioluminescence, and secretion
of virulence factors [5, 7, 8, 18, 20, 32] were shown to be regulated in this manner, leading to increased interest in characterizing quorum sensing based regulation in bacteria.
The quorum sensing networks in Vibrio harveyi and Vibrio
cholerae were recently analyzed in considerable detail [26].
The basic network components are highly homologous in the
two species, to the extent that the bioluminescence genes from
V. harveyi1 were used to characterize the regulatory network
in V. cholera using luminescence assays [13, 14, 21]. In both
species, the central regulatory module consists of multiple quorum regulatory small RNAs (qrr1-4 in V. cholerae and qrr1-5
∗ Corresponding

author
Email address: kulkarni@vt.edu (Rahul V Kulkarni)
1 The corresponding bioluminescence genes are absent in V. cholerae.
Preprint submitted to Journal of Theoretical Biology

in V. harveyi) which control levels of the master regulator for
quorum sensing: LuxR in V. harveyi and HapR in V. cholerae.
LuxR/HapR levels are maintained below the threshold for luminescence activation at low cell densities due to repression by
the small RNAs (sRNAs), whereas at high cell densities quorum
sensing leads to a reduction in sRNA production rates, thereby
increasing LuxR/HapR levels above the threshold leading to luminescence activation. By observing luminescence levels as
a function of cell density for different mutants (corresponding
to different deletions in the quorum sensing pathway components), several characteristics of pathway structure and function
were inferred.
The above studies documented striking differences in luminescence phenotypes in the two species even though the regulatory components of the pathways are very similar. The most
dramatic differences were seen in the luminescence phenotypes
of the qrr sRNA mutants. In V. cholerae, the four qrr sRNAs acted redundantly [14] – all mutants with only one sRNA
present had luminescence phenotypes that were identical to the
WT luminescence phenotype. In contrast, the corresponding
sRNAs in V. harveyi acted additively such that different mutants with only one sRNA present had distinct luminescence
phenotypes compared to the WT phenotype. Thus in V. harveyi
all the sRNAs must be present in order to mimic the wild-type
luminescence phenotype [30]. Apart from these differences in
the luminescence phenotypes of the sRNA mutants, there were
also significant differences in the luminescence phenotypes of
strains corresponding to deletions of upstream pathway elements in the two species. An important challenge for compuJanuary 28, 2011

tational analysis of quorum sensing pathways is to present a
unifying explanation for the various, apparently unrelated, differences in the luminescence phenotypes for the two species
despite the fact that the pathway elements are very similar (see
figure 1).

but significant levels at low cell densities (such that it can effectively repress AphA to the extent noted) rather than fully repressing it. Furthermore, experiments in V. harveyi examining
regulation of additional targets by LuxR indicated that LuxR
levels change in a graded manner as opposed to a sharp, ultrasensitive switch [33]. Thus, there is a need for computational
analysis of sRNA-target regulatory interactions in the context
of the quorum sensing pathway, which is consistent with these
experimental results and which also provides a unifying explanation for observed luminescence phenotypes.
In what follows, we will present a simplified model for luminescence regulation during quorum sensing in V. harveyi and
V. cholerae, which is an extension of work previously done by
the authors of this paper [2]. For a given choice of parameters,
the model accounts for the dramatic differences in the luminescence phenotypes for the sRNA mutants in the two species
based on a single parameter difference. The analysis also provides a unifying explanation for currently unrelated differences
between the luminescence phenotypes of different mutants in
the quorum sensing pathways and gives rise to testable predictions for future experiments. This work thus provides a framework for systems-level analysis of the quorum sensing pathway
in the V. harveyi and V. cholerae while complementing previous
models of V. fischeri [12, 24, 25] and suggests future experiments that can help in further unraveling the function of this
critical regulatory pathway.

Figure 1: A schematic of the quorum sensing gene networks. (Left) V. harveyi
and (Right) V. cholerae employ multiple AIs whose signals are integrated together in order to regulate either LuxR or HapR. V. harveyi produces and monitors the concentrations of three different AIs (HAI-1, CAI-1, and AI-2), while V.
cholerae produces and monitors the concentrations of two different AIs (CAI-1
and AI-2). Via very similar phosphorelay networks composed of highly homologous components, the bacteria transduce the signal produced by the external
AI concentrations through the network. In both bacteria, the sensors transfer
phosphate groups to the protein LuxU when the external concentration of AIs
is low. LuxU then passes the phosphate groups to the protein LuxO which,
when phosphorylated, is responsible for the production of sRNAs. The flow of
phosphate groups slows and then reverses when the external concentration of
AIs continues to increase, thus reducing the production of the sRNAs.

1.1. Overview of experimental results
We begin with an overview of the two pathways and associated luminescence phenotypes in the two species. A schematic
representation of the two pathways is shown in figure 1. The
core elements are the same in both species: a multi-component
phosphorelay involving sensor proteins (which can function as
kinases as well as phosphatases), the phosphotransfer protein
LuxU, and the response regulator protein LuxO. Phosphorylated LuxO is responsible for the activation of multiple qrr sRNAs which in turn repress the quorum sensing master regulator
(LuxR in V. harveyi and HapR in V. cholerae).
The pathways do exhibit some differences in the number of
autoinducer synthase/sensor protein pairs and in the number of
sRNAs present. V. harveyi has three known autoinducer synthase/sensor protein pairs whereas V. cholerae has only two
known autoinducer synthase/sensor protein pairs. Furthermore,
V. harveyi has five qrr sRNAs as opposed to four in V. cholerae
[26]. However, our current understanding indicates that these
differences are not significant under the conditions tested. For
example, it was shown that qrr5 in V. harveyi is not quorum
sensing regulated or expressed under normal conditions [30]
and one of the autoinducer synthase/sensor protein pairs in V.
harveyi has minimal effects on quorum sensing based regulation [9]. Thus, both pathways can effectively be considered
as having two autoinducer synthase/sensor protein pairs and
four qrr sRNAs. Furthermore, the pathway components are
highly homologous, e.g. LuxR is greater than 90% identical
to HapR. However, despite these common features and similarities between components, the luminescence phenotypes show
dramatic differences as detailed below.

Previous work on modeling quorum sensing globally has developed a framework for measuring a bacterium’s ability to
sense its microenvironment [27]. By modeling the relative concentration of autoinducers inside and outside the cell, quorum
sensing bacteria can be characterized based on a ‘sensing potential’ and its relation to the associated activation properties, e.g.
the critical population density [27]. Modeling has also been
done at the genetic interaction level, in particular the interaction of sRNAs with target mRNAs. The solutions for the corresponding rate equations (for a range of parameter values) contained a sharp transition from a steady state wherein the target
mRNA was strongly repressed to one in which the sRNA was
strongly repressed [14–16, 19, 22, 23]. Since the WT luminescence phenotype also showed a sharp transition as cell density
increased, it was initially suggested that this transition corresponded to the sharp transition seen in the sRNA-target rate
equations. However, recent experimental results provide indications that this is not necessarily valid and correspondingly the
picture needs to be revised.
Experiments in V. cholerae showed that the expression levels of the virulence regulator AphA [11] to be about three-fold
lower in WT at low cell densities compared to a ∆hapR mutant. This indicates that WT V. cholerae maintains HapR at low
2

1011

type in V. cholerae. Furthermore, while deletion of the sensor
kinases (e.g. for the cqsS,luxQ mutant) changed the luminescence phenotype with respect to WT for V. harveyi, the corresponding WT and deletion mutant luminescence curves were
almost identical for V. cholerae [13]. These observations based
on experimental luminescence curves lead to some important
questions which need to be addressed:
1) How can we understand changes in RLU (Relative Light
Unit)/cell over several orders of magnitude corresponding to
small changes in cell density? 2) How are the phenotypes dramatically different despite the basic components/circuitry being
the same? 3) Is there a unifying explanation for the seemingly
unrelated differences in luminescence phenotypes for different
mutant strains?

1010

RLU

109
108
107
106
105 -3
10

1

10-2

10-1
OD

2

3

100

101

Figure 2: Experimental Wild-Type luminescence curves for V. harveyi and V.
cholerae. The solid, red curve represents the change in luminescence relative
to optical density (OD) for V. harveyi. There is a smooth transition in luminescence near OD 10−1 as the distribution of cells switch from “off” to “on” [30].
The dashed, red curve represents the change in luminescence relative to OD for
V. cholerae. There is a sharp transition in luminescence near OD 100 as the distribution of cells switch from “off” to “on” [14]. The vertical solid and dashed
lines represent possible OD concentrations that correspond to the beginning of
the cells in the population reaching a LuxR/HapR concentration necessary for
luminescence for V. harveyi and V. cholerae respectively. Regions indicated by
(1), (2), and (3) reflect the relative protein distributions labeled similarly and
shown in figure 4.

2. Methods
2.1. Modeling framework
In order to address the issues raised above, we will first
discuss the modeling framework and key assumptions of our
model. They are schematically illustrated in this section and
more quantitatively developed in following sections.
We assume that the measured luminescence levels per cell
are proportional to the rate of transcription of the luminescence
genes. Since these genes are activated by the quorum sensing
master regulators, their transcription rate is a function of cellular concentrations of LuxR/HapR. We assume that this function has a sharp threshold; as a simplification we represent it
by a step function such that cells with LuxR/HapR concentrations below the threshold produce no light whereas cells with
LuxR/HapR concentrations above the threshold produce maximal luminescence.
Since the experimentally measured quantity is the population average of the luminescence output/cell, we need to consider the steady state distribution of LuxR/HapR levels across
all cells. Recent work showed that the steady state protein distribution for proteins can be characterized as a Gamma distribution [4]. Accordingly, we represent the LuxR/HapR distribution
by a Gamma distribution with a given variance and whose mean
value is determined by solving the rate equations of our model
(see next section).
With the assumptions mentioned above, we can make significant inferences about quorum sensing networks based on the
luminescence data. The change in RLU/cell over several orders of magnitude corresponds to the steady state distribution
for LuxR/HapR crossing the luminescence activation threshold (see figure 3). Thus the mean concentration of LuxR/HapR
must change by the minimal amount indicated in the figure during the transition from the ‘dark’ phenotype to the maximally
luminescent phenotype. The WT luminescence curves indicate
that this change occurs gradually in V. harveyi (positions (1)
and (2) in figure 2) as compared to V. cholerae (positions (2)
and (3) in figure 2). Since the change in mean HapR levels in V.
cholera (at OD ∼ 1.0) occurs without a corresponding significant change in cell density, it is unlikely to be driven solely by
quorum sensing. Instead we infer, based on the luminescence

While the most dramatic differences in luminescence phenotypes occur in the qrr and luxU mutants, distinct qualitative differences exist even in the WT phenotypes, see figure 2.
These qualitative differences serve as motivation for our modeling and help in discerning a key difference between the two
genetic networks that can potentially explain the various differences in luminescence phenotypes. The luminescence curves
for WT strains of V. harveyi and V. cholerae (based on experimental data from [30] and [14]) are shown in figure 2. In both
cases, the luminescence per cell begin at a high value since the
initial state corresponded to a dilution of the high cell density
culture which was maximally bright. As the colony density increases, the luminescence level drops until a critical cell density
is reached, after this critical point there is a subsequent rise in
luminescence back to the initial level. While the luminescence
curves of WT V. harveyi and V. cholerae look similar, there
are important differences between the two curves. Wild-type V.
harveyi showed an almost symmetric parabola centered around
OD600 ∼ 0.1 [30]; however, wild-type V. cholerae showed a
continued decline in relative light unit (RLU) output until the
colony reached an OD600 ∼ 1.0. The luminescence levels then
increased by several orders of magnitude over a timescale during which cell density changed by a small factor (≈ 4 fold) [14].
The luminescence phenotypes of strains corresponding to
deletions of various pathway elements also depicted important
differences between the two species. As mentioned in the Introduction, luminescence curves of qrr sRNA mutants in the
two species suggested that the sRNAs functioned additively in
V. harveyi [30] but were redundant in V. cholerae [14]. Another
striking difference was seen in the luxU mutant which was always bright regardless of cell density in V. harveyi whereas the
luxU mutant showed a density-dependent luminescence pheno3

sRNA and [y] the concentration of the target mRNA, the corresponding equations are:
d[x]
= k x − γ[x][y] − µ x [x],
(1)
dt
d[y]
= ky − γ[x][y] − µy [y],
(2)
dt
where the k’s are the production rates of each species, the µ’s
are the degradation rates of each species, and γ is an effective
parameter for mutual degradation of sRNA and target mRNA.
To generalize the above equations (1) and (2) while taking
care of the effective parameter constraints (see Appendix A), we
include the effects of 1) multiple sRNAs regulating luxR/hapR
and 2) autoregulation of LuxR/HapR [3, 17]. The corresponding equations are,
d[xi ]
= k xi − γi [xi ][y] − µ xi [xi ],
(3)
dt
X
ky
d[y]
(γi [xi ][y]) − µy [y],
=
−
(4)
dt
1 + ([y/[yD ])
i

Figure 3: An illustration depicting luminescence activation as LuxR/HapR concentrations cross a sharp threshold for activation. More (less) than the threshold, luminescence is (not) activated. The different distributions depicted in this
illustration are examples of LuxR/HapR concentration distributions and the corresponding luminescence profile for a few examples. (left - cyan) A protein
distribution that remains below the threshold regardless of cell density. (middle - green) A protein distribution that transitions across the threshold and is a
function of cell density. (right - magenta) A protein distribution that is entirely
past the threshold regardless of cell density.

The constant [yD ], represents the threshold concentration for
binding of the target protein to its own mRNA. When the target
protein is bound to the promoter region, transcription of the
target gene is effectively blocked.
Bioinformatic analysis [14] indicates that the 32 bp region
in the qrr sRNAs which is involved in regulation of hapR/luxR
is absolutely conserved for all the sRNAs. Thus, we make the
assumption that all the sRNAs have the same affinity for the
target mRNA, i.e. we set γi = γ. We further assume that the
degradation rates of all sRNAs are the same (µi = µ). However,
the model does consider differences in the sRNAs production
rates (k xi ) as demonstrated by experiment [31].
At steady state, the mean protein concentration is the mean
mRNA concentration scaled by a constant – the ratio of the protein translation rate to the protein degradation rate. Therefore,
we use the scaled mRNA concentration in place of the protein
concentration (see Appendix).
To make the connection to luminescence curves, we have to
consider the distribution of protein levels across cell populations. Recent work by Friedman et al. showed the distribution
of the protein concentration per cell for the colony can be represented by a Gamma distribution [4]. Furthermore, recent flow
cytometry work showed the distributions of fluorescence per
cell from a luxR-gfp fusion had a nearly constant variance for
a variety of conditions related to the concentration of AIs [33].
Similarly, luminescence output from Vibrio harveyi was shown
to be heterogenous across cell populations [1]. Therefore, we
model the protein distribution as a Gamma distribution with a
fixed variance. The mean of the distribution is obtained from
the equations above for a given choice of parameters. Using
this framework, we show in the following section how a single
parameter difference can account for the vastly different luminescence phenotypes of V. harveyi and of V. cholerae.

phenotype, that there is a sharp rise in HapR levels around OD
∼ 1.0 in V.cholerae. One potential cause for this rise is a further reduction in the available regulatory sRNAs allowing for
more available hapR transcripts. A possible source of the sRNA
reduction is that as the cells move into stationary phase from
growth phase, there is a decrease in the production of the Hfq
chaperone [10]. A decrease in Hfq corresponds to a decrease in
the concentration of sRNA-Hfq complexes which are necessary
to regulate the target mRNA. Recent experiments in V. cholerae
have indeed found evidence for a sharp rise in HapR levels at
OD ∼ 1.0 [28].
In contrast, the transition in the WT luminescence phenotype
for V. harveyi occurs at lower OD values and is more gradual
suggesting that it is driven by the quorum sensing pathway. This
observation leads to the suggestion that the crucial difference
between the two species lies in the location of the threshold for
luminescence activation: in V. harveyi, quorum sensing based
regulation suffices for moving the steady state LuxR distribution across the threshold, whereas in V. cholerae this requires
an additional jump in HapR levels at OD ∼ 1.0.
2.2. A minimal model for luminescence activation
We focus on quorum sensing pathway elements corresponding to the production of sRNAs, the transcription of the target
mRNA (luxR or hapR), and the interaction between the sRNAs
and target mRNA. We start with a model containing only one
sRNA species and neglect autoregulation of the target protein.
Then we add the contributions of multiple sRNAs and autoregulation to the model.
The basic equations for a simplified model of sRNA-target
interaction have been introduced and analyzed in previous work
[14–16, 23] and are given below (equations (1) and (2)). Consider first the case of a single sRNA species regulating one
target mRNA species. If [x] denotes the concentration of the

3. Results and Discussion
In this section we show how the minimal model discussed
above with only one essential difference (the threshold for lu4

minescence activation) between the V. harveyi and V. cholerae
pathways can explain the observed differences in luminescence
phenotypes as well as lead to testable predictions.
We note that bacterial colonies are observed to change their
luminescence production by many orders of magnitude in a relatively short amount of time, see figure 2. However, the changes
in the level of the master regulator proteins and sRNAs are not
nearly as dramatic [30, 33]. We interpret this as indicating that
a significant fraction of all the cells in the colony reach the
conditions necessary for luminescence activation upon a small
change in the master regulator protein levels. We model this as
corresponding to a significant fraction of the master regulator
distribution moving across sharp threshold values of concentrations necessary to activate luminescence (see figure 3).

0.035
0.030

Probability

0.025
0.020
0.015
1

2

3

0.010
0.005
0.000

0. 1

2

3

4

5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Relative Protein Fold Change

Figure 4: The distributions of the protein concentration across a WT bacterial
colony from the model for the: (1) low-cell density limit, (2) high-cell density
limit, and (3) entering stationary-phase limit. The x-axis depicts the fold change
difference relative to the mean protein concentration value for a WT colony
at the low-cell density limit. The solid, vertical bar between distributions (1)
and (2) and the dashed, vertical bar vertical between distributions (2) and (3)
represent the threshold values for luminescence for V. harveyi and V. cholerae,
respectively.

3.0.1. The protein distributions for WT strains
Using the model equations with parameter values guided by
experiment (see Appendix), we plot the the distribution of the
protein concentration for a WT colony (representing either V.
harveyi or V. cholerae) at the low-cell density limit, high-cell
density limit, and entering stationary phase labeled as positions
(1), (2), and (3) respectively, see figure 4. Since the protein distributions for WT and all the mutants in either V. harveyi or V.
cholerae are not available, we plot the distributions with respect
to fold changes relative to the mean protein concentration for a
WT colony at the low-cell density limit.2 Specifically, the first
two distributions in figure 4 are representative of the maximal
relative change in protein concentration in going from low-cell
density to high-cell density based on changes due to quorum
sensing alone. The third distribution in figure 4 is the resulting
distribution after the final reduction in sRNA production leading to a rise in HapR due to entering stationary phase.
The distributions at positions (1) and (2) in figure 4 represent the maximally dark and maximally bright WT V. harveyi
colonies, respectively. Similarly, the distributions at positions
(1-2) and (3) in figure 4 represent the maximally dark and maximally bright WT V. cholerae colonies, respectively. Ideally
none of the bacteria in the dark colony should be “on” and
none of the bacteria in the bright colony should be “off”, therefore we set the threshold of light activation for V. harveyi at a
fold change directly in between the two distributions – depicted
as the solid, vertical line in figure 4. Since experiments have
shown that the activation of V. cholerae to occur at a larger cell
density than V. harveyi, we propose the threshold of light activation for V. cholerae to be at a larger fold change – depicted as the
dashed, vertical line in figure 4. As indicated in the figure, this
corresponds to luminescence activation occurring in V. harveyi
using quorum sensing alone, whereas for V. cholerae luminescence activation requires both transition to the high-cell density
limit for the quorum sensing pathway and additional changes
in HapR levels associated with entry into stationary phase. In
what follows, we will discuss how assuming V. cholerae has a

different threshold of light activation than V. harveyi can consistently explain the differences in the sRNAs and luxU mutant
phenotypes.
3.0.2. Additivity vs redundancy
We account for each of the four active qrr sRNAs having
a different production rate and set the rates with the following hierarchy: qrr4 > qrr2 > qrr3 > qrr1, which is consistent
with experimental results in V. harveyi [30]. Figure 5 shows the
distributions of the protein concentrations for mutant colonies
containing only one of the four active qrr sRNAs for both V.
harveyi and V. cholerae – each sRNA mutant is represented as
a different shade of green in figure 5.
In the low-cell density limit, position (1) in figure 5, the distributions all have regions extending past the threshold for luminescence in V. harveyi. This is a representation of the qrr
“additivity” response seen in V. harveyi as all qrrs are needed to
prevent any appreciable region of the protein distribution from
extending past the threshold in the low-cell density limit [30].
For the sRNA mutants, the regions of the distributions in the
low-cell density limit that extend past the threshold represent
the amount of bacteria in the colony that are “on” regardless of
cell density.
The story is different from the perspective of V. cholerae.
In the high-cell density limit, position (2) in figure 5, the distributions are all below the threshold for luminescence in V.
cholerae, which corresponds to complete light repression and
mimics the WT V. cholerae response [14]. We suggest that
once the final reduction in sRNA production occurs, e.g. entering stationary phase, all the distributions cross the threshold
for luminescence, position (3) in figure 5. The resulting phenotype looks to be the same as the WT V. cholerae phenotype with
the conclusion that the sRNAs act “redundantly”. However, the
prediction from our model is that the sRNAs behave the same
in both V. harveyi and V. cholerae, but the associated thresholds

2 At the time of this work, the experimental protocol for measuring the exact protein concentration per cell in vivo was not available and has now only
recently been published [29].

5

0.035

for luminescence are different.

0.030
0.035
Probability

0.025

0.030

Probability

0.025
0.020

0.015
2

3

0.010

0.015
1

2

0.005

3

0.010

0.000

0.005
0.000

0.020

0. 1

2

3

4

0. 1

2

3

4

5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Relative Protein Fold Change

Figure 6: The distributions of the protein concentration across a mutant colony
where luxU has been removed from the system from our model at the: (2) highcell density limits and (3) high-cell density limit entering stationary phase. The
x-axis depicts the fold change difference relative to the mean protein concentration value for a WT colony at the low-cell density limit. The solid, vertical bar
between distributions (1) and (2) and the dashed, vertical bar vertical between
distributions (2) and (3) represent the threshold values for luminescence for V.
harveyi and V. cholerae respectively.

5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Relative Protein Fold Change

Figure 5: The distributions of the protein concentration across a mutant colony
containing only one active qrr sRNA from our model at the: (1) low-cell density
and (2) high-cell density limits. The x-axis depicts the fold change difference
relative to the mean protein concentration value for a WT colony at the lowcell density limit. The solid, vertical bar between distributions (1) and (2) and
the dashed, vertical bar vertical between distributions (2) and (3) represent the
threshold values for luminescence for V. harveyi and V. cholerae respectively.

cence threshold. This results in a fully bright, density independent phenotype, see figure 6. However, the distribution associated with the high-cell density is only partially across the V.
cholerae luminescence threshold resulting in a small concentration of the cells being “on” and a majority being “off”. The V.
cholerae colony will remain in this state until it enters stationary phase where the protein distribution completely crosses the
V. cholerae luminescence threshold, see figure 6.
Finally, the luminescent behavior of the cqsS and luxQ double mutant in V. cholerae is also consistent with the model. Essentially, this double mutant shows a WT response even though
the both autoinducer sensors are removed [13]. In our model,
this would correspond to the system starting in the WT highcell density limit, position (2) in figure 4, which is below the
threshold for luminescence in V. cholerae. Therefore, the observed phenotype should be nearly identical to WT.
By just having two thresholds separating three distinct regions of protein regulation, our model is able to consistently
link the sRNAs acting additively in V. harveyi [30], the sRNAs
acting redundantly in V. cholerae [14], and the density dependent phenotype in V. cholerae for the luxU mutant [21]. With
the relative positions of the thresholds and protein distributions
now in place, we now discuss the predictions that come from
our model.

3.0.3. The luxU mutant
The luxU mutant is another example of a difference in luminescence phenotypes between V. harveyi and V. cholerae. The
protein LuxU is responsible for coupling the autoinducer input
signal to the rest of the quorum sensing network, see figure 1. If
LuxU is removed from the pathway, the total sRNA transcription rate would drop to minimal levels, and the system would
no longer respond to changes in cell density. Therefore if the
quorum sensing pathway is the only factor controlling the luminescence phenotypes, removal of the the luxU gene should result in a bright, density independent phenotype. For V. harveyi,
this is indeed the case – the luxU mutant is bright regardless of
cell density.
The story, as before with the sRNAs, is different with V.
cholerae. In V. cholerae, the luxU mutant shows a density dependent luminescence phenotype, but the shape of the luminescence curve is different from the canonical quorum sensing
luminescence curves [21]. In the low-cell density limit, there
is a detectable level of light production that is larger than WT
value or any of the sRNA mutants values but much less than the
maximal level of light production. This low level of luminescence remains stable for a significant portion of the exponential
phase, and then sharply increases to the maximum level of luminescence – a feature present in most V. cholerae luminescence
curves.
Our model reproduces this observed luxU mutant behavior
in V. harveyi and V. cholerae. In figure 6, there are only two
distributions: one for the high-cell density limit (position (2))
and one for the high-cell density limit entering stationary phase
(position (3)). From the perspective of LuxR/HapR regulation,
the removal of luxU effectively decouples the quorum sensing pathway from the outside inputs. Therefore, the system
effectively starts at the high-cell density limit, and the associated protein distribution is always past the V. harveyi lumines-

3.1. Predictions
Current experimental techniques can produce a variety of different mutant strains of V. harveyi and of V. cholerae. Depending on the genes and sRNAs being removed from the strain, the
experimental techniques generate even up to triple knock-out
mutants (and possibly more if required). Since our simplified
model, with the given choice of parameters, reproduces features
of the observed luminescence phenotypes, it is of interest to examine the model predictions for luminescence phenotypes of
different gene and sRNA mutant strains that should be experimentally feasible to test.
6

production rate associated with the luxU mutant (6) is adjacent
to kc , reducing the total sRNA production rate to a value less
than kc will result in light production. This could be achieved
by combining luxU with sRNA mutants. Therefore, the different sRNA triple mutants in combination with the luxU mutant
for V. cholerae should show the associated HapR concentration
changing in a graded manner. Thus our model predicts that, in
a luxU mutant background, the different triple sRNA mutants
will appear to behave additively with regards to the luminescence – a phenotypic response similar to sRNA mutants in WT
V. harveyi.

The model distinguishes the varying behaviors of V. harveyi
and of V. cholerae as a difference in the threshold protein concentration of the master regulatory gene, and the concentration
of the master regulatory gene at any position is determined by
the associated production rate of the sRNAs. Therefore, there
is an effective total sRNA production rate that coincides with
the distribution of the master regulatory protein being centered
at a given threshold value. We refer to this critical value of total
sRNA production as kc .
Since we assume the threshold values are different for V.
harveyi and V. cholerae, their associated critical value of total
sRNA production, kc , is different. Each mutant has an associated total sRNA production rate at low-cell density and highcell density limits. A hierarchy of sRNA production rates for
different mutants and colony cell densities relative to kc explains currently seen phenotypes, and we will use this hierarchy
as a basis for predicting new phenotypes.
WT l > sRNAl > kc > WT h > sRNAh > ∆U > ∆O,

(5)

WT l > sRNAl > WT h > sRNAh > ∆U > kc > ∆O.

(6)

3.2. Discussion
In this study, we have shown how a simple set of equations,
with appropriate choice of parameters, can effectively mimic
the quorum sensing luminescence phenotypes of V. harveyi and
V. cholerae. While the components of the quorum sensing regulatory network in each of the bacteria are biologically similar
in both homology and function, there are striking differences
in luminescence phenotypes for the same mutant, e.g. luxU.
Even the sRNAs, which are virtually identical in their sequence
specificity to the target gene, act additively versus redundantly
for V. harveyi and V. cholerae.
We account for the striking differences by suggesting that
the threshold concentration of the master protein needed for the
bacteria to start luminesce activation is larger in V. cholerae than
V. harveyi. The larger threshold concentration correspondingly
implies the need for a mechanism that increases the levels of
the master regulator in addition to the increases due to quorum
sensing. The increase in master regulator levels can be effectively modeled as a sharp drop in sRNA productions rates and
one possible source of this reduction can arise from the transition from exponential growth phase to stationary phase.
We considered solutions of the model equations for specific
parameter choices motivated by experiments and analyzed the
effect different mutants have on the sRNAs’ production rates.
In V. harveyi, the removal of either LuxO or LuxU causes a sufficient reduction in the sRNAs’ production rate to result in the
bacterial colony achieving maximal luminescence at any cell
densities. Only the removal of LuxO from V. cholerae results
in a similar response. Removing LuxU does not drop the sRNAs’ production rates enough for the bacteria to luminesce at
any cell density. The extra reduction in the sRNAs’ production
rates from the transition to stationary-phase is required for the
luxU mutant of V. cholerae to luminesce.
We note that differences in the rate parameters between the
two species could also account for some of the observed differences in phenotypes. However, quantifying the multitude of reaction rates in both organisms is a challenging task experimentally. Also, even if significant differences in the rates between
the two species are found, it is not clear if they will account
for the observed dramatic differences in phenotypes. Instead
of considering a multitude of parameter differences as the explanation for the observed phenotypes, our model suggests that
changes in a single parameter can provide a unifying explanation for all the observed differences. Furthermore our model

Equations (5) and (6) represent the hierarchies for V. harveyi
and V. cholerae, respectively. Those rates greater than kc correspond to “dark” phenotypes, and those rates less than kc correspond to “bright” phenotypes. In equations (5) and (6), WT l
and WT h represent the total sRNA production rate for wild-type
bacteria in the low-cell density and high-cell density limits before the transition to stationary phase. sRNAl and sRNAh are
the sRNA production rates for any mutant with at least one active sRNA removed from the system in the low-cell density and
high-cell density limits before the transition to stationary phase.
Finally, ∆U and ∆O in equations (5) and (6) are the sRNA production rates for the mutants where LuxU and LuxO has been
deleted, respectively. Now that the hierarchy is established, we
discuss below the resulting predictions.
One way to explore the different quorum sensing responses
of the network is to add an external concentration of autoinducers to a low-cell density colony, also know as “cross-feeding”.
The additional autoinducers will “trick” a colony into behaving
as if it is in the high-cell density limit which causes a transition in the total sRNA production rate. Since the production
rates specifically dependent on cell density, WT l , sRNAl , WT h ,
and sRNAh are separated by kc in equation (5), the model predicts a low-cell density colony of wild-type or any sRNA mutant V. harveyi will start to luminesce when extra autoinducers
are added to the colony.
However, for V. cholerae, the production rates specifically
dependent on cell density are all greater than kc in equation (6).
Even the production rate of the luxU mutant is greater than kc .
Therefore, the model predicts that a low-cell density colony of
wild-type or any sRNA mutant V. cholerae will remain dark
when extra autoinducers are added to the colony. Also, the
model predicts this outcome for any mutant V. cholerae corresponding to a total sRNA production rate greater than kc , including the luxU mutant and the cqsS and luxQ double mutant.
The model also predicts cases where the sRNAs act “additively” in the luxU mutant V. cholerae. Since the total sRNA
7

leads to testable predictions which can easily be validated experimentally (e.g. changes in luminescence upon crossfeeding).
We further note that an alternative explanation for the differences in the luminescence phenotypes (in particular for the
luxU mutant phenotypes) is based on the observation that the
VarA/S-CsrA pathway interacts with the the quorum sensing
pathway in V. cholerae [13]. While the corresponding interaction has not been studied in V. harveyi, it is likely that VarA/SCsrA pathway interacts with the quorum sensing pathway in a
similar fashion in V. harveyi. If, however, it turns out that the
interaction between the two pathways is absent in V. harveyi,
then this observation could account for some of the differences
seen. In this case, the fold-change required for luminescence
activation would be higher in V. cholerae due to repression by
CsrA taking place in V. cholerae but not in V. harveyi. However,
even with the deletion of csrA in V. cholerae, the luxU mutant
still shows a density-dependent phenotype in V. cholerae [13] in
contrast to the observed phenotype in V. harveyi. Thus there is a
clear difference between the luxU mutant phenotypes between
the two species which cannot be ascribed to potential differences in the interactions between the quorum sensing pathways
and the VarA/S-CsrA pathway.
Within our model, the relationship between the threshold
concentration and the total of all the sRNAs’ production rates
leads to experimental predictions. The first prediction is the
inability to prematurely initiate luminescence in a low-cell density colony of V. cholerae through the addition of a large concentration of autoinducers. Thus cross-feeding based activation
of luminescence should work in V. harveyi but not in V. cholerae
We also predict that a luxU mutant of V. cholerae combined
with sRNAs mutants will result in a phenotype where the sRNAs act additively.
In summary, we have presented a simplified model for quorum sensing induced luminescence phenotypes in V. harveyi
and V. cholerae. Our analysis suggests that a single parameter
difference in our model effectively reproduces many features
of observed luminescence curves which were hitherto unconnected. Thus large sequence-based differences are, in principle,
not required to explain the dramatic differences between the luminescence phenotypes in these two species. Our model also
makes testable predictions for observable luminescence phenotypes (specifically in V. cholerae) which, if validated, should
shed new light on luminescence regulation by quorum sensing.

sionless parameters; x̃ = (µ x /k x )[x], ỹ = (µy /ky )[y], α =
(γky )/(µ x µy ), and β = (γk x )/(µ x µy ) in equations (1) and (2) so
that the corresponding equations at steady state become:
0
0

= 1 − α x̃ỹ − x̃,
= 1 − β x̃ỹ − ỹ.

(7)
(8)

These equations can be readily solved to determine how steady
state sRNA-mRNA levels change as system parameters are varied. In the limit α, β ≫ 1, the solutions show a sharp transition
as the ratio α/β changes from (α/β) < 1 to (α/β) > 1. This
parameter regime lets the system respond in an ultrasensitive
manner as discussed in previous works [14, 23]. During quorum sensing, the production rate of the sRNA (k x ) decreases and
hence the parameter β is lowered as bacteria make the transition
from low-cell density to high-cell density. Correspondingly the
system evolution traces out a trajectory in (α, β) phase space.
For α, β ≫ 1 the target mRNA levels show a sharp change as
the line α = β is crossed; thus it seems natural to identify the
sharp transition observed in the luminescence profile with the
sharp transition in target mRNA levels as β is lowered. However, as argued in the previous sections, this identification is
unlikely to be valid based on the following observations: 1) the
quorum sensing response in V. harveyi is observed to be graded
rather than all-or-none [33]. 2) Recent experiments have shown
that HapR represses aphA at low cell density [11], thus target
mRNA levels are significant even at low cell densities. 3) northern blots show little difference in the amount of sRNA in V.
cholerae when the target mRNA (hapR) is deleted [14].
Observation 3.) from above suggests that the sRNA and
mRNA interactions occur in a parameter regime where the
sRNA is never fully suppressed. To adhere to this constraint,
we look at the limit α ≪ 1 and β > 1 which effectively holds
the sRNA concentration constant regardless of the target mRNA
concentration. In this limit, the system no longer has an ultrasensitive response, but instead responds in a controlled manner.
As sRNA production rates double, the mRNA concentrations
are about halved, thus allowing for a graded response. Applying the limits α ≪ 1 and β > 1 to equations (7) and (8) in the
steady state explicitly shows the controlled response:
x̃

≈

1,

ỹ

≈

1/(1 + β).

(9)
(10)

We note that recent research [28] has provided evidence for
dosage compensation in V. cholerae due to regulation of sRNA
production by HapR. While the inclusion of this effect will imply that the restrictions on the parameter α noted above are not
required, the observation that the response of the regulated target is graded in a controlled manner remains the same.

Acknowledgements
RVK acknowledges support from the U.S National Science
Foundation (NSF) through grant PHY-0957430. ATF acknowledges support from NSF IGERT grant DGE-0504196. The authors also acknowledge support from ICTAS (Virginia Tech)
and the Virginia Tech ASPIRES award.

4.2. Multiple sRNA with autoregulation model
Here we provide additional details for the multiple sRNA
with autoregulation model. In V. harveyi, there are a total of five
sRNAs; however, only four are actively controlling the concentration of luxR mRNA. Likewise, V. cholerae contains four active sRNAs. Including multiple sRNAs has generated the new
constants: k xi , γi , and µ xi . However, we make the assumptions

4. Appendix
4.1. Single sRNA model
Here we provide additional details for the single sRNA
model. For convenience, we introduce the following dimen8

that each sRNA has equal affinity to the target mRNA and all the
sRNAs have the same degradation rate in both bacteria. These
assumptions return γi to γ and µ xi to µ x . To model autoregulation, we introduce the dimensionless parameter y˜D as the
threshold concentration for effective autoregulation of the target gene. In dimensionless units, the system should be tuned
in such a way that y˜D is not larger than the maximum value
obtainable by ỹ which is 1.
Using similar dimensionless parameters as the single sRNA
model, we replace β with βi = (γk xi )/(µ x µy ), and introduce the
dimensionless parameter ǫ = µy /µ x , which is only necessary in
the time dependent solutions of the model. Equations (3) and
(4) are therefore rewritten as the following set of dimensionless
equations
ǫ

d x̃i
dt˜
dỹ
dt˜

=

1 − α x̃i ỹ − x̃i ,

(11)

=

X
1
−
βi x̃i ỹ − ỹ.
1 + (ỹ/ỹD )
i

(12)

WT
qrr1
qrr2
qrr3
qrr4
∆luxU
∆luxO

LCD (1)
βi ( fLCD ) = 20.4
β1 ( fLCD ) = 4.5
β2 ( fLCD ) = 5.4
β3 ( fLCD ) = 4.8
β4 ( fLCD ) = 5.7
βi ( fO ) = 0.3264
βi (0) = 0.0

HCD (2)
βi ( fHCD ) = 2.04
β1 ( fHCD ) = 0.45
β2 ( fHCD ) = 0.54
β3 ( fHCD ) = 0.48
β4 ( fHCD ) = 0.57
βi ( fO ) = 0.3264
βi (0) = 0.0

Stationary (3)
δβi ( fHCD ) = 0.051
δβ1 ( fHCD ) = 0.0125
δβ2 ( fHCD ) = 0.0135
δβ3 ( fHCD ) = 0.0120
δβ4 ( fHCD ) = 0.0143
δβi ( fO ) = 0.00816
δβi (0) = 0.0

Table 1: A table of the different βi ( f ) values for WT, ∆luxU, ∆luxO, and the
qrr mutants.

[33] when LuxR autoregulation is removed. A direct determination of relative fold differences using Real-Time Quantitative
PCR for qrr1, qrr2, qrr3, qrr4, qrr5, and luxR with autoregulation intact has also been done [30]. In the case without autoregulation, luxR translational levels change ∼10 fold and qrr2
expression levels also change ∼10 fold.
With regards to the experimentally shown constraints, we let
βi change 10 fold between the low-cell density and high-cell
density limits. Since we are in the limit where βi is always
greater than 1, we chose βi ≈ 20 for the low-cell density resulting in βi ≈ 2 for the high-cell density limit. We set α = 0.1 to
satisfy the previously discussed constraint: α ≪ 1. The values
chosen for α and βi minimally satisfy the limits set on parameter space; and yet, the system behaves in a manner consistent
with experiment. Smaller values of α and/or larger values of βi
are also consistent with experiment showing robustness of the
system in this parameter regime.
To incorporate the effect of the system entering stationary
phase, we introduced the parameter δ such that k xi → δk xi . we
set δ to the fixed value 0.025 – the maximal value necessary
to have a clear enough distinction between the distributions at
position (2) and (3) for the luxU mutant, where position (3)
represents the colony entering stationary phase (see figure 6).
α, βi , and δ are the only parameters necessary to determine
the (normalized) mean values of LuxR/HapR. Furthermore, α
and δ remain a fixed value throughout our analysis, 0.1 and
0.025 respectively. βi , which is a function of the sRNA production rates, only changes in value between the low-cell density
limit and the high-cell density limit. The effects of the different
mutants are also embedded into βi as they represent variations
to the sRNA production rates relative to the WT.
The critical factor in determining the decomposition of βi is
the fraction of LuxO ( f ) that is capable of promoting the production of sRNA. Therefore, βi is a function of f , βi ( f ). To better understand the contributions of LuxU and LuxO to βi ( f ), we
specify the different values βi ( f ) can achieve depending on cell
density and genotype. First, quantitative real-time PCR experiments show a basal rate sRNA production that is independent
of the presence of LuxO which we label: βi (0) [30]. Next there
is the rate, βi ( fO ), that depends on the presence of LuxO which
is evident in the ∆luxU mutant showing a wild-type like luminescence phenotype in V. cholerae [21]. Then there are the rates
associated with phosphorylating LuxO, the dominant factor in
sRNA production, in the low cell density limit (βi ( fLCD )) and in

The addition of multiple sRNAs to the model does not change
the production rate of the target mRNA; therefore, we still consider the system to be in the parameter space where α ≪ 1. At
steady state, x̃i ≈ 1 and the summation in equation (12) reduces
P
to i βi ỹ. Since ỹ is independent of the summation, the sum
is only of βi , which results in just a constant representing all
P
the contributions of the sRNAs, i βi → βtotal . The effects of
multiple sRNAs are all integrated into the constant βtotal , and
their removal via mutations to the wild-type bacteria is equivalent to reducing the maximum and minimum value of βtotal as
the bacteria moves from low cell density to high cell density
respectively. The steady state concentration of ỹ therefore becomes:
!
ỹ
1
ỹ 1 +
=
.
(13)
ỹD
1 + βtotal
The effect of the autoregulation is best seen via different limiting cases of ratio ỹ/ỹD in equation
p (13). When ỹD ≪ 1,
then ỹ/ỹD ≫ 1 resulting in ỹ ≈ ỹD /(1 + βtotal ) ≈ 0. This
corresponds to the case where autoregulation is maximally on
which prevents the system from sustaining any appreciable
amount of protein. When ỹD ≫ 1, then ỹ/ỹD ≪ 1 resulting in
ỹ ≈ 1/(1+βtotal ) which is similar in form to equation (10) where
autoregulation is absent from the system. Since the amount of ỹ
is constrained to a value between 0 and 1, and ỹD is the effective
concentration needed of the target protein before autoregulation
occurs, we set ỹD = 0.75, which corresponds to the production
rate dropping by close to half as seen by experiment [3].
4.3. Parameter space analysis
Here we discuss the various parameter values and their associated experimental motivation used in the preceding models. Fluorescence experiments involving the expression of V.
harveyi’s qrr2 in the low-cell density and high-cell density limits provide a possible measure for estimating the sRNA fold
change between the two cell density limits [33]. The same type
of fluorescence experiment shows the translational rate of luxR
9

the high cell density limit (βi ( fHCD )). The different values βi ( f )
for WT, ∆luxU, ∆luxO, and the qrr mutants are listed in table 1.

[24] Müller, J., Kuttler, C., Hense, B. a., Apr. 2008. Sensitivity of the quorum
sensing system is achieved by low pass filtering. Bio Systems 92 (1), 76–
81.
[25] Müller, J., Kuttler, C., Hense, B. A., Rothballer, M., Hartmann, A.,
Oct. 2006. Cell-cell communication by quorum sensing and dimensionreduction. Journal of mathematical biology 53 (4), 672–702.
[26] Ng, W. L., Bassler, B. L., 2009. Bacterial quorum-sensing network architectures. Annu. Rev. Genet. 43, 197–222.
[27] Pai, A., You, L., Jul. 2009. Optimal tuning of bacterial sensing potential.
Molecular Systems Biology 5 (286), 1–11.
[28] Svenningsen, S. L., Waters, C. M., Bassler, B. L., January 2008. A negative feedback loop involving small rnas accelerates vibrio cholerae’s transition out of quorum-sensing mode. Genes Dev. 22 (2), 226–238.
[29] Teng, S.-W., Wang, Y., Tu, K. C., Long, T., Mehta, P., Wingreen, N. S.,
Bassler, B. L., Ong, N. P., May 2010. Measurement of the Copy Number
of the Master Quorum-Sensing Regulator of a Bacterial Cell. Biophysical
Journal 98 (9), 2024–2031.
[30] Tu, K. C., Bassler, B. L., Jan 2007. Multiple small RNAs act additively to
integrate sensory information and control quorum sensing in vibrio harveyi. Genes. Dev. 21 (2), 221–233.
[31] Tu, K. C., Waters, C. M., Svenningsen, S. L., Bassler, B. L., November 2008. A small-rna-mediated negative feedback loop controls quorumsensing dynamics in vibrio harveyi. Mol. Microbiol. 70 (4), 896–907.
[32] Waters, C. M., Bassler, B. L., 2005. Quorum sensing: cell-to-cell communication in bacteria. Annu. Rev. Cell. Dev. Biol. 21, 319–346.
[33] Waters, C. M., Bassler, B. L., Oct 2006. The Vibrio harveyi quorumsensing system uses shared regulatory components to discriminate between multiple autoinducers. Genes Dev. 20 (19), 2754–2767.

References
[1] Anetzberger, C., Pirch, T., Jung, K., Jul. 2009. Heterogeneity in quorum sensing-regulated bioluminescence of Vibrio harveyi. Mol Microbiol
73 (2), 267–77.
[2] Banik, S. K., Fenley, A. T., Kulkarni, R. V., December 2009. A model for
signal transduction during quorum sensing in vibrio harveyi. Phys Biol
6 (4), 046008+.
[3] Chatterjee, J., Miyamoto, C. M., Meighen, E. A., Apr 1996. Autoregulation of luxr: the vibrio harveyi lux-operon activator functions as a repressor. Mol Microbiol 20 (2), 415–425.
[4] Friedman, N., Cai, L., Xie, X. S., Oct 2006. Linking stochastic dynamics
to population distribution: an analytical framework of gene expression.
Phys Rev Lett 97 (16), 168302–168302.
[5] Fuqua, C., Winans, S. C., Greenberg, E. P., 1996. Census and consensus
in bacterial ecosystems: the LuxR-LuxI family of quorum-sensing transcriptional regulators. Annu Rev Microbiol 50, 727–751.
[6] Fuqua, W. C., Winans, S. C., Greenberg, E. P., Jan 1994. Quorum sensing
in bacteria: the luxr-luxi family of cell density-responsive transcriptional
regulators. J Bacteriol 176 (2), 269–275.
[7] Hammer, B. K., Bassler, B. L., Oct 2003. Quorum sensing controls
biofilm formation in vibrio cholerae. Mol Microbiol 50, 101–104.
[8] Henke, J. M., Bassler, B. L., Jun 2004. Quorum sensing regulates type
iii secretion in vibrio harveyi and vibrio parahaemolyticus. J Bacteriol
186 (12), 3794–3805.
[9] Henke, J. M., Bassler, B. L., Oct 2004. Three parallel quorum-sensing
systems regulate gene expression in Vibrio harveyi. J Bacteriol 186 (20),
6902–6914.
[10] Ishihama, A., Mar 1999. Modulation of the nucleoid, the transcription
apparatus, and the translation machinery in bacteria for stationary phase
survival. Genes Cells 4 (3), 135–143.
[11] Kovacikova, G., Skorupski, K., 2002. Regulation of virulence gene expression in Vibrio cholerae by quorum sensing: Hapr functions at the
aphA promoter. Mol Microbiol 46 (4), 1135–1147.
[12] Kuttler, C., Hense, B. A., Mar. 2008. Interplay of two quorum sensing
regulation systems of Vibrio fischeri. J Theor Biol 251 (1), 167–80.
[13] Lenz, D. H., Miller, M. B., Zhu, J., Kulkarni, R. V., Bassler, B. L., Nov
2005. CsrA and three redundant small RNAs regulate quorum sensing in
Vibrio cholerae. Mol Microbiol 58 (4), 1186–1202.
[14] Lenz, D. H., Mok, K. C., Lilley, B. N., Kulkarni, R. V., Wingreen,
N. S., Bassler, B. L., Jul 2004. The small RNA chaperone Hfq and multiple small RNAs control quorum sensing in Vibrio harveyi and Vibrio
cholerae. Cell 118, 69–82.
[15] Levine, E., Hwa, T., December 2008. Small RNAs establish gene expression thresholds. Curr Opin Microbiol 11 (6), 574–579.
[16] Levine, E., Zhang, Z., Kuhlman, T., Hwa, T., August 2007. Quantitative
Characteristics of Gene Regulation by Small RNA. PLoS Biol. 5 (9).
[17] Lin, W., Kovacikova, G., Skorupski, K., May 2005. Requirements for
vibrio cholerae hapr binding and transcriptional repression at the hapr
promoter are distinct from those at the apha promoter. J Bacteriol 187 (9),
3013–3019.
[18] McFall-Ngai, M. J., Ruby, E. G., Dec 2000. Developmental biology in
marine invertebrate symbioses. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 3 (6), 603–607.
[19] Mehta, P., Goyal, S., Wingreen, N. S., October 2008. A quantitative comparison of sRNA-based and protein-based gene regulation. Mol. Syst.
Biol. 4.
[20] Miller, M. B., Bassler, B. L., 2001. Quorum sensing in bacteria. Annu.
Rev. Microbiol. 55, 165–199.
[21] Miller, M. B., Skorupski, K., Lenz, D. H., Taylor, R. K., Bassler, B. L.,
Aug 2002. Parallel quorum sensing systems converge to regulate virulence in vibrio cholerae. Cell 110 (3), 303–314.
[22] Mitarai, N., Andersson, A. M., Krishna, S., Semsey, S., Sneppen, K., Sep
2007. Efficient degradation and expression prioritization with small rnas.
Phys. Biol. 4 (3), 164–171.
[23] Mitarai, N., Benjamin, J.-A. M., Krishna, S., Semsey, S., Csiszovszki,
Z., Massé, E., Sneppen, K., June 2009. Dynamic features of gene expression control by small regulatory RNAs. Proc. Natnl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
106 (26), 10655–10659.

10

