arXiv:1101.5244v2 [q-bio.QM] 28 Mar 2011

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis
using isoprene as a prototypic example
H Koc 1,3 , J King 2,3 , G Teschl 3 , K Unterkofler 1,2 , S Teschl 4 ,
P Mochalski 2,5 , H Hinterhuber 6 and A Amann 2,7
1

Vorarlberg University of Applied Sciences, Hochschulstr. 1, A-6850 Dornbirn,
Austria
2
Breath Research Institute, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Rathausplatz 4, A-6850
Dornbirn, Austria
3
Faculty of Mathematics, University of Vienna, Nordbergstr. 15, A-1090 Wien,
Austria
4
University of Applied Sciences Technikum Wien, Höchstädtplatz 5, A-1200 Wien,
Austria
5
Institute of Nuclear Physics PAN, Radzikowskiego 152, PL-31342 Kraków, Poland
6
Univ.-Clinic of Psychiatry, Innsbruck Medical University, Anichstr. 35, A-6020
Innsbruck, Austria
7
Univ.-Clinic for Anesthesia, Innsbruck Medical University, Anichstr. 35, A-6020
Innsbruck, Austria
E-mail: anton.amann@i-med.ac.at, anton.amann@oeaw.ac.at
Abstract. Isoprene is one of the most abundant endogenous volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) contained in human breath and is considered to be a potentially
useful biomarker for diagnostic and monitoring purposes. However, neither the exact
biochemical origin of isoprene nor its physiological role are understood in sufficient
depth, thus hindering the validation of breath isoprene tests in clinical routine.
Exhaled isoprene concentrations are reported to change under different clinical
and physiological conditions, especially in response to enhanced cardiovascular and
respiratory activity. Investigating isoprene exhalation kinetics under dynamical
exercise helps to gather the relevant experimental information for understanding the
gas exchange phenomena associated with this important VOC.
A first model for isoprene in exhaled breath has been developed by our research
group. In the present paper, we aim at giving a concise overview of this model and
describe its role in providing supportive evidence for a peripheral (extrahepatic) source
of isoprene. In this sense, the results presented here may enable a new perspective on
the biochemical processes governing isoprene formation in the human body.

AMS classification scheme numbers: 92C45, 92C35

Submitted to: Journal of Breath Research

Keywords: Breath gas analysis, isoprene, volatile organic compounds, modeling

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis

2

1. Introduction
1.1. Why modeling is important
In human breath more than 200 volatile organic compounds (VOCs) can be detected
at trace level down to the part-per-trillion (ppt) range [1–7]. Endogenous VOCs are
released within the human organism (e.g., as a result of normal metabolic activity or
due to pathological disorders), enter the blood stream and are eventually metabolized
or excreted via exhalation, skin emission, urine, etc..
Exhaled breath analysis has the advantage of being non-invasive. Breath samples
can be extracted as often as desired and can be measured in real time, even in breathto-breath resolution [8–13]. This renders breath analysis as an optimal choice for
gaining continuous information on the current metabolic and physiological state of an
individual [14–16].
Identification and quantification of potential disease biomarkers can be seen as
the driving force for the analysis of exhaled breath. Moreover, future applications for
medical diagnosis and therapy control with dynamic assessments of normal physiological
function or pharmacodynamics are intended [17,18]. Exogeneous VOCs penetrating the
body as a result of environmental exposure can be used to quantify body burden [19].
Also breath tests are often based on the ingestion of isotopically labeled precursors,
producing isotopically labeled carbon dioxide and potentially many other metabolites
[20–26].
Breath analysis is a young field of research and has not yet been widely accepted
in clinical routine. Breath sampling, in particular, is far from being a standardized
procedure due to the numerous confounding factors biasing the concentrations of
volatiles in breath [27]. These factors are related to both the breath sampling protocols
as well as the complex physiological mechanisms underlying pulmonary gas exchange.
Even under resting conditions exhaled breath concentrations of VOCs can strongly
be influenced by specific medical parameters (such as cardiac output and breathing
patterns), depending on the physico-chemical properties of the compound under study
[28, 29].
In order to obtain diagnostically conclusive results, a thorough understanding of
the physiological events and phenomena affecting exhaled VOC levels as well as an
appropriate choice of breath sampling conditions and protocols are essential. For
illustration of this point, consider the population study result in Figure 1, which may
suggest the detection of lung cancer patients on the basis of decreased isoprene levels in
end-tidal breath.

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis

3

Figure 1. Overlay depicting the variability of end-tidal isoprene concentrations
during hyperventilation of one single volunteer as compared to the population boxplots
associated with healthy test subjects and lung cancer patients, cf. [5].

Effectively, from the respective boxplots a tentative threshold value of about 70 ppb
differentiating between lung cancer patients and healthy volunteers might be established.
It should be noted, however, that from a procedural point of view this observation will
be of limited use, since any further attempt to classify a specific individual will strongly
depend on the hemodynamic and respiratory status of the test subject investigated.
Correspondingly, by measuring end-tidal isoprene levels with breath-to-breath resolution
(e.g., using proton transfer reaction-mass spectrometry (PTR–MS), cf. [11]), it can be
demonstrated that a normal healthy volunteer at rest might easily switch between
the two groups defined above merely by changing his breathing pattern, e.g., by
breathing faster or by increasing tidal volume. Doing so leads to an instantaneous
drop of breath isoprene levels, thereby hampering an unambiguous classification of
this volunteer. Such issues are further aggravated by the fact that human subjects
tend to hyperventilate when they are asked to breathe normally and provide a breath
sample [30]. Consequently, any screening study results like the one above must be
complemented by information on their variability with changes of ventilation, blood
flow or pre-measurement conditions.
This paradigmatic example shows that a proper quantitative assessment of the
underlying exhalation kinetics is mandatory when aiming at the successful introduction
of a clinically applicable breath test.
In this context, mathematical modeling and simulation can be employed for
capturing the decisive quantitative features of the observable data. The primary task of
mathematical modeling hence is to provide a mechanistic description of the physiological
phenomena governing the VOC under scrutiny using all the experimental evidence
available. Once such a model has been developed it becomes possible to understand

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis

4

the key relationships underlying the physiological behavior of the compound and to
identify its defining parameters. Such a quantitative approach can aid substantially
in preventing misinterpretations of experimental results and allows for the discovery of
errors and omissions in earlier interpretations. Furthermore, these analyses can guide
the standardization and establishment of new sampling protocols, avoiding potential
confounding factors and maximizing the information content of experimental results.
1.2. Compartmental modeling
Physiological models describe the behavior of substances by means of compartmental
mass conservation. The compartments are defined as functional units of the organism,
corresponding either to specific, localized anatomic structures (like liver, lung, kidney,
etc.) or to types of tissues (such as fat, muscle, viscera, bone, etc.) that are distributed
throughout the body [31]. The concentration time course of a compound in each
compartment is subsequently described by a mass-balance differential equation.
In the basic model describing pulmonary gas exchange of blood-borne inert gases,
the lung is assumed to be a single homogenous compartment with fixed effective storage
volume of the gas considered (see Appendix A.1). For inert gases which are not present
in inspired air and for steady state conditions, this leads to the well-known Farhi
equation [32]
CA =

Cv̄
.
λb:air + V̇A /Q̇c

(1)

It expresses the fact that the concentration of an inert gas in the alveolar air
depends on the mixed venous concentration Cv̄ , the substance-specific blood:air partition
coefficient λb:air , and the ventilation-perfusion ratio V̇A /Q̇c . For the gas exchange
between alveolar gas and capillary blood, it is generally postulated that the diffusive
resistance across the alveolar-capillary membrane is the limiting factor, while limitations
due to the diffusive conductance in alveolar gas are negligible [33]. Although the relative
equilibration of gas with blood along the pulmonary capillary depends on the balance
between diffusing capacity (D, see Appendix A.3) and perfusion, for inert gases the
exchange occurs very rapidly so that an instantaneous equilibration of end-capillary
blood and alveolar air is regarded a reasonable premise in persons not suffering from a
lung-related disease [33, 34].
From the physical factors influencing gas exchange, solubility (i.e., the blood:air
partition coefficient λb:air ) is the most important one because it determines the location
of gas exchange. In classical theory, gas exchange is restricted to the alveolar space
by reference to the assumption that no inert gas is added to or withdrawn from the
alveolar gas as it flows through the conducting airways during inhalation and expiration.
This is not true, however, for highly soluble gases, which may readily dissolve in the
bronchial lining fluid and the blood of the bronchial circulation. Particularly, Anderson
et. al. [35] demonstrated that only low soluble gases exchange almost exclusively in the
alveoli, whereas highly soluble gases exchange predominantly in the airways. As a result,

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis

5

diffusion of gas through the airway tissue, breathing patterns, bronchial blood flow, and
inspired air conditions become the decisive factors determining overall pulmonary gas
exchange. A corresponding model for the highly soluble compound acetone has recently
been presented in [13].
In the present work we will restrict our attention to isoprene, which is the most
abundant hydrocarbon exhaled by humans. Although isoprene can be seen as a
representative example for low-soluble endogenous VOCs, its exhalation kinetics show
a characteristic behavior which is not yet understood in sufficient depth. Conventional
knowledge and available mathematical models describing the gas exchange mechanisms
of the lung are not able to clarify isoprene exchange mechanisms in a physiologically
consistent manner. A first model towards a new interpretation has recently been
published by our research group [10], based on the hypothesis of a peripheral source of
endogenous isoprene formation. Here, we want to give an overview of the physiologically
relevant facts driving model development and present some insightful experiments
carried out in an attempt to specify the location of the above-mentioned peripheral
source.
2. Experiments
The experimental data presented in the following are taken from the study cohort
in [10] and [11], where five (age 27-34 years, 4 male, 1 female) and eight (age 25-30, 5
male, 3 female) normal healthy volunteers have been investigated, respectively. Figure
2 shows representative experimental results for one single volunteer (27 years, male).
Breath isoprene concentrations are assessed by means of a real-time setup designed
for synchronized measurements of exhaled breath VOCs (using PTR–MS) as well as a
variety of respiratory and hemodynamic parameters. For a detailed description of the
instrumental setup the interested reader is referred to [11]. All results were obtained in
conformity with the Declaration of Helsinki and with approval by the Ethics Commission
of Innsbruck Medical University.
Due to its volatility and low affinity for blood (as reflected by a small blood:gas
partition coefficient λb:air = 0.75 at body temperature [36]), isoprene exchange occurs
mainly in the alveolar region. Physical activity causes marked changes in exhaled breath
isoprene concentrations of humans [11,37,38]. Real-time measurements during moderate
workload ergometer challenges were provided by Karl et al. [38] and King et al. [11],
showing an initial increase within the first minute of exercise by a factor of ∼ 2 − 3
in mixed exhaled breath [38], and by a factor of ∼ 3 − 4 in end-tidal breath [11],
respectively. Physiologically, this effect could be attributed to functional changes in the
lung such as redistribution of ventilation and/or perfusion, recruitment and distension
of pulmonary capillaries or changes in mixed venous concentration due to depletion of
an isoprene buffer tissue.
In normal subjects, the more uniform topographical distribution of pulmonary
blood flow during exercise results in a relatively uniform matching of ventilation and

6

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis

perfusion throughout the lung [39, 40]. Since in moderate to severe exercise ventilation
increases more than perfusion, the overall ventilation-perfusion ratio increases from
a value of about 1 at rest to a range of 2 to 4 [40]. Other factors being equal,
this effect would cause a decrease in the exhaled breath concentrations of low soluble
VOCs according to Farhi’s equation (1). Interestingly, exhaled isoprene profiles during
workload challenges drastically depart from this predicted trend, see Figure 2. In
contrast, exhaled breath profiles of butane (also a blood-borne endogenous VOC) under
dynamical exercise obey the qualitative behavior anticipated from Farhi’s equation
(1) [12], even though both compounds are comparable in terms of their physico-chemical
properties. In particular, both butane and isoprene have similar molecular weights
and similar blood:gas partition coefficients, and therefore the diffusing capacity of the
lung for both gases should be similar according to Graham’s law (see Appendix A.3).
This discrepancy suggests that some compound-specific (release) mechanism needs to
be taken into account for clarifying the physiological flow of isoprene.

7%50,$.0,"5#1%*9/-,"5
*.0,"(2(6

.$78(7%50,$.0,"5
2$34,56

+.*',.+("/01/0
2$34,56

isoprene
[ppb]

!"#$%&&%'(%)%*+,-%

:5%#$%&&%'(%)%*+,-%

;*430!"#$%&&%'(%)%*+,-%

400

400

400

300

300

300

200

200

200

100

100

100

0

0

0

10 20 30 40 50 60

0

5

10 15 20 25 30

0

15

15

15

10

10

10

5

5

5

0

0

10 20 30 40 50 60

0

0

5

10 15 20 25 30

0

40

40

40

30

30

30

20

20

20

10

10

10

0

0

0

10 20 30 40 50 60

0

5

10 15 20 25 30

0

3

3

3

2

2

2

1

1

1

0

0

10 20 30 40 50 60
0,4%(24,56

0

0

5

10 15 20 25 30
0,4%(24,56

0

0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10
15
0,4%(24,56

20

Figure 2. Typical smoothed profiles of end-exhaled isoprene concentrations and
physiological parameters in response to several workload scenarios of one single
volunteer (27 years, male). Data are taken from the study cohort in [10] and
[11]. Exercise segments are shaded in grey. (First column): Two legged ergometer
experiment. Protocol: 5 min resting - 15 min exercise (75 W) - 3 min resting - 15 min
exercise (75 W) - 12 min resting - 5 min exercise (75 W) - 5 min resting. (Second
column): One legged ergometer experiment. Protocol: 3 min resting - 10 min left leg
(50 W) - 4 min resting - 2 min left leg (50 W) - 4 min resting - 7 min right leg (50 W).
(Third column): Arm/two-legged ergometer experiment. Protocol: 2 min resting 5 min arm-crank training (2.5 kg/arm) - 4 min resting - 2 min arm-crank training
(2.5 kg/arm) - 4 min resting - 4 min two-legged exercise (60 W).

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis

7

The first column of Figure 2 presents measurement results during a 2-legged
ergometer exercise with three subsequent workload phases at 75 W, and pauses of 3 min
and 12 min, respectively. The breath isoprene concentration profiles during these three
workload phases display similar shape. Nevertheless, the height of the characteristic
exercise peak is significantly higher during the first phase of workload, despite an almost
identical behavior of cardiac output and alveolar ventilation throughout all exercise
segments. This indicates the existence of a buffer tissue compartment for isoprene. The
concentration peak observed during the first workload phase is restored if the pauses
between workload phases are extended: Approximately one hour of rest is necessary to
achieve a complete recovery of the initial peak height [11].
The second column of Figure 2 shows representative results in response to onelegged ergometer exercise at 50 W. After 10 minutes of pedaling with the left leg, breath
isoprene profiles closely resemble the two-legged case and a clear washout effect emerges,
yielding a lower peak height when continuing the exercise with the same leg. However, if
the working limb is switched to the right leg after a short break, an immediate recovery
of the initial peak size can be observed. The observation that the rise in cardiac output
and alveolar ventilation is of comparable order in all three phases of exercise appears
to exclude functional changes of the lung (redistribution of ventilation-perfusion ratio,
distension of pulmonary capillaries) as the main cause for the peak-shaped isoprene
profile at the onset of exercise and strongly supports the hypothesis of a peripheral
source affecting breath isoprene output.
The experiment presented in the third column of Figure 2 allows for a more precise
specification of the location of the above-mentioned tentative isoprene buffer, namely
skeletal muscles, by stimulating single muscle groups with distinct masses. While
repeated dynamic arm-crank exercises with an intermediate pause of 4 minutes yield
the same washout effect as described above, subsequent two-legged ergometer exercise
at 60 W yields a much higher peak compared to arm-crank exercise, despite a similar
behavior of the ventilation-perfusion ratio within all three workload segments. We
attribute this effect to the smaller mass of arm musculature as well as to the smaller
fractional perfusion of the arm muscle group as compared to leg musculature. This
experiment proposes that a major part of isoprene variability during exercise conditions
can be ascribed to an increased fractional perfusion of the working locomotor muscles,
eventually leading to higher isoprene concentrations in mixed venous blood at the onset
of physical activity.
This rationale is in accordance with the predominant physiological role of working
muscle during exercise. Collectively, the skeletal muscles constitute up to 40-45% of
body weight, which is more than any other single organ. At rest, about 10–15% of
cardiac output is distributed to skeletal muscle, while during strenuous exercise skeletal
muscle may receive more than 80% of total blood flow, thus rendering it as one of the
major factors in overall cardiovascular hemodynamics [41].

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis

8

3. The model
In light of the experiments outlined above the mathematical model of isoprene
distribution presented here is based on the assumption of a peripheral source of
isoprene in the body. The lung is assumed to be a single homogenous compartment
where an instantaneous equilibration between the arterial concentration leaving the
lungs (corresponding to the end-capillary blood concentration Cc′ ) is reached. This
is considered to be a reasonable assumption for inert gases as mentioned in Section
1.2. The body is subdivided into two homogenous functional units: a richly perfused
tissue compartment (including intestines, liver, brain, connective muscles and skin) and
a peripheral tissue compartment. The model structure is sketched in Figure 3. While
production and metabolic elimination of isoprene occurs in both compartments, the
peripheral tissue compartment takes the role of an isoprene buffer and is postulated
to contain the working muscle compartment, which receives a disproportionally high
fraction of the systemic blood flow as soon as exercise starts. During rest, the
peripheral compartment is characterized by high isoprene concentrations resulting from
extrahepatic production with a constant rate. However, due to the minute fractional
blood flow to these tissues, mixed venous concentrations are mainly governed by the
lower isoprene content in venous blood returning from the richly perfused tissue group.
At the start of exercise, the fractional perfusion in the periphery increases and the
mixed venous concentrations become dominated by peripheral venous return. The
isoprene concentration peak visible in breath hence is considered as a consequence of
the corresponding increase in the underlying mixed venous concentration. The model
equations are given in Appendix A.2, while a detailed description of the model structure,
its validation and estimation can be found in [10].

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis

9

CA

CI
V̇A


CA

Cc′

VA

Vc′

"

alveolar
compartment
Q̇c

!

Crpt,b

! (1 − qper )Q̇c

Vrpt,b
rpt
" kmet

Crpt
Vrpt

!

Cper,b

!

rpt

kpr

! qper Q̇c

Vper,b
per
" kmet

Cper
Vper

richly perfused
tissue compartment

!

peripheral tissue
compartment

per

kpr

Figure 3. Sketch of the model structure. The body is divided into three distinct
functional units: alveolar/end-capillary compartment (gas exchange), richly perfused
tissue (metabolism and production) and peripheral tissue (storage, metabolism and
production). Dashed boundaries indicate a diffusion equilibrium. Abbreviations
connote as in Table A1.

4. Discussion
The interplay between mathematical modeling and theory-driven experimentation has
finally led us to a mathematical description of isoprene kinetics which respects all current
data and which furthermore allows for new predictions that can be tested by adequate
experiments.
The origin of endogenous isoprene in humans is mainly attributed to the mevalonate
pathway of cholesterol biosynthesis [38, 42, 43]. The synthesis of mevalonate is inhibited
by statins, which are used in the treatment and prevention of cardiovascular diseases
by lowering serum cholesterol levels. The primary mechanism of action exerted by
statin therapy is to competitively inhibit the activity of HMG-CoA reductase, which
is the rate limiting enzyme in cholesterol synthesis [44]. Correspondingly, it has been
reported that the administration of specific statins (such as lovastatin and atorvastatin)
causes a proportional decline in breath isoprene concentrations and serum cholesterol
levels [38, 43]. On the other hand, several studies have pointed out myotoxic effects to
be a major adverse reaction of statin therapy, leading to the inhibition of skeletal muscle
activity [44–46].
The extent to which the mevalonate pathway accounts for isoprene formation under
physiological conditions is still a matter of debate [15, 47]. In particular, the abovementioned pathway rests on the acid-catalyzed solvolysis of dimethylallyl-diphosphate

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis

10

in the liver which may be insignificant at physiological pH [48, 49]. In many plants,
the formation of isoprene is enzyme-catalyzed, and isoprene seems to play a role in
the heat protection of leafs [50]. Moreover, some indications of an isoprene synthase
in bovine liver have been put forward in [49]. Hence, it cannot be excluded that an
isoprene synthase is present in human tissues. However that may be, we suggest an
additional peripheral origin of isoprene through the same basic biochemical pathway.
Specifically, by adopting the assumption of a muscular source of isoprene, statin-induced
lowering of isoprene concentration in the muscles may turn out as the main cause for
the reduction of endogenous isoprene formation and the subsequent decrease of breath
isoprene concentrations. An analogous argument might also give further insights into
the surprising lack of statistically significant correlations between breath isoprene levels
and blood cholesterol levels [49, 51].
Similarly, the proposed mechanisms may explain the age dependency of breath
isoprene levels by correlating the latter to changes in the individual muscle mass. The
characteristic median breath isoprene concentration in adults under resting conditions
is about 100 ppb [51], whereas young children have demonstrably lower isoprene levels
[47, 52, 53]. Breath isoprene concentrations have been reported to be non-detectable in
the breath of neonates, while steadily increasing in teenagers and reaching a plateau
level in the middle age [53, 54]. Moreover, isoprene levels in older people appear to
decrease [51, 54].
While the cause and effect relationships proposed above remain speculative, the
modeling study presented in [10] and this paper certainly yields new interesting
perspectives on previous experimental findings. Several experiments have been
summarized here demonstrating that the peak-shaped behavior of end-tidal isoprene
during exercise is most probably associated with the increased activity and perfusion of
the skeletal muscle group. Former investigations with respect to the age dependency of
isoprene output and its reduction under statin therapy nicely fit into this rationale.
Moreover, the present work suggests that the major part of physiologically formed
isoprene stems from the skeletal musculature rather than hepatic production.
5. Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results has received funding from the European
Communitys Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-13) under grant agreement
No. 217967. We greatly appreciate funding from the Austrian Federal Ministry for
Transport, Innovation and Technology (BMVIT/BMWA, project 818803, KIRAS).
Julian King is a recipient of a DOC fellowship of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
at the Breath Research Institute. Gerald Teschl and Julian King acknowledge support
from the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) under Grant No. Y330. We greatly appreciate
the generous support of Vorarlberg and its governor Dr. Herbert Sausgruber.

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis

11

Appendix A.
The following paragraphs briefly summarize the fundamental physical principles
underlying the present model derivation. Further details can be found in [10].
Appendix A.1. Mass transport in the lung
In the basic model describing the pulmonary gas exchange of blood borne-inert gases,
the lung is considered to be a homogenous single compartment with a fixed storage
volume VA . An instantaneous equilibrium between end-capillary blood (corresponding
to arterial blood) and alveolar air is assumed, leading to a directly proportional
relationship (Henry’s law) between the arterial blood concentration Ca and the alveolar
air concentration CA , viz.,
Ca = λb:air CA .

(A.1)

Here, λb:air is the dimensionless substance specific partition coefficient between blood
and air. In view of this diffusion equilibrium, the alveolar compartment capacity is
governed by the effective storage volume ṼA := VA + λb:air Vc′ , where Vc′ represents the
capillary blood volume.
The rate of accumulation of a gas within this volume equals the difference between
supply and elimination due to perfusion Q̇c and ventilation V̇A , where both quantities
are regarded as continuous parameters ‡. This relationship is described by the following
mass balance equation (see, e.g., [55])
d
CA = Q̇c (Cv̄ − Ca ) + V̇A (CI − CA ) ,
(A.2)
dt
where Cv̄ and CI are the concentrations in mixed venous blood and inhaled air,
respectively. The expired air is assumed to have the same concentration as the alveolar
air.
ṼA

Appendix A.2. A three compartment model for isoprene exchange
In the gas exchange model for isoprene adopted here, the mass balance equation for
the lung corresponds to Equation (A.2), adding the assumption that inhaled air only
contains negligible amounts of isoprene, i.e., CI = 0.
The systemic part consists of two well mixed compartments: a richly perfused tissue
compartment (including intestines, brain, connective muscles, skin) and a peripheral
tissue compartment. Both compartments are active in the sense that production as well
as metabolic elimination of isoprene occurs. The venous blood concentration leaving the
compartment is considered to be in equilibrium with the respective tissue concentration
at every instant t (venous equilibrium). Based on this assumption, the storage capacities
in richly perfused and peripheral tissue can again be expressed as effective volumes
Ṽrpt := Vrpt + λb:rpt Vrpt,b and Ṽper := Vper + λb:per Vper,b , respectively. Here, V⋆ and V⋆,b
‡ i.e., only averages over time periods are considered

12

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis

denote the volumes of intracellular space and vascular blood, respectively, while λb:⋆ is
the blood:tissue partition coefficient of the corresponding compartment §. Mass balance
equations read
Ṽrpt

dCrpt
rpt
rpt
= (1 − qper )Q̇c (Ca − λb:rpt Crpt ) + kpr
− kmet
λb:rpt Crpt ,
dt

(A.3)

for richly perfused tissue and
dCper
per
per
Ṽper
= qper Q̇c (Ca − λb:per Cper ) + kpr
− kmet
λb:per Cper ,
(A.4)
dt
⋆
⋆
for peripheral tissue, with the kinetic rate constants kpr
and kmet
describing production
and metabolic elimination, respectively, and q⋆ denoting a fractional blood flow.
In order to capture the redistribution of the systemic perfusion during ergometer
exercise, the fractional blood flow qper ∈ (0, 1) to peripheral tissue is assumed to resemble
the fractional blood flow to both legs, which is postulated to increase with cardiac output
according to
rest
max
rest
qper (Q̇c ) := qper
+ (qper
− qper
) × (1 − exp (−τ max{0,

Q̇c − Q̇rest
c
})), (A.5)
rest
Q̇c

where τ > 0 is a constant. The associated concentrations in mixed venous and arterial
blood are given by
Cv̄ := (1 − qper )λb:rpt Crpt + qper λb:per Cper

(A.6)

and Equation (A.1), respectively. Moreover, we state that the measured (end-tidal)
isoprene concentration equals the alveolar level, i.e.,
Cmeas = CA .

(A.7)

Appendix A.3. Diffusion
The diffusive flux J of gases through a barrier separating two regions characterized by
distinct partial pressures Pj , j = 1, 2 is governed by Fick’s first law of diffusion
βDA
(P1 − P2 ) .
(A.8)
ℓ
While moving between the alveolar space and capillary blood, each gas is subject to
the same anatomically related limitations (cross sectional area A and thickness of the
membrane ℓ). Each gas, however, has a different solubility β and diffusivity D in the
membrane barrier.
Generally, all anatomically and gas related parameters in Equation (A.8) are
lumped together under the term diffusing capacity of the lung (D). At the alveolarcapillary interface Equation (A.8) hence simplifies to
J=

J = D(PA − Pb ) ,

(A.9)

where PA and Pb are the partial pressures in alveolar air and capillary blood, respectively.
§ here ⋆ denotes rpt or per

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis

13

Graham’s law states that the diffusivity of a gas is inversely proportional to the
square root of its molecular weight MW. Therefore, the relative diffusing capacities of
the lung for two distinct gases can be estimated via
p
MWgas,2
βgas,1
Dgas,1
.
(A.10)
=
×p
Dgas,2
βgas,2
MWgas,1

14

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis
Nomenclature

Parameter

Symbol

Concentrations
alveoli

CA

end-capillary

Cc′

arterial

Ca

mixed-venous

Cv̄

richly perfused tissue (rpt)

Crpt

peripheral tissue

Cper

inhaled (ambient)

CI

Compartment volumes
alveoli

VA

end-capillary

Vc′

rpt

Vrpt

blood rpt
peripheral tissue
blood peripheral tissue
ambient

Vrpt,b
Vper
Vper,b
ṼI

Fractional blood flows
periphery (both legs)

qper

maximal

max
qper

nominal (rest)

rest
qper

constant in Eq. A.5

τ

Partition coefficients
blood:air

λb:air

blood:rpt

λb:rpt

blood:peripheral tissue

λb:per

Rate constants
hepatic metabolic rate

rpt
kmet

extrahepatic metabolic rate

per
kmet

production rpt

rpt
kpr

production peripheral tissue

per
kpr

Table A1. List of symbols

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis

15

References
[1] L Pauling, A B Robinson, R Teranishi, and P Cary. Quantitative analysis of urine vapor and
breath by gas-liquid partition chromatography. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA, 68:2374–6, 1971.
[2] M Phillips, J Greenberg, and J Awad. Metabolic and environmental origins of volatile organic
compounds in breath. J Clin Pathol, 47:1052–3, 1994.
[3] A Amann and D Smith, editors. Breath gas analysis for clinical diagnosis and therapeutic
monitoring. World Scientific, Singapore, 2005.
[4] T Ligor, M Ligor, A Amann, C Ager, M Bachler, A Dzien, and B Buszewski. The analysis of
healthy volunteers’ exhaled breath by the use of solid-phase microextraction and GC-MS. J
Breath Res, 2:046006, 2008.
[5] A Bajtarevic, C Ager, M Pienz, M Klieber, K Schwarz, M Ligor, T Ligor, W Filipiak, H Denz,
M Fiegl, W Hilbe, W Weiss, P Lukas, H Jamnig, M Hackl, A Haidenberger, B Buszewski,
W Miekisch, J Schubert, and A Amann. Noninvasive detection of lung cancer by analysis of
exhaled breath. BMC Cancer, 9:348, 2009.
[6] J Herbig, M Müller, S Schallhart, T Titzmann, M Graus, and Hansel A. On-line breath analysis
with PTR-TOF. J Breath Res, 3:027004, 2009.
[7] I Kushch, K Schwarz, L Schwentner, B Baumann, A Dzien, A Schmid, K Unterkofler, G Gastl,
P Spanĕl, D Smith, and A Amann. Compounds enhanced in a mass spectrometric profile of
smokers’ exhaled breath versus non-smokers as determined in a pilot study using PTR-MS. J
Breath Res, 2:026002, 2008.
[8] A Amann, S Telser, L Hofer, A Schmid, and H Hinterhuber. Exhaled breath gas as a biochemical
probe during sleep. In Breath Analysis for Clinical Diagnosis and Therapeitic Monitoring, pages
305–16. World Scientific, Singapore, 2005.
[9] A Amann, J King, A Kupferthaler, K Unterkofler, H Koc, S Teschl, and H Hinterhuber. Exhaled
breath analysis-quantifying the storage of lipophilic compounds in the human body. Proceedings
of Ecopole, 3:9–13, 2009.
[10] J King, H Koc, K Unterkofler, P Mochalski, A Kupferthaler, G Teschl, S Teschl, H Hinterhuber,
and A Amann. Physiological modeling of isoprene dynamics in exhaled breath. J Theor Biol,
267:626–37, 2010.
[11] J King, A Kupferthaler, K Unterkofler, H Koc, S Teschl, G Teschl, W Miekisch, J Schubert,
H Hinterhuber, and A Amann. Isoprene and acetone concentration profiles during exercise on
an ergometer. J Breath Res, 3:027006, 2009.
[12] J King, P Mochalski, A Kupferthaler, K Unterkofler, H Koc, W Filipiak, S Teschl, H Hinterhuber,
and A Amann. Dynamic profiles of volatile organic compounds in exhaled breath as determined
by a coupled PTR-MS/GC-MS study. Physiol Meas, 31:1169–84, 2010.
[13] J King, K Unterkofler, G Teschl, S Teschl, H Koc, H Hinterhuber, and A Amann. A mathematical
model for breath gas analysis of volatile organic compounds with special emphasis on acetone.
J Math Biol, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00285-010-0398-9, 2011.
[14] A Amann, P Spanĕl, and D Smith. Breath analysis: the approach towards clinical applications.
Mini Rev Med Chem, 7:115–29, 2007.
[15] W Miekisch, J K Schubert, and Gabriele F E Noeldge-Schomburg. Diagnostic potential of breath
analysis–focus on volatile organic compounds. Clin Chim Acta, 347:25–39, 2004.
[16] S A Kharitonov and Barnes P J. Biomarkers of some pulmonary diseases in exhaled breath.
Biomarkers, 7:1–32, 2002.
[17] A Amann, G Poupart, S Telser, M Ledochowski, A Schmid, and S Mechtcheriakov. Applications
of breath gas analysis in medicine. Int J Mass Spectrom, 239:227–33, 2004.
[18] L C A Amorim and Z de L Cardeal. Breath air analysis and its use as a biomarker in biological
monitoring of occupational and environmental exposure to chemical agents. J Chromatogr B,
853:1–9, 2007.
[19] J D Pleil. Role of exhaled breath biomarkers in environmental health science. J Toxicol Environ

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis
[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]
[24]
[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]

16

Health B Crit Rev, 11:613–29, 2008.
A S Modak. Stable isotope breath tests in clinical medicine: a review. J Breath Res, 1:014003,
2007.
A Modak. Breath tests with 13C substrates. J Breath Res, 3:040201, 2009.
L K Mattison, H Ezzeldin, M Carpender, A Modak, M R Johnson, and R B Diasio. Rapid
identification of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency by using a novel 2-13C-uracil breath
test. Clin Cancer Res, 10:2652–8, 2004.
A Modak. 13C breath tests: transition from research to clinical practice. In Breath Analysis for
Clinical Diagnosis and Therapeitic Monitoring, pages 457–78. World Scientific, 2005.
A Modak. Single time point diagnostic breath tests: A review. J Breath Res, 4:017002, 2010.
A Modak, J M Reid, L A Williams, and G R Hobbs. A simple non-invasive method to detect and
monitor hypercapnia: the sodium 13Cbicarbonate breath test. Isotopes Environ Health Stud,
43:23–9, 2007.
H Ezzeldin and R Diasio. Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency, a pharmacogenetic syndrome associated with potentially life-threatening toxicity following 5-fluorouracil administration. Clin Colorectal Cancer, 4:181–9, 2004.
A Amann, W Miekisch, J Pleil, T Risby, and J Schubert. Methodological issues of sample collection
and analysis of exhaled breath. In European Respiratory Society Monograph 49, pages 96–114.
European Respiratory Society, Lausanne, 2010.
K A Cope, M T Watson, W M Foster, S S Sehnert, and T H Risby. Effects of ventilation on the
collection of exhaled breath in humans. J Appl Physiol, 96:1371–9, 2004.
J C Anderson, W J E Lamm, and M P Hlastala. Measuring airway exchange of endogenous
acetone using a single-exhalation breathing maneuver. J Appl Physiol, 100:880–9, 2006.
T H Risby. Critical issue for breath analysis. J Breath Res, 2:030302, 2008.
M B Reddy, R S H Yang, H J Clewell 3rd, and M E Andersen, editors. Physiologically based
pharmacokinetik modeling: science and applications. Wiley Interscience, New Jersey, 2005.
L E Farhi. Elimination of inert gas by the lung. Respir Physiol, 3:1–11, 1967.
M P Hlastala and A J Berger. Physiology of Respiration. Oxford University Press, New York,
2nd edition, 2001.
P D Wagner, H A Saltzman, and J B West. Measurement of continuous distributions of ventilationperfusion ratios: theory. J Appl Physiol, 36:588–98, 1974.
J C Anderson, A L Babb, and M P Hlastala. Modeling soluble gas exchange in the airways and
alveoli. Ann Biomed Eng, 31:1402–22, 2003.
J G Filser, G A Csanády, B Denk, M Hartmann, A Kauffmann, W Kessler, P E Kreuzer, C Pütz,
J H Shen, and P Stei. Toxicokinetics of isoprene in rodents and humans. Toxicology, 113:278–87,
1996.
S T Senthilmohan, D B Milligan, M J McEwan, C G Freeman, and P F Wilson. Quantitative
analysis of trace gases of breath during exercise using the new SIFT-MS technique. Redox Rep,
5:151–3, 2000.
T Karl, P Prazeller, D Mayr, A Jordan, J Rieder, R Fall, and W Lindinger. Human breath
isoprene and its relation to blood cholesterol levels: new measurements and modeling. J Appl
Physiol, 91:762–70, 2001.
J B West. Respiratory Physiology: The Essentials. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore,
8th edition, 2008.
M G Levitzky. Pulmonary Physiology. Lange Medical Books/McGraw-Hill, New York, 7th edition,
2007.
D E Mohrman and L J Heller. Cardiovascluar Physiology. Lange Medical Books/McGraw-Hill,
New York, 6th edition, 2006.
E S Deneris, R A Stein, and J F Mead. Acid catalyzed formation of isoprene from a mevalonatederived product using a rat liver cytosolic fraction. J Biol Chem, 260:1382–5, 1985.
B G Stone, T J Besse, W C Duane, C D Evans, and E G DeMaster. Effect of regulating cholesterol

The role of mathematical modeling in VOC analysis
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]

[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

17

biosynthesis on breath isoprene excretion in men. Lipids, 28:705–8, 1993.
J Farmer. Statins and myotoxicity. Curr Atheroscler Rep, 5:96–100, 2003.
M Evans and A Rees. The myotoxicity of statins. Curr Opin Lipidol, 13:415–20, 2002.
P A Walravens, C Greene, and F E Frerman. Lovastatin, isoprenes and myopathy. The Lancet,
334:1097–8, 1989.
J Taucher, A Hansel, A Jordan, R Fall, J H Futrell, and W Lindinger. Detection of isoprene
in expired air from human subjects using proton-transfer-reaction mass spectrometry. Rapid
Commun Mass Spectrom, 11:1230–4, 1997.
G M Silver and R Fall. Enzymatic synthesis of isoprene from dimethylallyl diphosphate in aspen
leaf extracts. Plant Physiol, 97:1588–91, 1991.
T Sharkey. Isoprene synthesis by plants and animals. Endeavour, 20:74–8, 1996.
G M Silver and R Fall. Characterization of aspen isoprene synthase, an enzyme responsible for
leaf isoprene emission to the atmosphere. J Biol Chem, 270:13010–6, 1995.
I Kushch, B Arendacká, S Stolc, P Mochalski, W Filipiak, K Schwarz, L Schwentner, A Schmid,
A Dzien, M Lechleitner, V Witkovský, W Miekisch, J Schubert, K Unterkofler, and A Amann.
Breath isoprene–aspects of normal physiology related to age, gender and cholesterol profile
as determined in a proton transfer reaction mass spectrometry study. Clin Chem Lab Med,
46:1011–8, 2008.
W Lindinger, Hansel A, and A Jordan. Proton-transfer-reaction mass spectrometry (PTR-MS):
on-line monitoring of volatile organic compounds at pptv levels. Chem Soc Rev, 27:347–54,
1998.
D Smith, P Spanel, B Enderby, W Lenney, C Turner, and S J Davies. Isoprene levels in the
exhaled breath of 200 healthy pupils within the age range 7–18 years studied using SIFT-MS.
J Breath Res, 4:017101, 2010.
T H Risby. Volatile organic compounds as markers in normal and diseased states. In Disease
markers in exhaled breath: basic mechanisms and clinical applications, volume 346 of Series I:
Life and Behavioural Sciences, pages 113–22. IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2002.
S Timischl. A global model for the cardiovascular and respiratory system. PhD thesis, Karl
Franzens University of Graz, 1998.

