EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex
Fibers
Hoda Boroudjerdi1 , Ali Naji1,2 , and Roland R. Netz1

arXiv:1101.5760v1 [cond-mat.soft] 30 Jan 2011

1
2

Department of Physics, Technical University of Munich, Garching 85748, Germany
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB3 0WA, United Kingdom
Received: date / Revised version: date
Abstract. The structure and stability of strongly charged complex fibers, formed by complexation of a
single long semi-flexible polyelectrolyte chain and many oppositely charged spherical macroions, are investigated numerically at the ground-state level using a chain-sphere cell model. The model takes into account
chain elasticity as well as electrostatic interactions between charged spheres and chain segments. Using a
numerical optimization method based on a periodically repeated unit cell, we obtain fiber configurations
that minimize the total energy. The optimal fiber configurations exhibit a variety of helical structures for
the arrangement of macroions including zig-zag, solenoidal and beads-on-a-string patterns. These structures are determined by a competition between attraction between spheres and the polyelectrolyte chain
(which favors chain wrapping around the spheres), chain bending and electrostatic repulsion between chain
segments (which favor unwrapping of the chain), and the interactions between neighboring sphere-chain
complexes which can be attractive or repulsive depending on the system parameters such as medium salt
concentration, macroion charge and chain length per macroion (linker size). At about physiological salt
concentration, dense zig-zag patterns are found to be energetically most stable when parameters appropriate for the DNA-histone system in a chromatin fiber are adopted. In fact, the predicted fiber diameter
in this regime is found to be around 30 nanometers, which appears to agree with the thickness observed
in in vitro experiments on chromatin. We also find a macroion (histone) density of 5-6 per 11 nm which
agrees with the zig-zag or cross-linker models of chromatin. Since our study deals primarily with a generic
chain-sphere model, these findings suggest that structures similar to those found for chromatin should
also be observable for polyelectrolyte-macroion complexes formed in solutions of DNA and synthetic nanocolloids of opposite charge. In the ensemble where the mean linear density of spheres on the chain is fixed,
the present model predicts a phase separation at intermediate salt concentrations into a densely packed
complex phase and a dilute phase.
PACS. 87.15.-v Biomolecules: structure and physical properties – 87.16.Sr Chromosomes, histones – 82.70.y Disperse systems; complex fluids

1 Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a growing interest in the
structure and phase behavior of large charged polymermacroion clusters, for instance, a long polyelectrolyte (PE)
chain is complexed with many oppositely charged spheres
[1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15]. Perhaps, the most
striking example is realized in biology, where a huge fiber
is formed by complexation of a long (negatively charged)
DNA chain with (positively charged) histone proteins, giving rise to the prominent chromatin fiber [16,17,18,19,20,
21,22,23]. The fundamental unit of chromatin is known as
the nucleosome consisting of about 200 base pairs (about
68 nm) of DNA associated with a cylindrical-wedge-shaped
histone octamer of diameter about 7 nm and mean height
5.5 nm. The nucleosome has two main parts: i) the nucleosome core particle (or the core particle) comprising 146

base pairs of DNA wrapped in nearly a 1-and-3/4 lefthanded helical turn around the histone octamer, and ii)
the linker DNA, which connects adjacent core particles to
one another. There is an additional component known as
linker histone H1 (or its variant H5), which binds to the
DNA and the histone octamer in such a way that it brings
the entering and exiting strands of DNA together along a
short distance, forming a stem-like structure. The role of
linker histone will be discussed further below.
In vitro experiments have revealed striking salt-induced
conformational changes for the chromatin fiber (see, e.g.,
[16,24,25,26,27,28,29]): At very small salt concentration,
the fiber structure is swollen, displaying an open beadson-a-string pattern in which individual core particles become highly separated from each other; the resultant fiber
is known as the 10 nm fiber because of the nearly 10 nm

2

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

hard-core diameter of the core particle (nearly equal to the tem throughout this study. We should emphasize, howcombined diameter of the core histone octamer and twice ever, that the present model is not meant to address the
that of the DNA wrapped around it). As the salt concen- specific problem of the chromatin fiber (as no attempt is
tration increases, the fiber becomes more and more folded made in order to incorporate explicitly the specific strucand finally within the physiologically relevant regime (aroundtural details of the actual chromatin fiber such as the
100 mM NaCl), it exhibits a thick and dense fiber of di- linker histone, core histone tails, specific binding effects
ameter about 30 nm, known as the 30 nm fiber. This salt- or the precise shape of the histone octamer [16,18]), but
dependent behavior indicates that predominant electro- we rather focus on the more general aspects of complex
static mechanisms are involved and influence the organi- fiber formation in PE-macroion systems. The results are
zation of the chromatin fiber.
thus also relevant for mixtures of DNA and oppositely
charged nano-colloids or synthetic spheres.
The precise arrangement of nucleosome core particles
We show that the transition between the predicted hein the 30 nm fiber has been under debate for a long time
[17,18,24,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,lical patterns is dictated by the wrapping-dewrapping be43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53]. A large number of mod- havior of the chain as the system parameters vary. For
els have been proposed for the structure of the 30 nm fiber instance, at low salt concentration, the dominant selfwhich are more or less consistent with the experimental repulsion of chain segments leads to dewrapping of the
observations. For instance, several studies [27,28,29,30] chain from macroions, generating an expanded fiber. In
appear to support a zig-zag or cross-linker pattern, where the physiological regime, zig-zag patterns are found to be
successive nucleosomes are at opposite sides of the fiber energetically most stable, because the chain is wrapped
and the linker DNA joining them bridges across the he- around macroions in about a 1-and-3/4 turn for moderate
lical core of the fiber. Among other models supported by sphere charge [54], which turns out to be about the same
recent experiments are the solenoidal model [24,31] (in degree of DNA-wrapping in the nucleosome core particles.
which successive nucleosomes are juxtaposed as nearest At elevated salt (beyond 100mM monovalent salt), the
neighbors with the linker DNA bent in between them), highly wrapped state of the chain leads to very compact
the twisted ribbon model [32], as well as the more gen- solenoidal structures for the fiber. The predicted struceral class of ribbon models [50,51] (see Refs. [18,39,48,51] tures will be summarized by presenting a two-angle strucfor a more comprehensive reference list and discussion of tural diagram in analogy with the two-angle models in
Refs. [17,27]. An important result follows from our model
various chromatin models).
when the chain (linker) length per macroion is treated as
Our goal in this work is to address structural prop- a free parameter. It is found that the binding energy (per
erties of generic chain-sphere complex fibers comprising macroion) takes a non-convex shape at intermediate salt
a long semi-flexible charged PE chain and many oppo- concentrations (when plotted as a function of the chain
sitely charged spheres. We adopt a simple chain-sphere length per macroion), with a global minimum at a high
cell-model approach [54,55] that allows for a systematic sphere density, indicating a gas-liquid-type “phase coexisdescription of the polymer conformation in an infinite tence” along the fiber: Part of the PE chain forms a dense
fiber. The chain conformation and the fiber structure are complex fiber with macroions phase-separating from a didetermined by a competition between chain elasticity, elec- lute phase along the fiber consisting only of uncomplexed
trostatic interactions (among chain segments and charged chain.
spheres across a salt solution) as well as geometrical conIn the aforementioned optimization model, the wrapstraints. We employ a numerical optimization method to
ping
structure of the chain around individual macroions
find configurations minimizing the total fiber Hamiltonian with respect to the whole conformation of the com- is not fixed and can vary so as to minimize the effecplexed chain and the position of macroions. This scheme tive Hamiltonian of the fiber (unconstrained optimizais known as the ground-state-dominance approximation tion). This can be thought of as a simple model mimicking
which is valid for strongly-coupled charged complexes (such linker-histone-depleted chromatin [24]. The 30 nm fiber
as DNA-histone complexes) that exhibit large PE adsorp- obtained within the unconstrained optimization model shows
tion energy and relatively small thermal fluctuations [54, a rather small density (number per projected unit length)
55]. The organization of the chain on individual macroions of macroions along the fiber, i.e., about one macroion per
and hence throughout the fiber is not externally imposed, 11 nm, which is comparable with the nucleosome density
but rather obtained as a result of the interplay between at relatively small salt concentration (where the chromatin
inter- and intra-fiber interactions. We demonstrate that still has a 30 nm diameter [28]), but not with the density of
the resultant optimal fiber structures exhibit a variety about 6 histones per 11 nm [18,24,26,27,28,29] observed
of helical structures including, for instance, beads-on-a- in the physiological salt regime.
string, zig-zag, and solenoidal patterns depending on a few
As noted above, the linker histone H1 “glues” together
basic system parameters, namely, the salt concentration, the entering and exiting strands of the DNA and also stathe macroion charge valency, and the chain length per bilizes (“seals off”) the internal structure of the DNA in
macroion (or the linker length). Other parameters such as the nucleosome core particle. It plays a key role in the comthe chain persistence length and its charge density as well paction of the chromatin into a 30 nm fiber [24]. In order
as the sphere diameter will be fixed; here we choose the to mimic this kind of effect in a very simple way within
parameter values appropriate for the DNA-histone sys- the present model, we also employ a variant of the opti-

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

3

Fig. 1. Cell model for a complex fiber: a) Each unit cell consists of a single PE-macroion complex the precise configuration
of which is obtained from a numerical minimization method. b) Two adjacent unit cells (which are identical in configuration)
are linked together such that they share a common tangent vector at the unit cells junction (see text). c) By repeating this
procedure the whole complex fiber is constructed from a main unit cell. Within the full minimization scheme, all degrees of
freedom associated with a single unit cell (that is the chain beads locations as well as the boundary rotational angle χ) are
varied in order to find the optimal configuration minimizing the full effective Hamiltonian of the fiber.

mization scheme, the so-called constrained optimization,
in which the core complex structure is fixed according to
the optimal structure of an isolated complex (with a chain
length of 146 DNA base pairs); then only the relative orientation angle of adjacent core particle complexes can vary
in order to find the optimal fiber structure. This leads to
a number of significant changes. Most notably, the entering and exiting strands of the chain tend to form a cross
pattern at physiological salt (producing a small entry-exit
angle as compared with the unconstrained model), which
resembles the stem-like pattern proposed for H1-stabilized
nucleosome [24,27,28]. As a result, the resultant optimal
fiber is found to have a more compact zig-zag pattern with
a histone density of about 5-6 histones per 11 nm in agreement with Refs. [24,26,27,28,29].
The organization of this paper is as follows: In Section
2, we describe the theoretical model and the numerical
method used to study infinite charged complex fibers. In
Section 3, the salt-induced structural changes of the fiber
are studied within the unconstrained optimization model.
The constrained optimization model is analyzed in the following Section 4. We then show in Section 5 how the fiber
structure is influenced by variation of the linker length
and discuss different thermodynamic ensembles and the
possibility of phase separation along the chain.

2 Theoretical model: Cell-model approach
The model used here for the study of complex fibers is
based upon the chain-sphere model [54,55], which consists
of a single semi-flexible PE chain complexed with an oppositely charged sphere (macroion). Here we use this model
to describe an infinite complex fiber made from complexation of a single long PE chain with many macroions. We
restrict the discussion to strongly coupled complexes and
thus employ the ground-state-dominance approximation
corresponding to strong adsorption of the PE chain on
each sphere [54,55,57].
The main idea here is to apply a cell-model approach
by describing the complex fiber in terms of identical chainsphere unit cells linked together via the same PE strand.

In analogy with the chromatin fiber, one can thus think of
each unit cell as consisting of two main parts: i) the coreparticle complex (macroion sphere complexed with a chain
segment), and ii) the linker chain connecting adjacent core
particles as shown in Fig. 1.
In our numerical analysis, the complex fiber is constructed by replicating one unit cell (referred to as the
main unit cell) infinitely many times such that the connectivity and smoothness of the linker chain is preserved.
We begin the minimization with a given initial condition,
typically, the one in which the structure of the core particle complex in each unit cell corresponds to the energetically optimized configuration in an isolated chain-sphere
complex with the chain length associated with each core
particle being taken to be equivalent to 146 DNA base
pairs. This procedure for a single isolated complex has
been studied thoroughly in our previous works [54,55,56].
We then connect an arbitrary length of linker chain and
the interaction Hamiltonian of the whole fiber is minimized
using a recursive numerical method to find the optimal
fiber structure without any further constraints (see below). This follows simply by focusing on a single unit cell.
Although this prescribes a model consisting of identical
unit cells, the optimized fiber structures are by no means
trivial in the way the unit cells or core particles are arranged. They display a rich structural phase diagram of
helical patterns. Note that these helical patterns may or
may not exhibit periodic structures (i.e., structures with
discrete translational symmetry). In fact, the energetically
optimal structures are merely quasi-periodic, i.e., they do
not show exact (rational) periodicity but a distribution of
periodicities with a sharp peak around a mean value of
periodicity (see Ref. [56] for details). We also note that
electrostatic interactions between all unit cells are fully
taken into account, and thus on this level, the only approximation of the present cell model is that structural
symmetry breaking between the unit cells is neglected.
2.1 Main unit cell
Each unit cell consists of a piece of PE chain of length
Lc (or an equivalent of Nbp = Lc /(0.34 nm) DNA base

4

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

uk1 (and in fact the whole k-th unit cell as a rigid body)
k−1
such that uk1 falls onto uN
to fulfill the smoothness of the
chain at the junction. We then allow the image unit cell k
to rotate around this common bond vector by an arbitrary
(azimuthal) angle χ, see Fig. 1 for an illustration. This
angle is indeed a rotational degree of freedom for each
unit cell as a whole in addition to other intra-cell degrees
of freedom (bead and sphere positions) that is varied in
order to minimize the fiber Hamiltonian (see Section 2.4
below).
The rotation matrix E is obtained as

pairs each of length 0.34 nm) with linear charge density of
−τ (in units of the elementary charge e) and bare (unscreened) mechanical persistence length of ℓp . The PE
chain interacts with a uniformly charged sphere of radius
Rs and charge valency Z in a salt solution of concentration
Cs . Although the present model is quite general, in making
explicit calculations, we set the parameters appropriate
for the DNA-histone system by choosing τ = 5.88 nm−1
(maximum dissociation of two elementary charges per base
pair [58]), ℓp = 30 nm [54,59,60] and Rs = 5 nm, while
Lc , Z and Cs are varied. Note that the sphere radius of
Rs = 5 nm represents the closest approach of DNA of radius 1 nm on a histone octamer of mean radius of about
4 nm. As in previous studies [54,55], we employ a discretization scheme in order to parametrize the chain conformation as required for numerical analysis. The chain is
discretized using N + 1 discretization points or beads of
valency q = τ Lc /(N + 1) located at positions {r0i } (with
i = 0, 1, . . . , N and the super-index 0 denoting the main
unit cell). This amounts to N rigid chain subunits within
a unit cell each described by a bond vector u0i = r0i − r0i−1
of length |u0i | = ∆ and two polar and azimuthal angles θi
and φi with respect to a fixed orthogonal reference [54,55]
(N has in general no connection with the number of actual monomers). The location of the central macroion R0
in the main unit cell is chosen as the origin, i.e., R0 = 0.
We conventionally discretize each natural DNA base pair
into two discrete subunits; therefore N = 2Nbp and we
have q = 1 (i.e., one elementary charge per subunit or
two per base pair) for large N when DNA linear charge
density is adopted.

where θ1 and φ1 are the polar and azimuthal angles of u01
and θN and φN are the polar and azimuthal angles of u0N .
Note that the matrix E is only a function of the angles
{χ, θ1 , φ1 , θN , φN }.

2.2 Unit cell replication

2.3 Intra-fiber interactions

Let us assume that the structure of the core-particle complex within the main unit cell is given (from a minimization scheme as discussed later). We construct the complex
fiber by attaching an image of the main unit cell to it such
that the linker chain tangentially connects the two unit
cells with no kinks at the junction (see Fig. 1); i.e., the
last chain bond vector, u0N , in the main unit cell is chosen
as the first bond vector, u11 , of the first immediate image cell (labeled by super-index 1) and so on for all other
image cells in a recursive manner.
Formally, this replication procedure is established by
a combined translation and rotation transformation. In
general, the position of the i-th chain bead and that of
the sphere center in the k-th unit cell (labeled by superindex k), i.e., rki and Rk respectively, are obtained as

Because the infinite complex fiber is obtained by replicating identical unit cells, one can focus on the effective
Hamiltonian of the main unit cell, which can be written
as
M
X
0k
Hint
,
(7)
H = Hself +

k−1
rki = E · (rik−1 − r0k−1 ) + rN
−1

(1)

k−1
Rk = E · (Rk−1 − r0k−1 ) + rN
−1 ,

(2)

from the given configurations in the (k − 1)-th unit cell
(labeled by super-index k − 1). Here E is the full rotation
k−1
k
matrix around the common point or junction rN
−1 = r0 of
the two adjacent unit cells, which rotates the bond vector

E = BXA

(3)

with the matrices A, X and B defined as follows


− sin φ1
cos φ1
0
A =  − cos φ1 cos θ1 − sin φ1 cos θ1 sin θ1  ,
(4)
sin θ1 cos φ1 sin φ1 sin θ1 cos θ1


cos χ − sin χ 0
X =  sin χ cos χ 0  ,
(5)
0
0
1


− sin φN − cos φN cos θN sin θN cos φN
B =  cos φN − sin φN cos θN sin φN sin θN  , (6)
0
sin θN
cos θN

k=1

where Hself gives the self-energy of the main unit cell, and
0k
Hint
accounts for the interactions between the main and
the k-th unit cells. The following interactions are included
in these two terms: 1) electrostatic interactions between
all charged beads along the PE chain with one another
and with charged spheres within the linear Debye-Hückel
theory (which effectively captures salt screening effects)
as well as the mutual interactions between the charged
spheres themselves, 2) a short-ranged soft-core excludedvolume repulsion between chain beads and spheres only,
which prevents the chain from penetrating the spheres,
and 3) the mechanical bending elasticity of the PE chain.
Note that the electrostatic contribution to the bending
rigidity is explicitly included via the electrostatic selfenergy term. In the second term in Eq. (7), we have used
a cut-off M to account for the interaction between M consecutive unit cells. We typically choose M = 5. As explicitly checked, the results are not influenced by increasing M

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

Hself =

N
ℓp X
∆
i=2





1 − cos(θi − θi−1 ) + sin θi sin θi−1 1 − cos(φi − φi−1 )

N−1
2

+ q ℓB

0
0
N
X X
e−κ|ri −rj |

i=0 j=i+1

2
H0k
int = q ℓB

+

0
N
0
ZqℓB X e−κ(|ri |−Rs )
−
− Ae−(|ri |−Rs )/α
0
0
|ri − rj |
1 + κRs
|r0i |

0
k
N
N
X
X
e−κ|ri −rj |

i=0 j=2

|r0i − rkj |

N  −κ(|rk |−R )
X
s
i
e
i=2

|rki |



−

i=0

N
X
ZqℓB
1 + κRs

−Ae



i=0

−(|rk
i |−Rs )/α

further due to the highly screened nature of electrostatic
interactions at high salt and/or highly expanded size of
unit cells at low salt.
The self-energy of the main unit cell is written in discretized form as
See equation (8) above
(in units of kB T ), where the first term is the mechanical bending contribution, the second term is the electrostatic repulsion between chain segments, and the third
term represents chain-sphere attraction as well as the softcore repulsion (which is specified by a repulsion range,
α, and strength A, which are fixed at typical values of
A = 0.014 nm−1 and α = 0.02 nm [56]). Recall that
κ = (8πℓB Cs )1/2 is the inverse Debye screening length
for monovalent salt with ℓB = e2 /(4πεε0 kB T ) being the
Bjerrum length.
The interaction between the main unit cell and the
k-th image unit cell reads (in units of kB T )
See equation (9) above
noting that the first two beads i = 0, 1 for the k-th image
unit cell are counted as the last beads of the (k − 1)-th
cell as explained before. The first term in Eq. (9) corresponds to repulsion between chain segments in the main
unit cell and those in the k-th image cell, the second
term involves electrostatic attraction and soft-repulsion
between the chain segment in the main unit cell and the
sphere in the k-th image cell and vice versa. The last term
represents electrostatic repulsion between the spheres in
the two unit cells.







0

k

5

(8)



0
k
e−κ(|ri −R |−Rs )
− A e−(|ri −R |−Rs )/α
0
k
|ri − R |



k

+

Z 2 ℓB e2κRs e−κ|R |
,
(1 + κRs )2 |Rk |

(9)

overall chain conformation. This amounts to 2N + 1 independent degrees of freedom (per unit cell) {θi , φi6=P , rP , χ},
where θi and φi6=P are the chain’s bond vector angles, rP is
the z component of the position of the middle bead of the
chain P = N/2 (measured from the sphere center) and
χ the unit cell rotation angle. Note that φP (azimuthal
angle of the subunit P or bond vector uP ) is fixed in order to remove Goldestone (zero) modes associated with a
trivial rotational symmetry around the z axis connecting
the sphere center to the middle bead P .
Due to a large number of free variables, we tackle the
problem numerically using the quasi-Newton optimization
algorithm [61], which locates the minimum of the Hamiltonian using its first-order derivatives. At a minimum, the
first-order variation of the Hamiltonian vanishes, i.e.
N 
X
dH


dH
dH
dH
δH =
δθi +
δφi6=P +
δrP = 0.
δχ+
dθ
dφ
dχ
dr
i
i6=P
P
i=1
(10)
We use a combination of stochastic and parameter
quenching methods to make sure that the obtained structures are not meta-stable (local minima). The meta-stable
structures have been discussed elsewhere for chain-sphere
complexes [54,56].

3 Salt-induced structural changes of the
fiber - unconstrained optimization

In this section, we investigate the dependence of structural
properties of the complex fiber on the salt concentration
for fixed macroion charge valency Z = 15 and fixed total length of chain per unit cell Lc = 68 nm (equiva2.4 Numerical method: Unconstrained (full)
lently Nbp = 200 base pairs of DNA) [24,28]. The salt
minimization model
concentration Cs is increased from zero up to the physiFor strongly coupled PE-macroion complexes (i.e., with ologically relevant range of 100 mM monovalent salt and
large polymer adsorption energy), the so-called ground- beyond (with the inverse screening length spanning the
state-dominance approximation becomes accurate [54]. Here, range κ = 0 − 1.1 nm−1 ). Here we focus on the unconone seeks the optimal or ground-state configuration of the strained (full) minimization scheme; therefore, the chain
fiber minimizing the effective Hamiltonian (7) with respect length wrapped around the macroion is not fixed and can
to all degrees of freedom that are necessary to specify the change accordingly. The results display a variety of helical

6

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

Fig. 2. The optimal spatial configuration of the complex fiber as calculated from the unconstrained minimization of the
Hamiltonian Eq. (7) for macroion (sphere) charge valency Z = 15, total chain length per unit cell (per sphere) of Lc = 68 nm
(equivalent to 200 DNA base pairs) and for various Debye inverse screening lengths as indicated on the graph.

fibers as visualized in Fig. 2, which reflect drastic structural variations by changing the salt concentration.
The ground-state configurations shown in the Figure
can be grouped into a few generic classes, such as beads-ona-string (Figs. 2a, b, g), zig-zag or cross-linker (Figs. 2d,
h-l) and loose solenoidal structures (Figs. 2c, e, f). These
types of patterns have been identified more specifically
within recent geometric models for the chromatin fiber [18,
27,35]. In general, the zig-zag pattern can be thought of
as a configuration in which successive core particles are located on opposite sides of the fiber and the straight linker
chain joining them bridges across the helical core of the
fiber. This property is absent in the loose solenoidal pattern where successive nucleosomes are adjacent (as nearest
neighbors). Note that this classification is only qualitative
in the present context and will be used for convenience
when referring to the structures obtained from our model.
A more quantitative analysis of the salt-dependent behavior will be discussed in the following Sections.
As seen, the degree of chain complexation increases
with increasing salt concentration. The highly wrapped
states occur at intermediate salt concentration and result
from the growing dominance of electrostatic chain-sphere
attraction against the chain (electrostatic and bending)
self-energy. Indeed, as we show later, macroions are highly
overcharged by the PE adsorption much in the same way
as a single isolated complex is overcharged at intermediate
to large salt concentration [54,55,62,63].

At vanishing salt concentration (Fig. 2a), the PE chain
takes a straight-line shape due to the dominant electrostatic self-energy of the PE chain as charged units interact with long-ranged (unscreened) Coulomb interaction.
The distribution of spheres around the chain is periodic
but their centers lie on different angular locations around
the chain. For inverse screening length in the range of
κ = 0.3 to 0.6 nm−1 (Figs. 2d-g), the fiber structure shows
an anomalous behavior, i.e., the diameter of the fiber decreases and the projected distance (along the fiber axis)
between neighboring sphere centers increases, which is due
to the fact that the chain strand completes its first turn
around each sphere (see also Fig. 3). Upon further complexation of the chain (Figs. 2h-l), the fiber thickness tends
to increase again and the spheres become more densely
packed. Note that in the range of Debye inverse screening lengths κ = 0 − 0.5 nm−1 (<25 mM monovalent salt),
the chain wrapping is less than a complete turn and these
configurations appear locally as beads-on-a-string structures. However, the chain wrapping may be increased by
taking a higher sphere charge, leading to different structures even for small κ, as shown elsewhere [56]. The role
of sphere charge will be discussed later.
3.1 Overcharging of the core particle
It is useful to consider the local structure of the core particles within the fiber in more detail. A closer view of the
unit cell of the fiber is shown in Fig. 3 for different salt

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

7

Fig. 3. The local shape of the core particles within the optimal fiber structures in Fig. 2 for sphere charge valency Z = 15 and
various Debye inverse screening lengths as indicated on the graph. The total length of the PE chain per unit cell is fixed as
Lc = 68 nm (Nbp = 200). The increase in the number of chain turns around the macroion is clearly demonstrated.

Fig. 4. Number of chain beads (circles) that are attached to
the sphere (i.e., within the distance 1.02Rs from the sphere
center where Rs = 5 nm is the sphere radius) as a function of
the inverse screening length for the structures shown in Figs.
2 and 3. As noted before each bead is monovalent (q = 1),
thus this number equals the PE charge adsorbed on the sphere.
Diamonds show the net charge of the complex. At very low salt
concentration, the sphere charge is already nearly compensated
by the adsorbed PE segment and for larger salt, the sphere is
strongly overcharged.

concentrations. We introduce two quantities that measure
the degree of PE chain wrapping around each macroion
in the fiber, namely, the adsorbed PE charge, U (that includes only those chain beads that are within distances
less than or equal to 1.02Rs from the sphere center), and
the net charge of the core particle defined as U − Z. Both
quantities are shown in Fig. 4 as a function of κ.
The unit cell configurations clearly show that the PE
chain becomes gradually more wrapped around the sphere
upon increasing the salt concentration. That amounts to
more than two complete turns at high salt (κ = 1.5 nm−1 ).
As seen from Fig. 4, the adsorbed PE charge increases

almost linearly with the salt concentration and reaches
a plateau-like region at high salt in agreement with the
behavior observed for a single isolated complex [56]. The
saturation at high salt is due to the finite and fixed length
of the PE chain per sphere that is 200 DNA base pairs
in the present case. The adsorbed PE charge amounts to
that of a DNA segment of 146 base pairs at about the
physiological salt concentration (κ ≃ 1 nm−1 ) [54].
Note that for the chosen parameters here (with sphere
valency of Z = 15), the core particle is always overcharged,
that is U − Z > 0. The overcharging degree, (U − Z)/Z,
becomes quite large at intermediate salt, such that the net
complex charge becomes more than twenty times larger in
magnitude than the bare sphere charge. This striking feature is known to occur due to strong lateral chain segment
correlations at large salt concentration, which leads to a
highly ordered adsorbed layer on the macroion surface [54,
55,62,63,64]. In this situation, the spacing between chain
strands on the sphere is of the order of the Debye screening
length, κ−1 [64].
The unit cell configurations in Fig. 3 also display how
the relative entry-exit angle of the chain in a core particle is influenced by the changes in the salt concentration.
The changes in the relative entry-exit angle in turn affects
the overall arrangement of the core particles and thus the
global structure of the fiber as seen in Fig. 2.
3.2 Geometry of the fiber
Besides the overall shape, one is interested in geometrical
characteristics of the fiber and the way they vary with the
salt concentration. Here we consider the following parameters (see Fig. 5):
- The fiber diameter, DF , which refers to the diameter
of the smallest outer cylinder coaxially enclosing the
fiber.
- The projected center-to-center distance, d|| , of consecutive spheres along the central fiber axis, which gives
a measure of projected density of the fiber, n|| ; conventionally, we represent the fiber density as the number

8

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

Fig. 5. Schematic representation of the fiber diameter, DF , and the projected center-to-center distance, d|| , of consecutive
spheres along the fiber axis. The central fiber axis is shown by a horizontal solid line.

Fig. 6. a) The projected distance of neighboring sphere centers along the fiber axis, d|| , and b) the fiber diameter, DF , as a
function of the inverse screening length. The macroion charge and chain length per unit cell are fixed as Z = 15 and Lc = 68 nm.

of spheres per 11 nm as typically expressed in experimental literature for chromatin [28]; i.e.
n|| =

11
,
d||

(11)

where d|| is measured in units of nm.
- The entry-exit angle, ψ, and the dihedral angle, ξ,
which can be defined (Section 4) in analogy with the
chromatin models [27] (see Fig. 7).
As seen in Fig. 6a, the projected distance takes a maximum value of about d|| = 68 nm at zero salt concentration and then falls off in a non-monotonic fashion to quite
small values of about sphere radius d|| ≃ Rs = 5 nm, when
the inverse screening length (salt concentration) exceeds
κ = 1 nm−1 (100 mM NaCl) representing a dense fiber of
a density about n|| = 2. The projected distance displays a
local minimum and a local maximum at inverse screening
lengths of about κ = 0.3 nm−1 and κ = 0.6 nm−1 , respectively. These extrema roughly correspond to extrema
in the fiber diameter, DF , which shows an almost opposite trend as compared with the projected distance when
the salt concentration is varied (Fig. 6b). At zero salt, the
outer fiber diameter is roughly twice the sphere diameter, i.e., DF = 20 nm, due to a staggered configuration
of the spheres. It changes rapidly at small salt concen-

tration with κ, reaching a maximum and then a sharp
minimum at an intermediate salt concentration of about
κ = 0.6 nm−1 , where the projected distance exhibits a local maximum. The minimum fiber diameter at this point
is about 10 nm (equal to the sphere diameter); hence at
κ = 0.6 nm−1 , the complex fiber shows its largest projected distance to diameter ratio d|| /DF = 4, reflecting an
almost one-dimensional beads-on-a-string structure (see
Fig. 2g).
Interestingly, over the range of intermediate salt concentrations between κ = 0.8 and 1.3 nm−1 (corresponding to 60-160 mM monovalent salt), the fiber diameter
remains almost unchanged at about DF = 30 nm (reflected by a plateau-like region in Fig. 6b), although the
fiber structure changes from the zig-zag to loose solenoidal
pattern (see also Fig. 8). The chain wrapping in this region amounts to about 1-and-3/4 turn, close to that in
the nucleosome core particles in chromatin at intermediate salt concentration about the physiological regime [16,
24,27,28]. In fact, the experiments reveal that the chromatin fiber exhibits a dense structure in this regime with
a diameter of about 30 nm, the so-called “30 nm fiber”.
The present results, which predict a stable 30 nm complex fiber at intermediate salt concentration, thus appear
to give a trend consistent with those found in chromatin
experiments [16,24,27,28]. The present full-minimization

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

9

Fig. 7. A schematic view of the two-angle representation of macroion positions along the chromatin fiber. Each two successive
spherical macroions, labeled by n − 1 and n, are connected to each other via a vector an . The entry-exit angle ψ is defined as
the complementary angle between any two consecutive connecting vectors (shown in the figure for an+1 and an+2 ), which is the
same for all n in a homogeneous helical structure as is the case in the present model. On the other hand, each three successive
macroions (e.g., those labeled by n − 1, n and n + 1) define a plane with a normal vector bn = an × an+1 . The dihedral angle
ξ is defined as the angle between two such normal vectors (shown in the figure for bn and bn+1 ).

model however is very different from the H1-stabilized
chromatin because (aside from other realistic factors in
chromatin that are missing in our model) the structure of
the core particle (and the conformation of the entering and
exiting chain strands) can change subject to interactions
with other units. Thus the local fiber structure is different
from that of chromatin. We also obtain a lower density of
spheres (n|| ≤ 1) as compared with the chromatin fiber.
The present results however suggest that such 30 nm fibers
may be feasible in mixtures containing DNA and synthetic
nano-colloids at intermediate salt concentrations.
For large salt concentrations (beyond κ = 1.3 nm−1 ),
the fiber diameter rapidly increases but the projected distance between spheres remains constant. At κ = 1.5 nm−1 ,
the fiber exhibits a small ratio of d|| /DF = 0.077, corresponding to a tight solenoidal shape (shown on Fig. 8).
3.3 Two-angle structural diagram
The arrangement of macroions along the fiber within the
present model may also be described using a two-angle
description in the spirit of the two-angle model presented
in Ref. [27] for the chromatin fiber. For the sake of analogy,
we define an entry-exit angle, ψ, and a dihedral angle, ξ,
as follows (see Fig. 7).
Let us assume that an = Rn − Rn−1 is the connecting
vector between two successive macroion centers, where Rn
is the position of the n-th sphere. The entry-exit angle, ψ,
is defined from the angle between two such consecutive
connecting vectors, an and an+1 , i.e.


an · an+1
−1
.
(12)
ψ = π − cos
|an ||an+1 |
The dihedral angle, ξ, the angle by which four consecutive spheres are out-plane, is determined by calculating
the angle between the normal vectors of two planes, one
identified by the spheres Rn−1 , Rn , Rn+1 and the other
identified by Rn , Rn+1 , Rn+2 . Explicitly, one has


bn · bn+1
−1
(13)
ξ = cos
|bn ||bn+1 |

with bn = an × an+1 . In a homogeneous helical structure, which is the case in the present model, ψ and ξ are
independent of n and thus the same angles are obtained
between any two consecutive vectors.
By calculating these two angles for various salt concentrations, one can sketch a two-parameter ξ − ψ structural
diagram. The result is shown in Fig. 8 for fixed sphere
charge Z = 15 and fixed chain length (per unit cell) of
Nbp = 200. Open circles give the two-angle coordinates
associated with the numerically calculated optimal configuration at given inverse screening lengths (indicated by
numbers on the graph).
It follows from the diagram that the angle ψ determines the compactness of the fiber, while ξ roughly determines its structural class, e.g., being zig-zag or solenoidal.
At small salt concentrations, these angles vary rapidly
with the salt concentration, which, as mentioned above, is
a consequence of the chain wrapping process. At high salt,
most of the free length of the chain available in a unit cell
is already wrapped and thus the angles vary weakly. The
parameter which varies more dramatically with κ is ψ. As
seen, ψ never becomes smaller than π/4, due to excludedvolume interactions [18], while ξ spans the whole interval
0 < ξ < π.
The beads-on-a-string patterns are found at the boundaries of the diagram with entry-exit angles roughly in
the range 3π/4 < ψ < π. While the compact solenoidal
structures appear in the lower right corner, that is with
small dihedral angle 0 < ξ < π/4 but large entry-exit
angle 3π/4 < ψ < π. One may thus distinguish compact solenoidal structures on the lower-right corner of the
graph. The 30 nm zig-zag structures obtained at intermediate salt regime typically appear on the left upper corner
of the graph, that is for π/4 < ψ < π/2 and typically for
large ξ > π/2.

4 Constrained optimization model
As noted before, several features of the actual chromatin
structure are not accounted for within the present model.

10

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

Fig. 8. The two-angle diagram for fiber structures from unconstrained optimization at fixed macroion charge valency Z = 15,
fixed chain length per unit cell Lc = 68 nm (Nbp = 200), and for various κ. The value of κ associated with each point is indicated
on the graph (in units of nm−1 ). The zig-zag structures (upper left corner), beads-on-a-string structures (upper right region),
and compact solenoids (lower right region) are indicated schematically by closed ellipses and for each case a characteristic
structure is shown.

Fig. 9. In the constrained optimization model, the conformation of the chain in each unit cell is fixed and only the rotational
angle χ can vary. The core particle complex (a) consists of a chain segment of length equivalent to 146 DNA base pairs,
whose configuration is obtained from numerical minimization of a single isolated complex for a given sphere charge and salt
concentration. The core particles are linked together with straight linker chain of arbitrary length (b) (in the shown configuration,
the total chain length per unit cell is Nbp = 200). The replication procedure (c and d) is the same as explained in Section 2.2.

One factor is the so-called linker histone H1, a cationic
protein which binds near the entry-exit region of the DNA
in the nucleosome. It brings together the two strands of the
DNA that enter and exit the central core particle forming
a stem-like pattern [24,28]. In in vitro experiments, H1 histone can be removed by exposing the system to high salt
concentrations (about 0.6 M), and washing the solution
in order to remove dissociated linker histone. In such H1depleted cases, the chromatin fiber appears to be rather
open and loose (i.e., with a low number of histones per
unit length along the fiber) [24]. While in the experiments
with H1-stabilized linker histone, the core particle config-

uration is fixed and no unwrapping of the DNA on the
histone octamer is possible [28]. As a result, the number
of base pairs complexed with the histone octamer is fixed.
Motivated by this observation, we introduce a variant of the preceding model, in which the structure of the
core chain-sphere complex is constrained to be fixed. At
any given value of the macroion charge Z and the inverse
screening length κ, we fix the core structure within each
unit cell according to the optimal (ground-state) configuration of an isolated complex (with a total chain segment
of length about 146 DNA base pairs). This structure is
obtained from a similar minimization study as discussed

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

11

Fig. 10. Optimal fiber configurations obtained from the constrained optimization model for different sphere charge Z as
indicated on the graph but for fixed inverse screening length κ = 1 nm−1 and PE chain length per unit cell Nbp = 200. The
inverse projected distance, d−1
, the binding energy, ∆E (in units of kB T ), and the fiber diameter DF are given in the graph for
||
each fiber. The corresponding local structure of the fiber unit cell is shown on the right.

in Refs. [54,55]. We then connect straight linker chains of
arbitrary length to the strands of the chain entering and
exiting the core particle. This constitutes a single unit
cell for the fiber which is hence constructed by replicating
this unit cell using the transformation method explained
in Section 2.2–see Fig. 9. Note, however, that in this case,
there is only one degree of freedom, that is the angle χ,
which can be varied in order to find the minimum of the
effective Hamiltonian of the fiber (see Sections 2.3 and
2.4). Note also that the entry-exit angle is dictated by
the configuration of a single complex in isolation, which
thus depends only on the sphere charge, Z, and the salt
concentration via κ, but not on the linker length.
4.1 Optimal constrained configurations for various
sphere charge
In Fig. 10, we show several structures obtained from the
constrained minimization for the inverse screening length
κ = 1 nm−1 and for large to small sphere charge Z (at
fixed chain length Nbp = 200). It is seen that the compactness of the fiber is less sensitive to changes in the sphere

charge. As a result, the entry-exit angle of the PE strand
changes weakly as compared with the unconstrained minimization case. The fiber becomes denser for large sphere
charge: For Z = 15, we have d−1
= 0.35 nm−1 corre||
sponding to n|| = 3.85 spheres per 11 nm length along
the fiber axis, while for Z = 100, we have n|| = 5.5
−1
(d−1
), very close to the experimental chro|| = 0.5 nm
matin value of about 5-6 histones per 11 nm as reported
in Refs. [24,26,27,28,29].
In order to understand the underlying mechanism behind the compaction of the fiber with increasing the sphere
charge, we consider the binding energy of the fiber, ∆E,
i.e., the energy of the optimal configuration measured with
respect to the reference state of a free straight PE chain
in the absence of attached spheres. While for Z = 15, the
binding energy is positive (which reflects the fact that we
are performing a constrained optimization which does not
necessarily find the global energy minimum), it becomes
highly negative for larger Z as indicated in Fig. 10, i.e.,
∆E = −580.3 (in units of kB T ) for Z = 100. This in fact
reflects effective attractive interactions between core particle complexes within the fiber, which result from correla-

12

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

Fig. 11. Same as Fig. 10 but for fixed sphere charge Z = 100 and 40 and different inverse screening lengths as indicated on
the graph.

tions between positive and negative patches on neighboring core complexes as may be seen in the spatial configurations. Such inter-complex correlations have been studied
before [55].
Note also that the diameter of the fiber is quite stable
at about DF = 30 nm, that is about the diameter of the
H1-intact 30 nm chromatin fiber in the physiological salt
regime (i.e., κ ≃ 1 nm−1 ). In fact, the striking point here
is that within this simple model, the entering and exiting
strands of the PE chain form a cross pattern as explicitly
shown by focusing on a single unit cell in Fig. 10 (shown
on the right). This situation–that resembles the experimentally observed stem-like pattern for the DNA in the
nucleosome–is only obtained within the constrained minimization and leads to a small entry-exit angle, and hence
a rather compact fiber in qualitative agreement with the
Woodcock model [27].

4.2 Optimal constrained configurations for various salt
concentration
In Fig. 11, we show configurations at fixed Z and different
salt concentrations. As seen for Z = 100, the structure of
the fiber becomes expanded for small κ as a direct consequence of the increased electrostatic repulsion between
the spheres. The density of the fiber reduces to about one
sphere per 11 nm and the fiber diameter increases to about
40 nm as indicated on the graph.
As discussed elsewhere [54,55], the sphere charge should
be taken as an effective (or fitting) parameter within the
present model, because the true sphere charge is regulated under experimental condition depending on the pH,
or it may shift from the bare value due to charge renormalization effects in a salt solution [58]. In fact, within the
present model, the most relevant fiber configurations (that
might resemble the chromatin fiber best) are obtained by

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

13

Fig. 12. a) and b) Density of spheres (number of spheres per 11nm along the fiber axis) n|| , and c) and d) the fiber diameter,
DF , as a function of the inverse screening length as obtained from the constrained optimization model. The macroion charge is
Z = 40 for a) and c) and Z = 100 for b) and d). The chain length per unit cell is fixed at 200 DNA base pairs (Lc = 68 nm).

changing Z according to the salt concentration. This may
be thought of as a fitting procedure, since as explained
above, the effective sphere charge is expected to depend
on κ. To make this point clear, note that for instance the
fiber configurations for Z = 100 and low κ do not show
zig-zag patterns [24,25,28,27,29]. But zig-zag patterns at
small κ may be recovered by taking a smaller value for the
sphere charge Z (compare κ = 0.5 nm−1 for Z = 40 and
100 in the Figure).
To summarize these results, we plot the the fiber diameter, DF , and the fiber sphere density, n|| , in Fig. 12
for two different values of sphere charge Z = 40 and 100.
Qualitatively, it appears that the sphere density increases
from about one at low salt up to 5-6 spheres in the physiological regime of κ ≃ 1.0 nm−1 (100mM monovalent salt)
[18,24,26,27,28,29]. Examining the fiber diameter in Figs.
12c and d, we find that the fiber diameter decreases down
to almost exactly 30 nm at the physiological regime. It
is noteworthy that the arrangement of the spheres in the
resultant 30 nm fiber shows a clear double helix pattern
for Z = 40 and κ = 1 nm−1 .

5 Variation of the chain length unconstrained optimization
In this Section, we return to the unconstrained optimization model and address the effects due to changes in the
length of the PE chain per unit cell, Nbp , on the fiber
structure. We change Nbp in the range of 50 to 240 DNA
base pairs and focus on the inverse Debye screening length

κ = 0.8 nm−1 and the sphere charge valency Z = 15. At
this salt concentration, the fiber exhibits a 30 nm zig-zag
pattern (Fig. 2) [56].
5.1 Two-angle structural diagram
In Fig. 13, we have sketched a two-angle diagram in terms
of the entry-exit angle, ψ, and the dihedral angle, ξ, summarizing the structural changes of the fiber with the chain
length per unit cell, Nbp (indicated by numbers on the
graph). As seen, the optimal configurations are mostly
gathered in the boundaries of the graph (unlike the behavior found for varying salt concentration in Fig. 8).
The global features may be summarized as follows. For
relatively large chain length per unit cell, the overall structure changes weakly with the length and exhibits, for the
parameters chosen here, the zig-zag pattern (upper left
corner with large dihedral angles typically ξ > π/2 and
small to intermediate entry-exit angles π/4 < ψ < 5π/8).
This is because the structure of the core particle is nearly
independent of the chain length in this regime. Note that
for Nbp > 200, almost 120 base pairs of the PE chain are
adsorbed on each sphere, and the rest serves as the linker
chain. As the chain length decreases down to the length
adsorbed on the sphere, i.e., Nbp = 120, the diameter of
the zig-zag fiber reduces to that of the spheres displaying a compact 10 nm fiber with a beads-on-a-string structure (upper right corner with ψ > 3π/4 and ξ > 3π/4).
For smaller chain lengths, there is practically no linker
chain present and the core particles will thus be located
very close to each other. There is a narrow range of chain

14

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

Fig. 13. Entry-exit and dihedral angles diagram for various chain lengths per macroion from unconstrained minimization. The
corresponding values of Nbp are indicated on the graph. The zig-zag region (top left), beads-on-a-string region (top right) and
compact solenoidal region (bottom right) are shown by closed ellipses. Here κ = 0.8 nm−1 and Z = 15 are fixed.

lengths 50 < Nbp < 100, where the fiber adopts a compact
solenoidal form, with 0 < ξ < π/2 and ψ being distributed
around 3π/4. Note that the transition between zig-zag and
beads-on-a-string structures involves an increasing entryexit angle ψ which maximizes the distance between adjacent spheres (minimizing their repulsion), while ξ changes
only weakly. In contrast, the transition between beads-ona-string and compact solenoidal structures involves larger
variations in ξ. The isolated zig-zag pattern with chain
length Nbp = 180 corresponds to a local minimum in the
binding energy of the fiber as will be discussed below.
5.2 Energetic evidence for intra-fiber phase separation
In the preceding Section, we discussed configurational variations associated with changes of the length of the PE segment per unit cell. Now we turn to thermodynamics and
assume that we have a solution of an infinitely long polyelectrolyte and oppositely charged spherical macroions. In
this case, an interesting question is one of the equilibrium
state of the system. In other words, what would be the
resultant linear number density of macroions attached to
the polyelectrolyte chain and the fiber structure? Clearly,
a complete answer to this question requires a full thermodynamic study by considering the free energy in an appropriate ensemble. But within the ground-state-dominance
approximation, one can address this question on the energetic level, i.e., neglecting entropic effects.

In order to investigate the stability of the system, we
calculate the fiber binding energy, ∆E = H − H0 , where
the first term is the energy of the complex fiber, defined in
Eq. (7), and the second term is the energy of a free straight
PE chain in the absence of attached spheres, which is used
as reference. Note that ∆E, H and H0 are energies per
unit cell and in units of kB T . One can then envision two
different ensembles: An ensemble consisting of a fixed number of macroions adsorbed on a fixed large length of the
PE chain (ensemble A), and an ensemble consisting of
macroions adsorbed from a bulk reservoir (with a fixed
chemical potential) on a fixed large length of the PE chain
(ensemble B).
Ensemble A is realized in a situation where the total
number of macroions is finite and thus macroions are depleted from the solution, and where the total length of
DNA available for adsorption is fixed such that the mean
linear concentration of adsorbed macroions is finite and
can be treated as an input parameter. To study thermodynamic equilibrium, in this case one has to consider the
binding energy per unit cell or sphere as a function of the
chain length per unit cell, Nbp . This is shown in Fig. 15a
for fixed κ = 0.8 nm−1 and Z = 15. As seen, ∆E appears
to have two minima at intermediate values of Nbp , i.e.,
one at about Nbp = 100, where the fiber exhibits a compact solenoidal structure, and the other minimum at about
Nbp = 120, where a compact beads-on-a-string structure
is obtained as discussed before. Also ∆E shows an over-

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

15

Fig. 14. Schematic view of the ensemble A with fixed number of macroions adsorbed on a fixed length of the PE chain,
exhibiting phase-coexistence between a dense and a dilute phase.

Fig. 15. a) Binding energy of the complex fiber (per unit cell and in units of kB T ) as a function of the chain length per unit
cell Nbp and b) the binding energy per chain unit length as a function of the concentration of adsorbed macroions on the chain,
1/Nbp , for different values of κ as indicated in the graph.

all non-convex behavior between Nbp = 100 and the limit
of an infinitely dilute fiber (with no macroion adsorbed),
i.e., Nbp → ∞. Thermodynamic stability follows from the
standard common-tangent construction (indicated by the
broken line in Fig. 15a), which indicates a gas-liquid-type
“phase coexistence” along the fiber between a liquid phase
of high sphere concentration and a gas phase of vanishing
sphere concentration (see Fig. 14). In between, the energy
has a non-monotonic behavior with values higher than the
common-tangent line, which thus represents a region of
meta-stable structures. Adding the one-dimensional translational entropy of adsorbed macroions would lead to a
dilute gas phase with a finite sphere density. Note that
we do not consider the possibility of a higher density of
spheres on the chain (i.e. a smaller number Nbp of base
pairs per unit cell) than corresponding to the minimum in
energy in Fig. 15a.
In the case of ensemble B, one deals with a complex
fiber in equilibrium with a reservoir of macroions, where
the density of macroions on the chain is controlled by the
chemical potential of macroions in bulk solution. To study
thermodynamic equilibrium in this case, one has to consider the binding energy per unit length of the PE chain
∆E/Nbp = H/Nbp−H0 /Nbp as a function of the adsorbed
macroion density along the chain, 1/Nbp , which is shown

in Fig. 15b for fixed κ = 0.8 nm−1 and Z = 15. We also
show data for κ = 0.4, 1 and 2 nm−1 for large Nbp . Note
that the data corresponding to κ = 0.8nm−1 lie below the
other data, i.e., for this range of Nbp , the energy of optimal
fiber is minimal at κ = 0.8nm−1 as compared to other values of κ [56]. For the data set for κ = 0.8 nm−1 , ∆E/Nbp
exhibits two minima at intermediate values of macroion
density, i.e., one at about 1/Nbp = 0.01 (Nbp = 100), and
the other minimum at about 1/Nbp = 0.008 (Nbp = 120)
Note that the location of the minima of ∆E/Nbp are in
principle different from the minima of ∆E, but the relative
shift is rather negligible. Phase coexistence between two
fiber phases of different densities in this ensemble would
correspond in fact to three phase coexistence, i.e. matching chemical potentials in the two fiber phases and in the
bulk macroion solution, and will thus be rather unlikely
since it only occurs when the bulk chemical potential exactly matches the chemical potentials of the dense and dilute phases simultaneously. In most cases, the equilibrium
will thus consist of a single phase with a macroion density
corresponding to the minimum of the energy density in
Fig. 15b. If the number of spheres in solution is less than
needed to homogeneously populate the chain, one crosses
over to ensemble A with a fixed sphere density which is
less than the optimal state of ensemble B.

16

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

6 Conclusion and discussion
In this paper, we present a systematic numerical approach
for investigating the structural properties and energetic
stability of complex fibers formed by complexation of a
long, semi-flexible polyelectrolyte chain with many oppositely charged spheres. The complex fiber is described using a chain-sphere cell model, in which the detailed structure of the PE chain (locally wrapped around individual
spheres) as well as interactions between various components (chain segments and spheres) are taken into account.
These interactions include salt-screened electrostatic interactions between all charged units (using linear DebyeHückel potential), the bending elasticity of the PE chain as
well as the excluded-volume interactions between the PE
chain and spheres. Here we choose parameters consistent
with the DNA-histone system (e.g., using the DNA charge
and persistence length and a hard-core sphere radius of
5 nm), but vary the salt concentration, sphere charge, and
chain length per sphere as control parameters.
We focus on the optimal structure of the fiber, i.e.,
the structure which minimizes the effective Hamiltonian
of the system for a given set of parameters. This amounts
to a ground-state analysis, which is expected to be valid
for strongly coupled complexes (large polymer adsorption
energy and relatively small thermal fluctuations) [54,55].
Two different schemes are used here for the optimization procedure: i) unconstrained optimization, and ii) constrained optimization. In the former case, we treat the positions of all chain beads within a fiber unit cell as degrees
of freedom in addition to an independent degree of freedom that defines rotational orientation of two adjacent
unit cells (core particles) with respect to each other. This
case therefore requires a many-variable optimization analysis. In the other case, the conformation of the PE chain
on each macroion sphere is fixed according to the optimal
configuration of a single isolated PE-macroion complex.
Two such complexes are then linked one by one to form a
fiber with the help of straight linker chains and the only
degree of freedom in this case is the relative rotation of
unit cells around the linker chain. In both cases, a variety
of helical structures are obtained for the fiber including, in
particular, the zig-zag patterns. There are however qualitative differences between the two models.
In unconstrained minimization, the PE conformation
is free to change on the sphere, i.e., upon changing the
salt concentration or the macroion charge, the PE chain in
each core complex may become increasingly more wrapped
or dewrapped. As a result, the entry-exit angle of the PE
strand varies accordingly, leading to dramatic changes in
the overall fiber structure. As shown, the optimal fiber
structure shows beads-on-a-string pattern or thick and
loose solenoidal patterns at low salt. At about the inverse screening length κ = 0.6 nm−1 , the chain is already
wrapped around the sphere for almost a complete turn.
In this case, the spheres are aligned and form a fiber of
diameter about 10 nm, which to some extent resembles
the swollen 10 nm beads-on-a-string chromatin fiber. For
salt concentrations within the physiological regime, zigzag patterns are found as optimal structures and the fiber

diameter is about 30 nm; this diameter and the fact that
the fiber structure is zig-zag in the physiological regime
thus appear to agree with those proposed for chromatin
in Refs. [24,25,26,27,28,29], although the present model
predicts a qualitatively different core particle structure.
This is because the linker histone (absent in the present
model) plays a key role in the compaction of chromatin
into a 30 nm fiber by gluing together the entering and
exiting strands of the DNA and thus sealing off the internal structure of the DNA in the nucleosome core particle. In our unconstrained model, the entering and exiting
strands of the chain are displaced and divergent and thus,
the density of spheres along the fiber appears to be much
smaller (i.e., about one sphere per 11 nm along the fiber
axis) than the value proposed in the cross-linker models
(about 5-6 spheres per 11 nm [18,24,26,27,28,29]). For
higher salt concentrations, the chain wrapping degree still
increases and the spheres become highly packed along the
fiber backbone (for fixed chain length per sphere), leading
to compact solenoidal structures.
We have also studied the role of sphere charge and
chain length per sphere and their influence on the fiber
structure. An important result is that when the chain
(linker) length per macroion is treated as a free parameter, the binding energy (per sphere or unit cell) is found
to take a non-convex shape at intermediate salt concentrations when plotted as a function of the chain length
per sphere. A simple common-tangent construction indicates a gas-liquid-type “phase coexistence” along the fiber,
i.e., a part of the PE chain forms a dense complex with
macroions phase-separating from a dilute phase along the
fiber.
In the constrained optimization model, the core particle structure is fixed and only the relative rotation of the
core particles (unit cells) is allowed in order to minimize
the fiber Hamiltonian. As shown, for large sphere charge
and within the physiological salt regime, the fiber shows
zig-zag pattern and sphere densities of about 5-6 spheres
per 11 nm length along the fiber axis. Indeed, both the
global structure as well as the fiber density and diameter
in this case resemble more closely the structures found or
proposed for chromatin in Refs. [24,26,27,28,29]. Interestingly, the dense zig-zag pattern results from the fact
that the entering and exiting strands form a cross pattern
leading to a small entry-exit angle; the form of the entryexit strands in this case tends to resemble the stem-like
form expected in chromatin in the presence of the linker
histone [27,28] and is therefore found to be a similarly important factor in order to obtain dense fiber structures in
our model. The constrained model is thus similar to the
two-angle model proposed by Woodcock et al. [27], except that here we employ a realistic interaction potential
between the core particles.
We emphasize again that the present results are obtained for a generic charged chain-sphere complex fiber
and no direct comparison with the 30 nm chromatin fiber
(which involves additional structural and specific details)
should be attempted. Especially, the linker histone effects
or other factors such as histone tails or the specific shape

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

of the histone octamer are not incorporated within the
present model, and the constrained optimization model
is only a simple way to mimic the linker-histone stabilization of the nucleosome. On the other hand, our model
and its predictions are applicable to the mixtures of DNA
and synthetic oppositely charged spheres and suggest that
chromatin-like structures should also be observable in such
systems. The main advantage of the present approach is
that it accounts for the detailed wrapping state of the PE
chain within a fiber as well as the essential intra-fiber interactions, and that it can easily be generalized to more
sophisticated models.
In this work, we have also neglected the excludedvolume interaction between chain segments. (Note that
the chain-sphere volume interaction and the finite radius
of DNA is taken into account via the hard-core radius
of the sphere as explained in the text.) The chain-chain
excluded-volume interaction is expected to play a role
only at high salt concentration (typically beyond 100mM
monovalent salt for intermediate sphere charge), where the
chain wraps around the spheres more than two turns. (For
a complete analysis and possible improvements of the basic chain-sphere scheme used here see the discussions in
Refs. [54,55,56].)
Another interesting problem is to study the response
of the fiber to an externally applied stress. Recent experiments have shown that the response of chromatin to an
external mechanical stress can provide more insight into
the DNA-histone interactions and the detailed conformation of the fiber [18,21,22,33,34]. This problem has been
considered in several recent theoretical studies [17,18,36,
38,54]. Finally, one may also consider an inhomogeneous
fiber within the present model by assuming that the linker
length may vary from one unit cell to the other. In this
case, the fiber may exhibit overall deformations and largescale conformational fluctuations [27].
A.N. is supported by the Royal Society, the Royal Academy of
Engineering, and the British Academy.

References
1. A. U. Bielinska, J. F. Kukowska-Latallo, J. R. Baker Jr.,
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1353, 180 (1997).
2. P. L. Dubin, D.R. Rigsbee, L.-M. Gan and M. A. Fallon,
Macromolecules 21, 2555 (1988)
3. A. Tsuboi, T. Izumi, M. Hirata. J. Xia, P. L. Dubin and
E. Kokufta, Langmuir 12, 6295 (1996).
4. F. Ganachaud, A. Elaissari, C. Pichot, A. Laayoun, and P.
Cros, Langmuir 13, 701 (1997).
5. J. K. Strauss and L. J. Maher, Science 266, 1829 (1994).
6. J. Xia, P. L. Dubin and H. Dautzenberg, Langmuir 9, 2015
(1993).
7. P. Haronska, T. A. Vilgis, R. Grottenmüller, and
M. Schmidt, Macromol. Theor. Simul. 7, 241 (1998).
8. D. I. Gittins and F. Caruso, J. Phys. Chem. B 105, 6846
(2001).
9. D. I. Gittins and F. Caruso, Adv. Mater. 12, 1947 (2000).
10. Y. Li, P. L. Dubin, H. A. Havel, S. L. Edwards and H.
Dautzenberg, Langmuir 11, 2486 (1995).

17

11. P. L. Dubin, M. E. Curran, and J. Hua, Langmuir 6, 707
(1990).
12. D. W. McQuigg, J. I. Kaplan, and P. L. Dubin, J. Phys.
Chem. 96, 1973 (1992).
13. M. Jonsson and P. Linse, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 3406 (2001).
14. M. Jonsson and P. Linse, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 10975
(2001).
15. M. Skepö and P. Linse, Macromolecules 36, 508 (2003).
16. B. Alberts, A. Johnson, J. Lewis, M. Raff, K. Roberts and
P. Walter, Molecular Biology of The Cell (Garland Science
(Taylor and Francis Group), New York, 2002)
17. H. Schiessel, W. M. Gelbart and R. Bruinsma, Biophys. J.
80, 1940 (2001).
18. H. Schiessel, J. Phys.: Condensed Matter 15, R699 (2003).
19. R. D. Kornberg and A. Klug, Sci. Am. 244, 48 (1981).
20. K. Luger and T. J. Richmond, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 8,
33 (1998).
21. J. Widom, J. Mol. Biol. 190, 411 (1986).
22. J. Yao, P. T. Lowary and J. Widom, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
87, 7603 (1990).
23. K. van Holde, Nature 362, 111 (1993).
24. F. Thoma, Th. Koller and A. Klug, J. Cell Biol. 83, 403
(1979).
25. J. Allan, T. Mitchell, N. Harborne, L. Boehm and C.
Crane-Robinson, J. Mol. Biol. 187, 591 (1986).
26. S. E. Gerchman, V. Ramakrishnan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 84, 7802 (1987).
27. C. L. Woodcock, S. A. Grigoryev, R. A. Horowitz and
N. Whitaker, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 90, 9021 (1993).
28. J. Bednar, R. A. Horowitz, S. A. Grigoryev, L. M. Carruthers, J. C. Hansen, A. J. Koster and C. L. Woodcock,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95, 14173 (1998).
29. R. A. Horowitz, D. A. Agard, J. W. Sedat and C. L. Woodcock, J. Cell Biol. 125, 1 (1994).
30. S. H. Leuba, G. Yang, C. Robert, B. Samori, K. van Holde,
J. Zlatanova and C. Bustamante, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 91, 11621 (1994)
31. J. T. Finch and A. Klug, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 73,
1897 (1976).
32. A. Worcel, S. Strogatz, D. Riley, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 78, 1461 (1981).
33. Y. Cui and C. Bustamente, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
97, 127 (2000).
34. V. Katritch, C. Bustamante and W. K. Olson, J. Mol. Biol.
295, 29 (2000).
35. G. Wedemann and J. Langowski, Biophys. J. 82, 2847
(2002).
36. H. Schiessel, Europhys. Lett. 58, 140 (2002).
37. J. Mozziconacci and J.-M. Victor, J. Struct. Biol. 143, 72
(2003); J. Mozziconacci, C. Lavelle, M. Barbi, A. Lesne,
J.-M. Victor, FEBS Lett. 580, 368 (2006).
38. I. M. Kulić and H. Schiessel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 228101
(2004).
39. C. L. Woodcock, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 16, 213 (2006).
40. T. Schalch, S. Duda, D. F. Sargent, and T. J. Richmond,
Nature 436, 138 (2005).
41. B. Dorigo, T. Schalch, A. Kulangara, S. Duda, R.R.
Schroeder, T. J. Richmond, Science 306, 1571 (2004).
42. P. J. J. Robinson, L. Fairall, Van A. T. Huynh, and D.
Rhodes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 103, 6506 (2006).
43. A. T. Huynh, P. J. J. Robinson, and D. Rhodes, J. Mol.
Biol. 345, 957 (2005).

18

Hoda Boroudjerdi et al.: Salt Modulated Structure of Polyelectrolyte-Macroion Complex Fibers

44. J. Langowski and D. W. Heermann, Semin. Cell Dev. Biol.
18, 659 (2007); J. Langowski, Eur. Phys. J. E 19, 241
(2006). F. Aumann, F. Lankas, M. Caudron and J. Langowski, Phys. Rev. E 73, 041927 (2006).
45. P. M. Diesinger, D. W. Heermann, Phys. Rev. E 74, 031904
(2006).
46. D. A. Beard, T. Schlick, Structure. 9, 105 (2001); J. Sun,
Q. Zhang and T. Schlick, Proc. Natl . Acad. Sci . USA
102, 8180 (2005)
47. G. Arya, Q. Zhang, and T. Schlick, Biophys. J. 91, 133
(2006).
48. K. van Holde and J. Zlatanova, Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 18,
651 (2007).
49. H. Wong, J.-M. Victor and J. Mozziconacci, PLoS ONE 2,
e877 (2007).
50. M. Depken and H. Schiessel, Biophys. J. 96, 777 (2009).
51. M. Emanuel, N. H. Radja, A. Henriksson and H. Schiessel,
Phys. Biol. 6, 025008 (2009).
52. M. Kruithof, F.-T. Chien, A. Routh, C. Logie, D. Rhodes
and J. van Noort, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 16, 534 (2009).
53. A. Routh, S. Sandin and D. Rhodes, Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
105, 8872 (2008).
54. K. K. Kunze and R. R. Netz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4389
(2000); Phys. Rev. E 66, 011918 (2002).
55. H. Boroudjerdi, R. R. Netz, Europhys. Lett. 64, 413
(2003); 71, 1022 (2005); J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 17,
S1137 (2005).
56. H. Boroudjerdi, Charged Polymer-Macroion Complexes,
PhD thesis (Potsdam University, Potsdam, Germany,
2005).
57. H. Boroudjerdi, Y.-W. Kim, A. Naji, R.R. Netz, X. Schlagberger, A. Serr, Phys. Rep. 416, 129 (2005).
58. Note that we set the linear charge density of DNA to the
maximal value and treat it as constant. This turns out
to be a good approximation for moderate to high salt
concentration–see R.R. Netz and H. Orland, Eur. Phys.
J. E 11, 301 (2003).
59. M. Rief, H. Clausen-Schaumann and H. Gaub, Nat. Struct.
Biol. 6, 346 (1999).
60. C. Frontali, E. Dore, A. Ferrauto and E. Gratton, Biopolymers 18, 1353 (1979).
61. W. H. Press, B. P. Flanney, S. A. Teukolsky and W. T.
Vetterling, Numerical Recipes in C (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1998)
62. S. Y. Park, R. F. Bruinsma, and W. M. Gelbart, Europhys.
Lett. 46, 454 (1999).
63. A. Yu. Grosberg, T. T. Nguyen, and B. I. Shklovskii, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 74, 329 (2002).
64. R. R. Netz and J.-F. Joanny, Macromolecules 32, 9026
(1999).

