Quantitation of Cellular Dynamics in Growing Arabidopsis Roots
with Light Sheet Microscopy
Giovanni Sena1*, Zak Frentz2*, Kenneth D. Birnbaum1 & Stanislas Leibler2,3
1

Department of Biology, Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York University, New York, NY, USA
Laboratory of Living Matter, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA
3
The Simons Center for Systems Biology and School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton,
NJ, USA
2

*

The first two authors contributed equally to this work

Abstract
To understand dynamic developmental processes, living tissues have to be imaged frequently
and for extended periods of time. Root development is extensively studied at cellular resolution
to understand basic mechanisms underlying pattern formation and maintenance in plants.
Unfortunately, ensuring continuous specimen access, while preserving physiological conditions
and preventing photo-damage, poses major barriers to measurements of cellular dynamics in
growing organs such as plant roots.
We present a system that integrates optical sectioning through light sheet fluorescence
microscopy with hydroponic culture that enables us to image, at cellular resolution, a vertically
growing Arabidopsis root every few minutes and for several consecutive days. We describe
novel automated routines to track the root tip as it grows, to track cellular nuclei and to identify
cell divisions. We demonstrate the system’s capabilities by collecting data on divisions and
nuclear dynamics.

Introduction
A broad understanding of development in both animals and plants requires a quantitative
analysis of the morphological dynamics underlying tissue organization. The Arabidopsis root is a
well established model system for studying pattern formation and organogenesis in plants [1]. It
offers numerous advantages for live imaging, such as a high degree of transparency, radial
symmetry, manageable size (typically 100-150 μm in diameter) and slow growth rate (few
millimeters/day).
Live imaging techniques based on fluorescence confocal microscopy are used increasingly to
study morphodynamics during post-embryonic development in plants [2,3]. Among these
studies, high temporal resolution observations have been limited to short time-span events, as
photo-induced cellular toxicity and fluorophore bleaching impose severe limitations on
performing frequent time-lapse fluorescence microscopy over long periods [4].
However, relevant examples of plant organogenesis such as lateral organ formation [5] or
organ regeneration [6] occur over periods of days. Many fundamental questions require long
term analysis of numerous instances of individual developmental paths. For example,
developmental robustness in pattern formation and maintenance may entail compensatory cell
divisions or other morphological adjustments that span long periods. To capture long temporal
correlations in cellular dynamics and to preserve the continuity of imaging data during the entire

developmental process, extended observations of individual plants at high temporal resolution
become necessary. To enable such an imaging approach, the sample must be continuously
accessible for optical probing, while at the same time appropriate physiological conditions must
be provided for the plant. While morphological analyses of Arabidopsis root growth have been
carried out [7,8], these combined technical obstacles prevented a quantitative characterization at
high spatiotemporal resolution and long temporal scale of cellular dynamics during root growth.
Light sheet microscopy (LSM) [9] offers numerous advantages over confocal microscopy for
live imaging of thick tissues, such as reduced photo-bleaching and toxicity, and high speed
acquisition [10]. At any given time during optical sectioning with LSM, the sample is
illuminated by only a thin (<10 µm) laser “sheet”, significantly reducing the corresponding
incident photoenergy compared to the broad illumination of confocal microscopy. The need for
lateral scanning is also eliminated, thereby reducing the duration of imaging. Recently, new
techniques based on LSM have produced spectacular images of cellular dynamics at high
temporal resolution during animal embryogenesis (in medaka, zebrafish and fruit fly) [11-13].
While still images of autofluorescence of isolated mulberry pollen grains have recently been
recorded with LSM [14], this technique has not been implemented yet to achieve live imaging of
growing multicellular plant structures.
We developed a new method specifically conceived to perform automated 3D fluorescence
sectioning through LSM of a growing Arabidopsis root at high spatial (microns) and temporal
(minutes) resolution, for many days. By taking advantage of the geometry and transparency of
the root, the setup has been explicitly developed to acquire high quality data with minimal
hardware complexity, resulting in a relatively inexpensive (~30,000 $) system composed of offthe-shelf optical and mechanical parts. Moreover, the computational analysis did not require
special hardware and was performed on a single desktop computer.
Thus, our work comprises a simple and well-established imaging technique adapted to a novel
growth and tracking system that can follow cellular dynamics in a continually growing organ.

Results
Frequent and long-term optical sectioning of the Arabidopsis root apex
In our system, frequent access to the sample is achieved by maintaining the plant in a microchamber mounted on the microscope’s stage and designed to provide sterile conditions,
continuous illumination, gas exchange and constant temperature. The root is confined to an
optically accessible vertical channel in a glass fluorimetry cuvette and its continuous growth is
sustained by a hydroponic perfusion system using commercial peristaltic pumps (Fig. 1A). In our
implementation of LSM, an expanded laser beam is focused in one dimension by a cylindrical
lens creating a thin (4.2 µm) excitation sheet used to optically section the root (Fig. 1B,C). The
fluorescence signal is collected by a long working distance objective with its optical axis normal
to the excitation sheet, as the whole root width is scanned by repeatedly moving the sample
through the excitation sheet in steps of 1 to 2.5 µm in the axial (z) direction (Fig. 1B). An autofocusing step precedes each acquisition, and scans are repeated every 10 minutes (details on the
apparatus and the acquisition protocol can be found in the Methods). We detected no significant
fluorophore photo-bleaching or photo-toxicity to the plant, as shown by the fluorescence
intensity and rate of root growth over a typical experiment lasting more than 4 days (Fig. 1D).
Since the root typically grows by a few millimeters per day, the stage must be repositioned to
keep the root apex in focus and within the field of view of the objective. Automatic sample

tracking is achieved by optical feedback. The most recently acquired image is aligned to the
previous one through global spatial translations and rotations and then the calculated translations
are used to reposition the stage in three dimensions.

Tracking cell nuclei
As a proof of principle, we present data obtained by imaging Arabidopsis transgenic plants
expressing the protein fusion of the histone 2B (H2B) protein and the yellow fluorescent protein
(YFP) under the control of the 35S promoter of the cauliflower mosaic virus [15] (Fig. 2A). The
spatial expression pattern appears uniform with the exception of the cortex tissue, where a
significant YFP depletion was observed and also confirmed by confocal microscopy.
Deconvolution based on a measured point spread function was applied to the stack of raw
images acquired at each time point, achieving a final axial resolution < 4 µm across the imaged
region. This resulted in the identification of most nuclei in the root, with an average inter-nuclear
separation of 10 µm (Fig. 2A, S1). The temporal resolution of 10 minutes was sufficient to track
nuclear separation during cytokinesis, which typically lasted 30 minutes, allowing the detection
of cell divisions (Fig. 2B).
Fluorescence intensity collected from regions deep within the root along optical axes was
attenuated, up to 60% along the collection axis and up to 35% along the light sheet axis. The
pixel intensities were normalized along the two optical axes, and the images were segmented
with a custom routine to extract the positions of nuclei at each time point. The segmentation
routine performed globally with a 6.9% chance of missing true nuclei (false negative rate) and a
7.3% chance of erroneously labeling a nucleus (false positive rate), as calculated using a set of
1303 nuclei manually identified from a single time point. A more refined analysis of the error
rates revealed variations in the segmentation performance in different regions of the root, but this
did not prevent successful nuclear tracking throughout the root, as discussed below (Fig. 2C,
Table S1). At each time point, the segmentation routine typically identified about 1500 nuclei.
We mapped the positions of all the nuclei in a moving frame of reference defined by the root
tip and cylindrical coordinates were used to exploit the symmetry of the root (Fig. 3A). Local
nuclear dynamics remained present in such a moving frame of reference, potentially reflecting a
combination of sub-cellular nuclear motion, non-uniform stretching or twisting of the tissues and
cell divisions.
As a first step to analyze the nature of the observed nuclear dynamics, we developed a method
for automatically generating nuclear trajectories from the positions and morphological features
of segmented nuclei. Tracking is a computational task commonly required in biology, for which
several ad hoc methods have been developed [12,16-18]. Model based methods require
estimation of parameters such as diffusion constants and probability densities for various
motions, which are not trivial to measure independently [19]. The tracking problem can be
generally formulated as a multidimensional assignment problem (MAP), facilitating the
comparison of tracking data collected in different systems. This formulation is important for
subsequent data analysis, especially for tracking populations of cells which may divide or are
closely spaced relative to the typical displacement between time points, and for dealing with
temporal gaps in the segmentation data for a given object due to false negatives. Given the
computational complexity of MAP (NP complete [20]) and the large size of typical problems
(more than 1000 objects for more than 100 time points in our case), exact solutions are not
feasible, and rather than employ deterministic heuristics we used simulated annealing to

efficiently search for approximate solutions [21]. A similar approach has been proposed and
demonstrated by Gor et al. [22].
In our approach, a score or “energy” is defined for all possible assignments of nuclear
identities, which we call configurations, so that correct tracking corresponds to low energy. The
energy includes terms for the magnitude of nucleus displacement across neighboring time points,
penalties for trajectories with temporal gaps and penalties for trajectories which fail to continue
backwards or forwards in time or which branch. All terms were estimated empirically from
acquired data; in particular, a library of manually identified cell divisions was used to define an
energy term specific for cell division events. An initial configuration is generated by greedy local
energy minimization, then the configuration is adjusted randomly and iteratively to reduce the
energy until no further improvements are found.
We tested the performance of the tracking routine by manually verifying the consistency of
nuclear assignments on a data set of 100 randomly picked trajectories, and observed a spatially
uniform error rate of about 3% (Table S1).

Nuclear collective motions: longitudinal stretching and rigid rotation of
the root
We analyzed in detail a 29 hour interval from one of the acquisition sets. Visual inspection of
the time-lapse movie of a deconvolved maximum intensity projection of the root (Video S1) and
of single reconstructed trajectories (Fig. 3B) both suggested rich nuclear dynamics made up of
collective motions and spatial fluctuations of individual nuclei. Fourier analysis of the
displacements in several trajectories suggested a separation between low frequency directed
motions and high frequency fluctuations (Fig. 3C). The predominant collective motion was
clearly due to stretching along the root axis (Video S1), and was observed to vary over time.
To analyze collective motions, we first estimated the vector field of the nuclear velocities by
binning spatial data on nuclear position and averaging over temporal windows (Fig. 4). The
root’s diameter at the most proximal observed region was found to decrease by about 10 μm
during the 29 hour interval, with most of the change occurring between 8 and 21 hours (Fig. S2).
We reasoned that such apparent contraction of the proximal region was simply due to cellular
elongation progressively pushing the nuclei out of the field of view in the thickest, proximal,
region. To separate temporal variations of velocities from this morphological effect, we divided
the data set in two temporal windows: one including the first 21 hours and another including the
remaining 8 hours.
Of the three velocity components, only that along the root axis was found to vary appreciably
with time (Fig. 4A). Consistent with the radial symmetry of the root, no component of the
velocity was found to have significant dependence on the cylindrical angle θ (not shown).
Interestingly, we were able to detect a small, non-zero, average nuclear velocity along the
cylindrical axis m of the root starting around 90 µm from the root tip (Fig. 4A). Nuclei proximal
to this point moved progressively away from the root tip with a constant average linear
expansion rate in m of 5.0 x 10-4 (μm/min)/μm for the first 21 hours (Fig. 4A, early), declining to
2.3 x 10-5 (μm/min)/μm for the last 8 hours (Fig. 4A, late), as shown by the linear fits of vm to m
in both cases. This reflected early longitudinal cell expansion.
The spatial average of the component of the velocity along the radial axis ρ was
indistinguishable from zero, and no spatial dependence was detected (Fig. 4B), ruling out both
global and local cellular migration in the radial dimension. The angular component of the
velocity showed a small but significant spatial average (0.017 μm /min) but no significant spatial

dependence (Fig. 4C), indicating a rigid rotation but no detectable local twisting. Finally, we did
not detect any statistically significant variation of either vm or vθ with ρ, indicating no shear
longitudinal or circumferential movements among tissues (Fig. 4).

Identifying cell divisions
In the absence of cell migration, cell divisions play a central role in maintaining pattern
organization in a growing root. We developed an automated routine to identify cell division
events in the dataset of reconstructed nuclear trajectories (Fig. 5A). Manually identified cell
divisions were found to have stereotypical dynamics: on average, the lateral size of the measured
nuclear marker decreased by 20% following division, while the intensity increased as much as 5
fold immediately prior to division, followed by a rapid decrease to below the temporal mean
intensity and a reversion to the mean intensity over the 30 minute period following division.
These characteristic dynamical features were used, after the nucleus tracking, to automatically
separate true divisions from spurious events due to optical artifacts or segmentation errors.
Overall, our method performed with a 26% chance of missing true divisions (false negative rate)
and 13% chance of erroneously labeling an event as division (false positive rate; Fig. S3).

Distribution of cell divisions and their orientations
The temporal distribution of all detected cell divisions was inconsistent with a Poisson process
with constant rate, indicating non-trivial temporal correlations (Fig. 5B). The cell divisions
appeared mainly clustered in a region between 100 to 200 µm from the root tip (Fig. 5C), making
our large dataset a unique tool for the future characterization of this region of proliferation in the
root meristem.
The orientation of a cell division determines its effect on the topology of tissue organization.
The spatial and temporal resolutions of our observations allowed the analysis of cytokinesis: the
displacement of daughter nuclei from the parent position over one time interval defines the
orientation of the cell division. For example, a longitudinal cell division is defined as having its
orientation along the main axis m of the root. In our data daughter nucleus separation occurred
symmetrically (Fig. 2B and 5A) and tended to be larger by a factor 2.4 than the typical
displacement over the same interval for non-dividing nuclei. In the temporal interval we
examined, most of the detected divisions occurred approximately parallel to the main axis m
(Fig. 5C,D, red crosses), with only a few occurring along the circumferential and radial
dimensions (Fig. 5C,D, blue and green crosses, respectively). This is consistent with a scenario
where most of the cellular proliferation contributes to root longitudinal growth, with only few
events resulting in radial tissue “invasions” or perturbing the circumferential organization of
single tissues. Due to its resolution and the long duration of the observations, our system is thus
ideal for a systematic measurement of the orientations in 3D of cell division events in a growing
root.

Discussion
The presented apparatus represents a unique tool for supporting a quantitative approach to
plant morphodynamics.
As a proof of principle, we present data collected from Arabidopsis roots expressing a nuclear
localized fluorescent marker, producing a detailed analysis of the nuclear dynamics during post-

embryonic root growth. The high temporal resolution of the imaging was sufficient to track
densely packed nuclei, to detect short scale fluctuations in their position (interpreted as subcellular erratic movements of the nuclei) as well as large scale directed motions and to identify
division events. The sensitivity of our method is revealed by the small average (collective)
positive nuclear velocity along the longitudinal dimension m that we were able to detect just 90
μm from the root tip. We interpret the constant increase of this quantity as the well known
longitudinal stretch of the tissues, caused by cellular elongation along the main axis of the root.
Besides an expected rigid rotation of the root around its main axis m, we did not detect any
significant changes of the nuclear average angular velocity along m, indicating that no or very
little twisting of the tissue occurred in the region analyzed. Moreover, as largely expected in a
structure where cell walls produce a strong anchoring effect, we did not find evidence for cell
migrations. Finally, the non-uniform temporal distribution observed for the cell division events,
together with the decrease observed in the longitudinal expansion rate after 21 hours in the data
set analyzed, suggests physiological transitions during root growth in the experiment’s
conditions. These observed changes could simply reflect a combination of aging and metabolic
adaptation to the hydroponic conditions as the root is transferred from a solid growth medium
(standard MS agar plate) to the continuous perfusion of liquid medium (new imaging and growth
micro-chamber). Even though we cannot exclude that the imaging procedure itself contributes to
physiological changes in the root, the typical growth rate indicates no major photo-toxic effects.
The problem of tracking populations of cells has arisen in many fields and for several methods
of microscopy. The general formulation of the tracking problem as a multiple assignment and the
use of stochastic optimization to find approximate solutions may be useful in studies of
organisms other than Arabidopsis and for types of microscopy besides light sheet based methods.
Though the energy defined for our nucleus tracking algorithm was specific to the organism,
microscope and fluorescent marker, all terms were estimated directly from observations, a
process which should readily extend to other systems.
The versatility of the method allows not only for the visualization of the root 3D structure by
identifying cell positions, as shown here, but also potentially for tracking dynamics of
endogenous gene expression in different transgenic lines. Furthermore, to capture the kinetics of
in vivo cellular trans-differentiation, additional fluorescence channels could be added to
simultaneously image multiple cell type-specific reporters. This capability opens the potential to
locate and quantify symmetric and asymmetric divisions, a critical issue in development.
The ability to produce frequent time-lapse imaging of the 3D structure of the Arabidopsis root
at cellular resolution as it grows vertically for many days, without inducing significant photobleaching or photo-damage, offers a novel dynamic perspective on root development. The
resulting quantitative phenomenology will contribute, for example by supporting mathematical
modeling of organogenesis, to our understanding of many fundamental developmental processes
in plants. Among these are pattern maintenance in presence of continuous post-embryonic tissue
growth and de novo pattern establishment during organ branching and tissue regeneration. From
an even broader perspective, the relatively inexpensive setup presented here could be used in
replicate to produce a rich quantitative characterization of the effects of pattern perturbations
induced by genetic mutations, organic or inorganic molecules such as plant hormones or
poisoning agents, and biotic or abiotic stresses in general.

Methods
Plant imaging and growing chamber
For each experiment a plantlet was grown in a closed and sterile micro-chamber (Fig. 1A)
designed to constrain the root growth to an optically transparent vertical narrow path, while at
the same time providing illumination and gas exchange for the leaves. The main body of the
chamber is made up of a glass fluorimetry cuvette (inner size 10 x 10 x 40 mm, Starna) with a
glass capillary tube (o.d. 1.5 mm, Fisher) placed vertically against one corner of the cuvette to
create a channel (diameter approximately 300 μm) in which the root grows. Two teflon collars
with a thickness of 80 μm are added at the ends of the tube to distance it from the walls of the
cuvette and create enough space for medium flow in the channel, while still preventing root
escape. The tube is held in position by filling the cuvette outside the channel with 3 mm glass
beads (Fisher), and the whole space is filled with liquid medium (see Perfusion, below). The
cuvette is closed with a custom-made transparent top cap and the junction sealed with several
rounds of Parafilm. The cap is obtained from a disposable plastic spectrophotometer cuvette
(inner size 10 x 10 x 40 mm, Fisher) whose square base has been removed and whose three long
sides have been cut to create windows. The base is then closed with a glass square coverslip (for
illumination) glued with silicone and the three side windows with adhesive breathable sealing
tape (for gas exchange, Nunc).
The sample is illuminated from above by an array of 12 bright white LEDs (Luxeon Star/O)
powered by a current source controlled by the computer. The LED current is gated by a signal
indicating camera exposure so that the LEDs are shut off during exposure. The optics and microchamber are housed in a thermally insulated light-tight box with a hinged door allowing sample
loading and a thermoelectric assembly (AC-046, TE Technologies, Inc.) maintains constant
temperature within the box.

Perfusion
To sustain root growth for days, continuous perfusion of liquid medium is maintained through
the micro-chamber. One peristaltic pump (Dynamax RP-1, Rainin, run at 30 rpm with Pharmed
BPT tubing 0.51mm i.d., Cole Parmer) flows liquid medium from a reservoir to the bottom of the
micro-chamber, and a second pump (Dynamax RP-1, Rainin, run at 30 rpm with Pharmed BPT
tubing 0.89 mm i.d., Cole Parmer) flows medium out of the top of the glass cuvette (right below
plantlet’s hypocotyl) to a waste bottle. The outflow rate is kept higher than the inflow rate
(different i.d.), to prevent flooding. The liquid medium is composed by 1/4X Murashige and
Skoog (MS) basal medium enriched with Gamborg’s vitamins (Sigma), 3.0% sucrose, 0.05%
MES buffer (Sigma) and adjusted to pH 5.7 (KOH). After autoclave sterilization, antibiotic
antimycotic solution (A5955, 1/200X, Sigma) and Amphotericin B (A9528, 1.0 mg/l, Sigma) are
added the medium. The medium reservoir is maintained saturated with oxygen with filtered air
from a standard aquarium air pump.

Plant material and growth conditions
Arabidopsis seeds are sterilized as describe previously [6] and germinated on 0.8% agar plates
containing 1X MS, 0.5% sucrose, 0.05% MES buffer, pH 5.7, under constant illumination and
23°C. Between 3 and 5 days post-germination a single plantlet is transferred to the microchamber, first making sure that the root is completely aligned along the corner of the cuvette, and

then reconstructing the micro-chamber by adding the capillary tube, filling the cuvette with the
glass beads, adding some liquid medium and sealing the top cap with Parafilm. The perfusion is
started, and the automated tracking and scanning sequence initiated. Throughout the experiment,
the micro-chamber is illuminated with constant light at 20,000 lux and the temperature
maintained constant at 23°C.

Optical apparatus
Our imaging system is based on the light sheet microscopy (LSM) concept [9]. Fluorescence
excitation is provided by either a 473 nm, 80 mW diode pumped solid state laser (Lasever) or a
multi-line 60 mW Argon ion laser (Spectra Physics). The laser beam passes an excitation filter
(Chroma) and optional neutral density filter (Thorlabs) and is modulated by a Pockels cell (35050, Conoptics). Two flat mirrors direct the beam into a 10X Galilean beam expander (Thorlabs)
illuminating a circular 9 mm iris (Thorlabs). The circular beam is focused in one dimension by a
plano-convex cylindrical lens (f=30 mm, Thorlabs), creating a “sheet” of 4.2±0.2 µm across 180
µm along the excitation axis. Emission is imaged with a 20X super long working distance
objective (NA=0.35, f=19.9 mm, Nikon) coupled by a lens tube to an emission filter (Chroma)
and cooled CCD camera (1392 x 1024, 4.65 µm square pixels, QICam, QImaging). Acquisitions
are typically performed with 2 x 2 pixel binning.
The x axis is defined as coincident with the optical axis of the cylindrical lens, the y axis is
parallel to gravity and z is the optical axis of the objective (Fig. 1B).
The sample is maintained in the coincident foci of the cylindrical lens and the objective by 3
translation stages coupled to the sample holder (x,y and z axes, Fig. 1B) and 2 translation stages
coupled to the CCD camera and objective (x and z axes). All translation stages are positioned by
micrometers driven by servo motors (25 mm travel, 40 nm resolution).

Resolution
The axial resolution of the optical system is determined by the sheet thickness near its focus
and the depth of field of the microscope objective. Since the former is inversely proportional to
the numerical aperture of the cylindrical lens (0.15) and the latter is inversely proportional to the
square of the objective's NA (0.352 = 0.1225), the sheet thickness dominates in determining the
overall axial resolution. The mean of the sheet full width at half maximum (FWHM) over the
region of interest is 4.2±0.2 µm, as measured by scanning fluorescent beads (0.3 μm diameter,
Duke Sci.) embedded in Phytagel (0.5%). This sheet thickness is maintained within 5% over 180
μm along the excitation beam axis, which is sufficient to section the entire diameter of the root.
The subsequent deconvolution step (see below) improves the axial resolution, as shown by the
intensity profiles of neighbor nuclei (Fig. S1).

Image acquisition
At the beginning of each experiment, the root tip is positioned in the focus of the excitation
beam, whose profile was previously measured by scanning fluorescent beads as described above.
Imaging typically occurred every 10 minutes. At the beginning of each scan, the focal plane of
the objective is determined by exciting fluorescence from a central region of the root while
imaging at several positions along the optical axis of the objective. At each position, the spatial
gradient is estimated at each pixel and summed over the image, and the position corresponding to
the maximum sum is chosen as the best focus for that excitation plane. During the scan, the

sample is repeatedly moved through the laser sheet by stepping its stage in the z direction and
acquiring the emission signal from each optical section (typical exposure time was 25-50 ms). At
each step of the scan, the stage holding the camera and objective is repositioned in z to maintain
the excitation plane in the objective focus, accounting for the defocus caused by variable optical
path length through air and medium.
The sectioning interval is chosen to satisfy the Nyquist criterion for the measured point spread
function (typically 1.25 - 2.5 µm). The total scan depth (typically 200 µm) is larger than the root
thickness (typically 100 µm) to ensure that the entire tip is sectioned. The camera acquisition
triggers via TTL a pulse from a custom circuit to modulate the Pockels cell. Typically multiple
acquisitions at each z step are averaged to reduce amplifier noise from the CCD.
The duration of the scan (typically 90 s) is primarily limited by the repositioning of the
motorized stages.

Photoenergy
Due to the fundamental difference between the way the optical sectioning is performed in LSM
and in confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM), a scan consisting of n slices (for typical
Arabidopsis root, n ≈ 60 with 2.5 μm steps) will produce a total incident photoenergy at least n
times reduced in LSM compared to CLSM. Moreover, the calculated irradiance in the focal plane
2
is 57 W/cm with LSM compared to 950 kW/cm2 calculated for typical confocal imaging of a
root expressing the same marker. Such 16,000-fold reduction in irradiance and 60-fold reduction
of incident photoenergy for the LSM compared to CLSM allow acquisition of live plant roots at
high temporal resolution without significant photo-bleaching or photo-toxicity, as seen in Figure
1D of the main text.

Root tracking
Because the root grows continuously throughout the experiment (approximately 1-3 µm/min)
the sample must be repositioned between scans to maintain the root tip in the field of view. This
is accomplished via optical registration of the most recent scan's images to those from the
previously optically registered scan. The algorithm used for registration is a version of the
Lucas-Kanade algorithm [23]. The algorithm calculates by iterated gradient descent the 3D rigid
motion which minimizes the squared difference between two images, assuming that the motion is
small compared to the length scale over which the image intensity varies. After the optimal rigid
motion has been calculated, the stages are translated to reposition a point of interest in the most
recently scanned image to a fixed location in image space, chosen to maintain the entire root tip
within the field of view. The stage position is recorded at each scan.
The root typically rotates about all three axes as it grows. The calculated rigid motion includes
rotations, while the repositioning of the sample stage only involves translations - the former are
necessary to maintain registration of the root tip. Tracking was accurate for the largest observed
translations, which were 15% in the linear dimension of the field of view.
Defocus along the excitation beam caused by movement along the x axis of the sample was
compensated taking into account the refractive indices of air and medium (water).

Acquisition software
The acquisition and tracking is facilitated by custom C++ software with a graphical interface
controlling the stages, camera, LEDs, perfusion and all scan parameters, and displaying relevant

images and information from the acquisition as it proceeds. The most computationally
demanding task during an acquisition is the sample tracking, which takes about one minute on a
desktop computer with a dual core 3.0 GHz processor (Core 2 Duo E8400, Intel) and 2GB RAM.

Deconvolution
The stack at each time point is deconvolved off-line via expectation maximization (EM)
assuming Poisson noise and using the point spread function measured by imaging 0.3 µm
diameter fluorescent beads (Duke Scientific Corp.) [24]. Typically 30 iterations of the EM
algorithm are used. 3D fast Fourier transforms were performed using FFTW [25]. The
deconvolution significantly improves the separability of nuclei along the optical axis (Fig. S1),
without introducing artifacts affecting the analysis.

Segmentation
The stack of deconvolved images at each time point is automatically segmented by a routine
adapted from a previously described method [12]. The main difficulties for image segmentation
in our data are heterogeneity of nuclear size and intensity, and variation of optical quality with
position within the root. In addition, the spatial extent of each nucleus appears comparable to the
internuclear distance, occasionally making the separation of neighboring nuclei even more
challenging.
Most of the spatial variation can be ascribed to the depth of tissue through which the light
passes along the two optical axes. These depths are estimated from images by constructing the
three dimensional convex hull of all voxels above an intensity threshold chosen to separate
nuclear signal from background. This convex hull approximates the boundary of root tissue and
for each imaged voxel the distances along the optical axes to the hull can be calculated. The
logarithm of maximum pixel intensity was fit to a second order polynomial in the two optical
depths by least squares and the fit was subsequently used to normalize intensities within the root.
A segmentation routine was developed consisting of an increasing series of global
segmentation thresholds and a set of criteria for classifying a contiguous blob as a nucleus. Once
a blob is classified as a nucleus, its voxels are no longer considered as the segmentation
threshold increases. The criteria for classification are ranges for number of voxels, mean
intensity, lateral size, lateral eccentricity and axial size. To ensure that nuclei are separated along
the optical axis, the intensity profile along the optical axis is computed for each blob and tested
for the absence of multiple maxima as a further criterion. A blob must fall within the specified
range for each parameter to be classified as a nucleus. The ranges for classification resulted from
training with 850 manually identified nuclei, located throughout the root tip
The output of the segmentation routine is a time series of centroid location, maximum and
mean intensities, voxel count, lateral size, lateral eccentricity and axial size for each detected
nucleus.
The segmentation validation was performed on a set of 1303 manually identified nuclei. The
routine failed to identify 90 of the nuclei in the test set (false negative rate, 6.9%), while labeling
as nuclei 95 blobs not present in the test set (false positive rate, 7.3%) (Table S1).

Registration of segmented images and frame of reference
The global alignment of nuclear positions over time is important, as the nuclear displacement
across time points is the essential factor used in tracking nuclei. The sample tracking is

predictive, in that it compares the previous two stacks in order to calculate a translation for the
next scan. An improved alignment with finer translations and rotations can be calculated after the
image has been acquired. For simplicity, we calculate this alignment based on nuclear positions
extracted by segmentation, minimizing by iterated gradient descent the mean squared nuclear
displacements over adjacent time points with respect to rotations and translations. This frame of
reference is used for nuclear tracking.
Finally, a new frame of reference is introduced in which the origin of the primary root axis m
effectively coincides with the root tip, defined at a constant distance from a single nucleus
identifiable in all time points, and the cylindrical angle θ is measured from the objective axis
(Fig. 3A). All the data presented are in such reference frame, which facilitates the analysis of
performance as a function of penetration depth.

Nuclear tracking
To follow nuclei through time and identify cell divisions, the output of the segmentation
routine is analyzed by a custom algorithm for nuclear tracking. Our routine exploits similarity in
nuclear position within the root from one time point to the next, since other features such as
intensity and nuclear size fluctuate more than position due to biological and optical effects.
Nuclear identity assignments are represented as an array of trees, with each tree corresponding
to a unique identity, each node of a tree representing a segmented blob associated with that tree's
nuclear identity, and an edge between two nodes indicating that the corresponding blobs
represent the same nucleus at adjacent times. In the ideal case, each level of the tree corresponds
to one scan of the experiment, but in practice false negatives in the image analysis necessitate
skipping isolated time points for some nuclei, so that a nucleus at time t can be directly
associated with a nearby nucleus not just at time t + 1 but also t + 2 , etc.
The energy to be minimized consists of a sum over all edges of all trees of squared spatial
displacement, a penalty for temporal gaps, a penalty for terminal nodes and a penalty for
branching. Each identified nucleus is numbered and for nucleus i the position ri , time t i and
maximum intensity I i are considered. An indicator function Aij is defined as equal to 1 when
nucleus i is directly equated with nucleus j and 0 otherwise. The energy is expressed in μm 2 ,
since the squared displacement is the most important term and is the only term with physical
meaning, so this scale eases interpretation of the various terms.
The energy can be written as

∑ f (m ) + g (n ) + ∑ Α
i

i

i

j :t j < ti

ij

( r −r
i

2
j

+ α (ti − t j − 1) 2

)

(1)

where α = 20 μm 2 is a coefficient controlling the contributions from non-physical quantities, mi
and ni are the number of nuclei identified with nucleus i at immediately previous and later
times along its trajectory, respectively:
mi = ∑ Α ij
j : t j < ti

ni =

∑Α

j : t j > ti

ij

and f (m) and g (n) are functions defined as follows for penalizing nuclei with numbers of
parents and children not equal to one, respectively. Although nuclear fusions ( mi = 2 ) do not
occur biologically, they are allowed in the analysis with a finite penalty to prevent false positives
from disrupting the continuity of nearby trajectories so that these events can be considered
manually:
⎧100 μm 2 if mi = 0
⎪
if mi = 1
⎪0
f ( mi ) = ⎨
2
⎪195μm if mi = 2
⎪⎩∞
if mi > 2
The data contained many events in which two nearby nuclei were properly resolved by the
segmentation routine for some time, followed by a period in which they were not resolved.
When the nuclei are again resolved, the event resembles a cell division. In order to distinguish
these events from true cell divisions, several properties unique to true divisions were
incorporated in the branching penalty.
In a manually generated set of over 400 true divisions, the displacement of centroids from the
parent cell to each daughter cell was on average 2.4-fold greater than the average non-dividing
displacement (2.6 ± 0.6 µm for dividing cells compared to 1.1 ± 0.8 µm for non-dividing cells
over 10 minute scan intervals). In addition the displacements from the parent were typically in
opposite directions.
The branching term g(0) was designed to apply negligible penalty to true division events and
significant penalty to most events which otherwise resembled divisions, based on these empirical
observations. For a nucleus i with two daughter nuclei j and k , define the displacements
Δrij = ri − r j and Δrik = ri − rk and the deviations of these displacements from the average
measured displacement upon division δ ij = Δrij − Δr

divisions

, where Δr

with a threshold deviation: δ th = 1.25μm .
The penalty for node i having ni children is defined as

⎧100 μm2
⎪
⎪0
g (ni ) = ⎨
⎪Lij + Lik + ωijk
⎪⎩∞

if
if
if

ni = 0
ni = 1
ni = 2

if

ni > 2

divisions

= 2.6 μm , along

where Lab accounts for the displacement of the daughter nucleus from the parent:
⎛
⎛ δ ⎞⎞
2
Lab = ⎜⎜1 − rect ⎜⎜ ab ⎟⎟ ⎟⎟ 1.5μm 2 + (δ ab − δ th )
⎝ 2δ th ⎠ ⎠
⎝

(

with

)

⎧1
if
⎪
rect ( x) = ⎨1 2 if
⎪0
if
⎩

x <1 2
x =1 2
x >1 2

and ωabc accounts for the angle between the two displacements:
⎛

ω abc = 75μm 2 ⎜⎜1 +
⎝

Δrab ⋅ Δrac ⎞⎟
Δrab Δrac ⎟⎠

The fundamental term in the energy is the squared displacement, since nuclear position is the
strongest indicator of identity in our data. The penalties f(0) and g(0) for zero children and
parents determine the length scales over which identifications can be made, as described below.
The remaining terms are chosen to cope with specific events - specifically, segmentation errors
and cell divisions.
The values for the penalties are empirically constrained. As an example, we depicted in Figure
S4 a typical situation: two nuclei, one at time t and one at time t+1, are separated by a distance
Δr. Consider two configurations: (A), in which the nuclei are connected, i.e. assigned to the same
trajectory, and (B), in which the nucleus at time t has no child and the nucleus at time t+1 has no
parent, i.e. not assigned to the same trajectory. From (1), the energy for (A) is (Δr)2, while the
energy for (B) is f(0) + g(0). Configuration (A) should be chosen to describe a situation where
the same nucleus is observed at both time points with a true displacement Δr, while configuration
(B) describes events in which the first nucleus disappears after time t (by leaving the field of
view, for example) and the nucleus observed at time t+1 is its neighbor. Since the algorithm
favors lower energy configurations, to achieve the correct assignment f(0) + g(0) must be large
compared to the square of the largest observed nuclear displacement over the time-step (dmax = 5
μm), so that the energy of (B) is always higher than the one of (A) in the case of true
displacement of a single nucleus. At the same time, f(0) + g(0) cannot be much larger than the
square of the typically observed internuclear distance (dnn = 10 μm), otherwise distinct neighbor
nuclei will tend to be wrongly assigned to the same trajectory as in configuration (A).
Other parameters are determined by similar empirical considerations. The tracking parameters
have not been systematically optimized; nevertheless their performance allows for useful
analysis, as validated below.
The scheme for optimizing identity assignments was as follows for all experiments. The initial
configuration is chosen by equating each nucleus at time t with its nearest neighbor at time
t + 1 . The move at each step is chosen randomly but with a bias for high energy nodes as targets,
so that the probability of choosing a given nucleus for a move is proportional to the energy it
contributes to the total. Once node i has been chosen, the possible moves include cutting a
connection by flipping Aij from 1 to 0 for some j , adding a connection by flipping Aij from 0
to 1, or changing a connection by flipping Aij to 0 and Aik to 1 for some j and k . Moves are
accepted according to the Metropolis criterion [26]. We found that allowing two serial moves,
where one of the nodes involved in the first move is chosen as the target for the second move,
improved the rate of convergence significantly, while allowing three or more such serial moves
showed no improvement.

We found that the critical temperature for annealing the energy defined in equation (1) was
approximately 50 μm 2 . This was typically chosen as the initial temperature, the system was
equilibrated for several thousand moves, then exponentially cooled.
Nuclear tracking was manually validated by choosing 100 trajectories at random and
identifying errors by considering high energy nodes and comparing to images when necessary.
Since some ambiguity remains in the manual tracking, we calculated global lower and upper
bounds on the error rate of 2.4% and 3.9%, respectively, over 32,067 total assignments (Table
S1). Nuclear tracking was performed on a dual core 2.66 GHz processor (Core 2 Duo E7300,
Intel).

Identification of cell divisions (or cell-lineage tracking)
Each branching event in the set of identified nuclear trajectories was labeled as a potential cell
division. The majority of these branching events arose from failure of the segmentation to
properly separate two nearby nuclei at one time point followed by proper separation at
subsequent time points. Additional dynamic features of true cell divisions were considered after
the nucleus tracking was performed. These features did not enter the definition of the energy for
tracking due to the expense of calculation arising from their temporally extended nature. This
filtering step was implemented by constructing a support vector machine [27] (SVM) for
classification based on nuclear size and intensity at time points within a temporal neighborhood
of the identified division and on the durations of the trajectories for the parent nucleus and both
daughter nuclei. A complete set of 461 true cell divisions was manually built, and the SVM was
trained on a subset of 424 true cell divisions and 3805 spurious branchings, yielding an out of
sample accuracy of 92.3% in five fold cross validation. The SVM was then used to classify all
branching events and compared to the complete manual set, resulting in 340 true positives
(73.8% of true divisions) and 58 false positives (12.6% of true divisions).

Source code
Code for deconvolution, segmentation and nucleus tracking is available and maintained as a
SourceForge project (qanneal-celltrk.sourceforge.net).

Acknowledgements
We thank B. Scheres (Utrecht University) for providing seeds of Arabidopsis transgenic plants
expressing 35S::H2B::YFP. We thank D. Hekstra (The Rockefeller University) for advices in
building the optical system, and J.Chuang, D. Hekstra, S. Kuehn (The Rockefeller University)
and T. Nawy (New York University) for helpful comments on the manuscript.

References
1. Petricka JJ, Benfey PN (2008) Root layers: complex regulation of developmental patterning. Current Opinion in
Genetics & Development 18: 354-361.
2. Chickarmane V, Roeder AHK, Tarr PT, Cunha A, Tobin C, et al. (2010) Computational Morphodynamics: A
Modeling Framework to Understand Plant Growth. Annual Review of Plant Biology, Vol 61 61: 65-87.

3. Fernandez R, Das P, Mirabet V, Moscardi E, Traas J, et al. (2010) Imaging plant growth in 4D: robust tissue
reconstruction and lineaging at cell resolution. Nature Methods 7: 547-553.
4. Pawley JB (2006) Handbook of biological confocal microscopy. New York, NY: Springer. xxviii, 985 p.
5. Malamy JE, Benfey PN (1997) Organization and cell differentiation in lateral roots of Arabidopsis thaliana.
Development 124: 33-44.
6. Sena G, Wang XN, Liu HY, Hofhuis H, Birnbaum KD (2009) Organ regeneration does not require a functional
stem cell niche in plants. Nature 457: 1150-1153.
7. Baskin TI (2000) On the constancy of cell division rate in the root meristem. Plant Molecular Biology 43: 545554.
8. Campilho A, Garcia B, Van der Toorn H, Van Wijk H, Campilho A, et al. (2006) Time-lapse analysis of stem-cell
divisions in the Arabidopsis thaliana root meristem. Plant Journal 48: 619-627.
9. Fuchs E, Jaffe JS, Long RA, Azam F (2002) Thin laser light sheet microscope for microbial oceanography. Optics
Express 10: 145-154.
10. Holekamp TF, Turaga D, Holy TE (2008) Fast three-dimensional fluorescence imaging of activity in neural
populations by objective-coupled planar illumination microscopy. Neuron 57: 661-672.
11. Huisken J, Swoger J, Del Bene F, Wittbrodt J, Stelzer EHK (2004) Optical sectioning deep inside live embryos
by selective plane illumination microscopy. Science 305: 1007-1009.
12. Keller PJ, Schmidt AD, Wittbrodt J, Stelzer EHK (2008) Reconstruction of Zebrafish Early Embryonic
Development by Scanned Light Sheet Microscopy. Science 322: 1065-1069.
13. Keller PJ, Schmidt AD, Santella A, Khairy K, Bao ZR, et al. (2010) Fast, high-contrast imaging of animal
development with scanned light sheet-based structured-illumination microscopy. Nature Methods 7: 637-642.
14. Verveer PJ, Swoger J, Pampaloni F, Greger K, Marcello M, et al. (2007) High-resolution three-dimensional
imaging of large specimens with light sheet-based microscopy. Nat Methods 4: 311-313.
15. Boisnard-Lorig C, Colon-Carmona A, Bauch W, Hodge S, Doerner P, et al. (2001) Dynamic analyses of the
expression of the HISTONE :: YFP fusion protein in arabidopsis show that syncytial endosperm is divided in
mitotic domains. Plant Cell 13: 495-509.
16. Dzyubachyk O, Niessen W, Meijering E (2007) A variational model for level-set based cell tracking in timelapse fluorescence microscopy images. 2007 4th Ieee International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging :
Macro to Nano, Vols 1-3: 97-100.
17. Li K, Miller ED, Chen M, Kanade T, Weiss LE, et al. (2008) Cell population tracking and lineage construction
with spatiotemporal context. Medical Image Analysis 12: 546-566.
18. Liu M, Yadav RK, Roy-Chowdhury A, Reddy GV (2010) Automated tracking of stem cell lineages of
Arabidopsis shoot apex using local graph matching. Plant Journal 62: 135-147.
19. Marshall WF, Straight A, Marko JF, Swedlow J, Dernburg A, et al. (1997) Interphase chromosomes undergo
constrained diffusional motion in living cells. Current Biology 7: 930-939.
20. Karp R (1972) Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In: Miller RE, Thatcher JW, editors. Complexity of
Computer Computations. New York: Plenum. pp. 85-104.
21. Kirkpatrick S, Gelatt CD, Vecchi MP (1983) Optimization by Simulated Annealing. Science 220: 671-680.
22. Gor V, Elowitz M, Bacarian T, Mjolsness E (2005) Tracking cell signals in fluorescent images. IEEE Computer
Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition – Workshops. San Diego, California.
23. Lucas BD, Kanade T (1981) An iterative image registration technique with an application to stereo vision.
Proceedings of Imaging Understanding Workshop. pp. 121-130.
24. Holmes TJ (1988) Maximum-Likelihood Image-Restoration Adapted for Noncoherent Optical Imaging. Journal
of the Optical Society of America a-Optics Image Science and Vision 5: 666-673.
25. Frigo M, Johnson SG (2005) The design and implementation of FFTW3. Proceedings of the Ieee 93: 216-231.
26. Metropolis N, Rosenbluth AW, Rosenbluth MN, Teller AH, Teller E (1953) Equation of State Calculations by
Fast Computing Machines. Journal of Chemical Physics 21: 1087-1092.
27. Chang CC, Lin CJ (2011) LIBSVM : a library for support vector machines. ACM Transactions on Intelligent
Systems and Technology, 2: 27:1-27:27. Software available at http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm.
Accessed 2011 June 1

Figure Legends
Figure 1 | Imaging system. (A) Plant micro-chamber details. Left panel, view from the top;
Right panel, view from the side showing inflow and outflow of perfusion medium. B, beads; CT,
capillary tube; Ch, channel; Co, collar. (B) Optics. L, laser; F1, excitation filter; PC, Pockels cell;
BE, beam expander; I, iris; CL, cylindrical lens; IGC, plant imaging and growing micro-chamber
on a stage moving in xyz; O, objective; F2, emission filter; C, camera on a stage moving in xz.
(C) 3D rendering of the laser sheet scanning the corner of the cuvette where the root is growing;
P, plant (D) Long-term sustained root growth. Root tip speed (blue line) as measured during
tracking in a typical experiment; average fluorescent intensity normalized to the beginning of
experiment, detected from the same root expressing 35S::H2B::YFP (green line).
Figure 2 | Deconvolution and segmentation. (A) Arabidopsis root expressing 35S::H2B::YFP.
Maximum intensity projections before (left panel) and after (right panel) deconvolution; the
horizontal axis corresponds to the objective axial dimension; bar, 50 μm. (B) Cell divisions from
same root in (A), time-lapse. Three cells divide giving rise to daughters labeled with “a” and “b”;
bar, 5 μm. (C) Density plot of segmented nuclei. Projection along the longitudinal axis of all the
nuclei recognized by the segmentation, accumulated in a 29 hour period. Five regions used in
Table S1: I, towards objective; II, away from laser source; III, away from objective; IV towards
laser source; V center of the root (ρ < 30μm).
Figure 3 | Trajectories. (A) Cylindrical coordinates. Schematic of the root tip and the
cylindrical coordinate system used in text: m, distance from the tip on the main longitudinal axis
of the root; ρ, distance from the center of the root; θ, angle with respect to the axis normal to m
and with maximal component z (see Fig. 1B), where θ = 0 towards the objective and θ = π/2
towards the laser source. (B) Nuclear displacements along a typical trajectory, displayed along
the main axis of the root (m, top panel), the m-normal closest to z (ρcosθ, middle panel) and the
m-normal closest to x (ρsinθ, bottom panel); bar, 10 μm. (C) High frequency (left panel,
freq.>0.23 hr-1; bar, 1 μm) and low frequency (right panel, freq.<0.23 hr-1; bar, 20 μm)
components of the trajectory shown in (B).
Figure 4 | Analysis of collective nuclear velocities. Heatmaps and plots for each cylindrical
component of the velocity, from data collected in a 29 hour temporal interval. In the heatmaps,
only bins containing 36 or more nuclei are shown; in the plots, the solid black line is the median
per 5 micron bin, while the dashed black lines are the 25% and 75% quartiles. (A) m component
of the velocity; “early”, temporal window 0-21 hours; “late”, temporal window 21-29 hours; the
red dotted line is the linear fit of vm for the region 80-300 μm. (B) ρ component of the velocity.
(C) θ component of the velocity multiplied by the position ρ in the radial dimension.
Figure 5 | Cell divisions. (A) Nuclear displacements along a typical trajectory showing
branching, displayed along the main axis of the root (m, top panel), m-normal closest to z (ρcosθ,
middle panel) and the m-normal closest to x (ρsinθ, bottom panel); arrow, branching point
indicating cell division; bars, 20 μm. (B) Temporal distribution of the cell divisions detected in
the 29 hour interval analyzed (true positives, N=340). (C) Position and orientation of the same
cell divisions, superimposed to a smoothed density estimate of all the nuclei segmented at all
time points throughout the same 29 hour interval; main direction of divisions: red, Δm; blue, ρΔθ;

green, Δρ (D) Polar histograms for the angles of the cell division orientation to Δm, in the plane
defined by Δm and Δρ (top panel) and by Δm and ρΔθ (bottom panel); color code as in (C).

Supporting Information
Figure S1 | Effects of deconvolution in the axial (z) dimension. (A) Raw (left column) and
deconvolved (right column) images of three close nuclei, at different z-positions; bar, 7.5 μm.
(B) Maximum intensity collected in the region marked by the red ellipses in (A), both for the raw
(black) and the deconvolved (blue) images. The increased resolution in z after deconvolution is
shown by the improved separation between peaks.
Figure S2 | Contraction of the root radius. Number of nuclei with radial coordinate ρ greater
than 55 μm, as a function of time. The red dotted line indicates the time point (21 hours) chosen
to distinguish “early” and “late” temporal windows.
Figure S3 | False positives. Positions of the false positive cell divisions found in the same
dataset containing the true positives shown in Fig. 5 of the main text, superimposed on the
smoothed density estimate of all the nuclei segmented at all time points throughout the same 29
hour interval.
Figure S4 | Tracking nuclei: example. Diagram showing the correct assignments in two typical
scenarios (A and B) for two consecutive time-points (t and t+1). (A) The same nucleus a is
observed at both times t and t+1, with a spatial displacement (blue arrow): the two nuclei should
be assigned to the same trajectory (link between them, red arrow). (B) Nucleus a is only
observed at time t and nucleus b is only observed at time t+1: the two nuclei should not be
assigned to the same trajectory (no link between them, red truncated links). Δr, distance between
nuclei observed in t and t+1; dmax = 5 μm, maximum nucleus displacement observed between t
and t+1 (time-step = 10 min); dnn = 10 μm, average distance between nearest neighbor nuclei.
Table S1 | Performance of segmentation and tracking routines. Segmentation: error rates in
nuclei recognition in the regions I-V defined in figure 2C; N, number of manually identified
nuclei; FP, false positive rate; FN, false negative rate. Tracking: error rates in nucleus-trajectory
assignment in the same regions I-V; N, number of manually identified trajectories starting in the
given region; error range, lower and upper bounds for errors in assigning a nucleus to the correct
trajectory.
Video S1| Growing root. Time-lapse images of the same 29 hour interval used to extract the
presented data. Maximum intensity projection along the optical axis of the deconvolved images.
The temporal step is 10 minutes. Longitudinal tissue stretching and several cell divisions are
detectable by eye.

Table S1

Segmentation

Tracking

N

FP (%)

FN (%)

N

Error range (%)

I

255

1.6

9.4

18

1.3 – 2.4

II

238

3.8

9.2

16

3.9 – 5.6

III

220

11.4

5.9

15

2.3 – 3.8

IV

239

1.7

5.0

19

1.4 – 2.4

V

351

15.1

5.4

32

2.8 – 4.6

TOT

1303

7.3

6.9

100

2.4 – 3.9

