arXiv:1105.4386v1 [q-bio.PE] 23 May 2011

Nested structure acquired through simple
evolutionary process
Kazuhiro Takemoto a,∗ Masanori Arita a,b,c
a Department

of Computational Biology, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences,
University of Tokyo, Kashiwanoha 5-1-5, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8561, Japan

b RIKEN
c Institute

Plant Science Center, Suehiro-cho 1-7-22, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan

for Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, Baba-cho 14-1, Tsuruoka,
Yamagata 997-0035, Japan

Abstract
Nested structure, which is non-random, controls cooperation dynamics and biodiversity in plant-animal mutualistic networks. This structural pattern has been explained in a static (non-growth) network models. However, evolutionary processes
might also influence the formation of such a structural pattern. We thereby propose
an evolving network model for plant-animal interactions and show that non-random
patterns such as nested structure and heterogeneous connectivity are both qualitatively and quantitatively predicted through simple evolutionary processes. This
finding implies that network models can be simplified by considering evolutionary
processes, and also that another explanation exists for the emergence of non-random
patterns and might provide more comprehensible insights into the formation of
plant-animal mutualistic networks from the evolutionary perspective.
Key words: Nestedness, Heterogeneous connectivity, Plant-animal mutualism,
Bipartite graph model, Evolution

1

Introduction

Elucidation of basic design principles behind mutualistic networks is a central
topic in theoretical ecology for understanding cooperation dynamics and biodiversity. In particular, nested structure is a well-known non-random structural
∗ Corresponding author.
Email address: takemoto@cb.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp (Kazuhiro Takemoto).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

24 May 2011

pattern observed in plant-animal mutualistic networks (Bascompte et al., 2003).
In this structure, pollinators (animals) of a certain plant form a subset of those
of another plant in a hierarchical fashion. Such non-random patterns often
strongly control dynamics of ecological systems. For example, nested structure
is believed to minimize competition and increase biodiversity (Bascompte et al.,
2009). In addition to nestedness, the heterogeneous connectivity, which is defined as the occurence of diversified patterns of interaction among species (both
plants and animals), is found in such mutualistic networks (Jordano et al.,
2003; Saavedra et al., 2009). Together with nestedness, heterogeneous connectivity might influence the dynamics of ecological systems.
To elucidate the origin of non-random patterns such as nested structure and
heterogeneous connectivity, Saavedra et al. (2009) recently proposed the bipartite cooperation (BC) model inspired by food-web models based on species
traits and external factors (reviewed in Stouffer et al. (2005)). Although this
model agrees well with real plant-animal mutualistic networks, it is a static
(non-growth) network model in which the number of species (plants and pollinators) is fixed. The structure of model-generated networks is determined by
three types of parameters drawn from exponential or beta distributions: foraging traits (e.g., efficiency and morphology), reward traits (e.g., quantity and
quality) and external factors such as environmental context (e.g., geographic
and temporal variation).
The structure of interactions between plants and animals may be affected
by not only species traits and external factors but also evolutionary history
(Rezende et al., 2007a). Thus far, few efforts have been made to theoretically
explain the development of interactions between plants and animals. For example, Rezende et al. (2007b) showed that plant-animal mutualistic networks
are qualitatively more nested by using phylogenetic information in addition
to species traits. Futhermore, they repoted that the phylogenetic signal was
reported to be significant but weak in plant-pollinator networks. In addition,
by using evolving network models, Guimarães Jr. et al. (2007) explained the
origin of frequency distributions of the number of interactions per species following a power law with an exponential truncation (i.e., heterogeneous connectivity). However, this previous model was less predictive than the BC model, is
a static (non-growth) network model (Saavedra et al., 2009). Therefore, these
results suggest that the evolutionary effects in plant-animal mutualistic networks are not accurate.
Nevertheless, evolutionary history may also determine the structure of plantanimal mutualistic networks because species are believed to mutually interact via traits or functions acquired through evolution. Ecological systems are
very complex, and we have not yet understood the whole picture of ecological systems. To understand such complex systems, we need to consider them
from several perspectives. Therefore, it is important to develop good evolving
2

network models that consider the effect of evolutionary processes on network
formation. In the present study, we present an evolving network model of plantanimal interactions that takes into account simple evolutionary processes and
use this model to investigate the effect of evolutionary history on the formation of plant-animal mutualistic networks. Numerical simulations showed that
this simple evolving network model better reproduced nestedness and heterogeneous connectivity by using real data on plant-animal mutualistic networks.
This result implies a not negligible contribution of evolutionary history to
the structure of networks. Furthermore, we discuss the comprehensible origin of nested structures and heterogeneous connectivity from an evolutionary
perspective.

2

The Model

We developed an evolving network model based on the model proposed by
Takemoto and Arita (2009) to explain plant evolution. In our model, a small
initial plant-animal mutualistic network (Fig. 1 A) is preparated and represented as a complete bipartite graph with n0 plants and n0 animals, where
n0 is the initial number of species, and is an integer ≥ 1. This initial network
evolves according to two simple evolutionary mechanisms as follows:
(i) Animals interacting with new plants are inherited from those interacting
with existing (ancestral) plants. This mechanism is based on the phylogenetic resemblance between related species (Garland Jr. et al., 2005). We assume that new plants emerge because of mutations in ancestral plants. In
our model, mutations in plants occur at the probability p and time t, and
new plants originate from randomly selected existing plants. In this case, the
traits (e.g., forms, colors, and chemical compounds) of new plants are similar
to those of ancestral plants because of the phylogenetic resemblance. Since
plant-animal interactions are based on these traits, the animals connecting to
the new species are inherited from those connecting to ancestral plants (Fig. 1
B). By considering divergence, however, we model each animal such that it is
inherited from animals interacting with the ancestral plant at the probability
q (Fig. 1 C). This indicates that plants lose some traits due to the divergence. As explained above, since plants interact to animals via their traits,
the plants also lose some interactions with animals. In addition, a bipartite
network model generated based on the above inheritance (or copy) mechanism was proposed in Nacher et al. (2009) to describe the evolution of protein
domain networks at around the same time that we developed our model.
(ii) Plants acquire new interacting animals after obtaining new traits (phenotypes) because plants are believed to connect to animals via phenotypic information as above. In particular, chemical compounds, which are often flower
3

pigments, are involved in attracting insects (animals), protecting plants from
insects (Harborne and Williams, 2000). During evolution, living organisms
(plants) are believed to obtain new phenotypes (traits) via genetic changes
such as gene duplications and horizontal gene transfers. Since new phenotypes
(traits) are based on existing phenotypes, plants interact with new animals.
We modeled the above event to occur at the probability 1 − p and time t;
a plant-animal pair is selected at random (Fig. 1 D) because new traits are
based on existing traits, and thus, a plant acquires a new animal (Fig. 1 E).
Our model has two parameters p and q. We can generate the model network by
estimating these parameters using observable parameters in real plant-animal
mutualistic networks: the number of plants P , the number of animals A, and
the number of interactions L.
Parameter p is estimated as
p=

P
P +A

(1)

where P = pt and A = (1 − p)t in our model.
To estimate parameter q, we need to consider the time evolution of L. This is
derived as L ≈ (1−p)t/(1−q) (Takemoto and Arita, 2009). Since A = (1−p)t,
parameter q is estimated as
q =1−

A
L

(2)

Using Eqs. (1) and (2), we estimated parameters p and q from real data and
generated corresponding model networks for comparison with real ones.

3

Results and Discussion

We first show that our model-generated networks reproduce nested structures by using real data on plant-animal mutualistic networks reported by
Saavedra et al. (2009). The nested structure indicates that animals (pollinator) of a certain plant form a subset of those of another plant. The degree
of nested structure is measured by nestedness N, ranging from perfect nonnestedness (N = 0) to perfect nestedness (N = 1). When N is close to 1, we
can see such a strong containment relationship in a hierarchical fashion. When
N is close to 0, in contrast, plants have independent sets of animals: there is no
such a relationship. In order to measure N of model and real-world networks,
4

PLANT
(A)

ANIMAL

p

1-p

(B)

(D)

q
q
(C)

(E)

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of our model. The squares and circles represent plants
and animals, respectively. (A) Initial plant-animal network is represented as a complete bipartite network. (B and C) The addition of a new plant and the resulting
plant-animal interactions. The gray square represents a randomly selected plant.
The filled square indicates a new plant resulting from duplication of the selected
plant. The dashed lines represent possible interactions between the new plant and
animals. (D and E) The addition of a new animal and the resultant interaction. The
thick link between the gray nodes corresponds to a randomly selected plant-animal
pair. The filled circle indicates a new animal.

we used the BINMATNEST program (Rodrı́guez-Gironés and Santamarı́a,
2006).
We also assessed the BC model and random networks generated using the null
model II (Bascompte et al., 2003) for comparison. The null model generates
random bipartite networks with degree sequences that are similar to those of
real networks. In the null model, the probability that a plant connects to an
animal is proportional to the product of node degrees for a given plant and
animal.
The comparison of nestedness between models and real data is shown in Fig. 2.
Our model and the BC model produced comparable nestedness in real network
data. The null model could not predict nestedness. This result indicates that
nested structure is independent from degree sequences and that the predictions
of our model and the BC model are nontrivial.
Furthermore, we closely evaluated the prediction accuracy of our model and
the BC model by using the Pearson correlation coefficient and root mean
square error between predicted nestedness xi and observed nestedness yi , defined as
RMSE =

v
u
n
u1 X
t
(x

n i=1

i

− y i )2 ,

5

1
0.95

Predicted N

0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7

Our model
BC model
Null model

0.65
0.6
0.8

0.84

0.88 0.92
Observed N

0.96

1

Fig. 2. Comparison of nestedness between models and real data. The dashed line
represents the perfect agreement between predicted nestedness and observed nestedness. The values of nestedness from models are averaged over 100 realizations.

where n is the number of samples. As shown in Table 1, our model had higher
prediction accuracy than the BC model.
Table 1
Comparison of prediction accuracy between our model and the BC model.
Correlation Coefficient

Root Mean Square Error

Our model

0.934

0.0232

BC model

0.790

0.0415

Our model can clearly explain the origin of nested structure in plant-animal
mutualistic networks by using fewer parameters. In this model, animals interacting with a new plant are inherited from those interacting with an ancestral
plant because the two types of plants tend to be similar. New plants acquire
some of the interacting animals via divergence (elimination of interactions).
As a result, animals of an offspring plant become a subset of those of the
parent plant, and thereby resulting in nestedness.
Next, we investigated the frequency distribution of the number of interactions
per species (degree distribution). In plant-animal mutualistic networks, we often observe heterogeneous degree distributions, which follow a power law with
an exponential truncation. Our model also reproduces heterogeneous distributions (Takemoto and Arita, 2009), which are not influenced by the structure
of initial networks (i.e., n0 ) in the case of large P and large A. The cumulative degree distributions of real plant-animal mutualistic networks (symbols)
and model-generated networks (lines) are shown in Fig. 3. The cumulative
distributions of only three representative networks are shown owing to space
limitations. We could observe cumulative distributions of two types [Pcum (kP )
and Pcum (kA ), where kP and kA denote the degrees on nodes corresponding
6

to plants and animals (pollinators), respectively] because plant-animal mutualistic networks are represented as bipartite graphs. The models studied were
in good agreement with real data (Fig. 3).

Pcum(kP)

(A) Marsh (Japan)

(B) Grassland (Cass, New Zealand)

(C) Subalpine (Japan)

100

100

10

10-1

10-1

10-1

0

Our model
BC model
-2

10

100

-2

-2

101
kP

102

0

10

100

101
kP

102

10

100

101
kP

102

101
kA

102

0

0

10

10

10-1

10-1

10-1

10-2

10-2

10-2

Pcum(kA)

10

-3

10

100

-3

-3

101
kA

102

10

100

101
kA

102

10

100

Fig. 3. Cumulative degree distributions in plant-animal mutualistic networks for
plants (top column) and pollinators (animals) (bottom column). The circles and
lines represent real data and models, respectively. The cumulative distributions of
models are averaged over 100 realizations.

In order to quantitatively verify goodness of fits between models and real
data, we calculated the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) statistics (distance) between empirical distributions and predicted distributions for Pcum (kP ) (KSP )
and Pcum (kA ) (KSA ). We also investigated the relationship between network
size and the KS distance of degree distributions. Here, the network size and
prediction accuracy were defined as P + A and the sum of the KS distances
for the two distributions (i.e. KSP + KSA ), respectively.
The KS distances in our model and the BC model are compared in Fig. 4 A.
Overall, the KS distances were small for both models, i.e., in good agreement
with real data. However, we also observed some low-accuracy predictions in
both cases for small-sized networks. The KS distance increased as the network
size decreased (Fig. 4 B) because the structure of small model-generated networks may have strong fluctuated owing to its stochastic nature. The accuracy
of our model was lower than that of the BC model for small networks. This
might be because the BC model considers more parameters such as species
traits and external factors than our model dose and is more independent from
initial networks. In the case of large networks, however, our model more precisely reproduced the degree distributions than did the BC model.
Using our model, we could elucidate the origin of heterogenous distributions,
which generally corresponds to multiplicative processes or preferential attachments (Barabási and Oltvai, 2004), in plant-animal mutualistic networks from
an evolutionary perspective. When new animals emerge, plants establish new
7

(A)

0.5
KS P
KS A

BC model

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Our model

(B)

0.7
Our model
BC model

KSP+KSA

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0

400

800

1200

1600

2000

P+A

Fig. 4. Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) statistics (distances) between models and real
data. (A) Comparison of KS distance between our model and the BC model. The
dashed line indicates that our model and the BC model had the same prediction
accuracy. KSP and KSA are KS distances between observed and predicted distributions for Pcum (kP ) and Pcum (kA ), respectively. (B) Correlation between network
size and KS distance.

interactions with them. Plants that interact many animals are likely to acquire more new animals because plant-animal pairs are selected at random.
This phenomenon reflects preferential attachment, which is similar to that in
the Dorogovtsev-Mendes-Samukhin model (Dorogovtsev et al., 2001). A similar mechanism exists in the case of animals. In our model, new plants inherit
the animals of randomly selected plants. That is, animals also established new
interaction with plants when new plants emerge because of random mutation.
Thus, animals that interact with many plants tend to acquire more new plants.
This is similar to preferential attachment in the duplication-divergence model
(Vázquez, 2003).
Our model is simpler than the BC model. In the BC model, parameters such
as species traits and external factors have to be expressly provided; these parameters need to drawn from given probabilistic distributions. Furthermore,
the interactions between plants and animals are determined according to the
linking mechanisms based on such parameters. In contrast, species traits and
external factors and linking mechanisms are masked to a certain extent in our
model, which takes into account evolutionary processes. Therefore, the above
parameters, probabilistic distributions, and linking mechanisms based on pa8

rameters need not be directly considered in our model. However, this implies
that species traits and external factors are not inessential. Species traits and
external factors are important for plant-animal interactions. In our model,
plant-animal interactions are determined as a result of species traits and external factors. However, our model has no parameters corresponding to these
traits and factors. Thus, it does not reveal the relationship of species traits
and external factors with network structure in exchange for the simplification.
This is a limitation of our model.
We based our model on plant evolution. As explained in Sec. 2, plant chemical
compounds are critical for plant-animal interactions (Harborne and Williams,
2000) and hence, such interactions are often explained from the perspective
of plants. Thus, we assumed that interactions between plants and animals are
influenced by the traits of plants. Nonetheless, network formation may also
be influenced by animal evolution. In this case, however, a more complicated
model is required (i.e., more parameters). Therefore, we selected a model based
on plant evolution. Due to the simplification, our model does not clearly explain animals. For example, it does not consider what kind of animals join
in networks when new species emerge. In other wards, it does not distinguish
whether the new animals are related to existing ones or not, and it is not clear
what traits animals have. For this reason, the strength of phylogenetic signal
is not evaluated. Therefore, traits of animals and phylogenetic relationships in
plant-animal mutualistic networks are not discussed by using our model. This
is also a limitation of our model, and it is a problem needing to be solved in
the future.
It is surprising that the same model can explain two different systems: plantanimal mutualistic networks and species-metabolite relationship in regards
to flavonoids (Takemoto and Arita, 2009). A hidden evolutionary relationship
between flavonoids and animals, through a radical speculation, may exist.
Some flavonoids, such as flower pigments, play roles in attracting insects (pollinators) and protecting plants from insects. Such chemical compounds may
correspond to traits (or phenotypes) of plants. Thus, the structure of speciesmetabolite relationships is expected be similar to that of plant-animal networks.
As shown above, structural patterns are also reproduced through simple evolutionary processes. However, Rezende et al. (2007b) showed that the phylogenetic signal was significant but weak in an observed plant-animal mutualistic
network. Our model, which shows high phylogenetic signal, does not explain
this network well. This may be cause that there are several independent mechanisms for generating nested structure and heterogeneous connectivity. Network
formation may be explained several independent theories. One is described by
the BC model, which implies low phylogenetic signal. The other is based on
our model, which suggests high phylogenetic signal. In nature system, the
9

nested structure and heterogeneous connectivity may be independently generated by both mechanisms. Due to the balance of mechanisms, thus, we can
expect to observe plant-animal mutualistic networks with high phylogenetic
signal in addition to those with low phylogenetic signal. We believe that there
are other plant-animal mutualistic networks descried by our model. Species
traits, which are important for plant-animal interactions, are inherited from
ancestral species to new species. Thus, evolutionary history may greatly affect
the formation of plant-animal mutualistic networks. However, earlier models
do not reveal the effect of evolutionary history on ecological networks because
they do not clearly consider evolution. We believe that our model (an evolving
network model) is important to obtain a deeper understanding of the formation of plant-animal mutualistic networks.
Regarding external factors, our model has a limitation. Heterogeneous environments (e.g., geographic, temperature, and nutrient differences) may reduce
phylogenetic signals in plant-animal mutualistic networks. Our model may not
clearly explain the formation of networks under such situations because it has
no parameter corresponding to external factors due to the simplification. Our
model can be applied to ecological networks if plant-animal relationships are
comprehensively obtained under ideal conditions (e.g. environmentally homogeneous islands).
For simplicity, we did not consider a number of important evolutionary processes such as extinction and convergent evolution. In particular, degree distributions might be altered because of such extinctions (Enemark and Sneppen,
2007). However, our results indicate that such mechanisms might have only
negligible effects on the structural properties of ecological networks such as
nested structure and heterogeneous connectivity. In plant species, genome doubling (polyploidity) is a major driving force for increasing genome size and
the number of genes (Adams and Wendel, 2005). Duplicated genes typically
diversify in function, and some are phenotypically expressed as forms, colors,
syntheses of chemical compounds, etc. Such phenotypes (traits), especially the
syntheses of chemical compounds, are therefore expected to increase, indicating that the effect of node losses may be disregarded when considering the
global tendencies of plant-animal mutualistic networks. However, this implies
that deletions of nodes and interactions are not unnecessary. Such evolutionary mechanisms might play important roles in determining partial (or local)
interaction patterns of bipartite relationships. Thus, we need to focus on such
evolution processes in the future to fully understand the formation of plantanimal mutualistic networks.
Although our model has the above limitations due to simplification of model,
it may be extensible by considering several factors (parameters). We believe
that our model helps to reveal the relationships such factors and evolutionary
history in plant-animal mutualistic networks and to more deeply understand
10

the formation of networks in the future.

4

Conclusion

By considering simple evolutionary processes, we have shown that non-random
structural properties of plant-animal mutualistic networks, such as nested
structures and heterogeneous connectivity, can be both qualitatively and quantitatively predicted. This finding suggests that network models can be simplified by considering evolutionary processes. Furthermore, it implies that another explanation exists for the emergence of non-random structures (i.e.,
from the evolutionary perspective). Rezende et al. (2007a,b) and our simple
description of interactions between plants and animals indicate the importance of evolutionary history, which is worth further investigation. The evolving network model does not contradict static (non-growth) network models
because these models describe respective different mechanisms for formation
of non-random structures, and therefore provides additional insights into the
formation of plant-animal mutualistic networks.

Acknowledgments

We thank S. Saavedra for providing data on plant-animal networks and helpful
comments. We are also obliged to the reviewers for their valuable discussion
and comments.

References
Adams, K.L., Wendel, J.F., 2005. Polyploidy and genome evolution in plants.
Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 8, 135–141.
Barabási, A.-L. & Oltvai, Z.N., 2004. Network biology: understanding the cell’s
functional organization. Nat. Rev. Genet. 5, 101–113.
Bascompte, J., Jordano, P., Melián, C.J., Olesen, J.M., 2003. The nested assembly of plant-animal mutualistic networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
100, 9383–9387.
Bastolla, U., Fortuna, M.A., Pascual-Gracı́a A., Ferrera, A., Luque, B., Bascompte, J., 2009. The architecture of mutualistic networks minimizes competition and increases biodiversity. Nature 458, 1018–1020.
Dorogovtsev, S.N., Mendes, J.F.F., Samukhin, A.N., 2001. Size-dependent degree distribution of a scale-free growing network. Phys. Rev. E 63, 062101.
11

Enemark, J., Sneppen, K., 2007. Gene duplication models for directed networks with limits on growth. J. Stat. Mech., P11007.
Guimarães Jr., P.R., Machado, G., de Aguiar, M.A.M., Jordano, P., Bascompte, J., Pinheiro, A., dos Reis, S.F., 2007. Build-up mechanisms determining the topology of mutualistic networks. J. Theor. Biol. 249, 181–189.
Garland Jr., T., Bennett., A.F., Rezende, E.L., 2005. Phylogenetic approaches
in comparative physiology. J. Exp. Biol. 208, 3015–3035.
Harborne, J.B., Williams, C.A., 2000. Advance in flavonoid research since
1992. Phytochemistry 55, 481–504.
Jordano, P., Bascompte, J., Olesen, J.M., 2003. Invariant properties in coevolutionary networks of plant-animal interactions. Ecol. Lett. 6, 69–81.
Nacher, J.C., Ochiai, T., Hayashida, M., Akutsu, T., 2009. A bipartite graph
based model of protein domain networks. Complex Sciences 4, 525–535.
Rezende, E.L., Lavabre, J.E., Guimarães Jr., P.R., Jordano, P., Bascompte, J.,
2007. Non-random coextinctions in phylogenetically structured mutualistic
networks. Nature 448, 925–928.
Rezende, E.L., Jordano, P., Bascompte, J., 2007. Effects of phenotypic complementarity and phylogeny on the nested structure of mutualistic networks.
Oikos 116, 1919–1929.
Rodrı́guez-Gironés, M.A., Santamarı́a, L., 2006. A new algorithm to calculate
the nestedness temperature of presence-absence matrices. J. Biogeogr. 33,
924–935.
Saavedra, S., Reed-Tsochas, F., Uzzi, B., 2009. A simple model of bipartite
cooperation for ecological and organizational networks. Nature 457, 463–
466.
Stouffer, D.B., Camacho, J., Guimerá, R., Ng, C.A., Amaral, L.A.N., 2005.
Quantitative patterns in the structure of model and empirical food webs.
Ecology 86, 1301–1311.
Takemoto, K., Arita, M., 2009. Heterogeneous distribution of metabolites
across plant species. Physica A 388, 2777–2780.
Vázquez, A., 2003. Growing network with local rules: Preferential attachment,
clustering hierarchy, and degree correlations. Phys. Rev. E 67, 056104.

12

