TRANS-CANADA SLIMEWAYS: SLIME MOULD
IMITATES THE CANADIAN TRANSPORT NETWORK

arXiv:1105.5084v1 [nlin.PS] 25 May 2011

ANDREW ADAMATZKY AND SELIM G. AKL
Abstract. Slime mould Physarum polycephalum builds up sophisticated networks to transport nutrients between distant part
of its extended body. The slime mould’s protoplasmic network is
optimised for maximum coverage of nutrients yet minimum energy
spent on transportation of the intra-cellular material. In laboratory experiments with P. polycephalum we represent Canadian
major urban areas with rolled oats and inoculated slime mould in
the Toronto area. The plasmodium spans the urban areas with
its network of protoplasmic tubes. We uncover similarities and
differences between the protoplasmic network and the Canadian
national highway network, analyse the networks in terms of proximity graphs and evaluate slime mould’s network response to contamination.
Keywords: biological networks, vehicular transport networks, slime
mould, bio-inspired computing

1. Introduction
The increase of long-distance travel and subsequent reconfiguration
of vehicular and social networks [14] requires novel and unconventional
approaches towards analysis of dynamical processes in complex transport networks [7], routing and localisation of vehicular networks [21],
optimisation of interactions between different parts of a transport network during scheduling road expansion and maintenance [26], and shaping of transport network structure [8]. In the present paper we attempt
to build viable analogies between biological and human-made transport
networks and project behavioural traits of biological networks onto existing vehicular transport networks.
While choosing a biological object we want it to be experimental
laboratory friendly, easy to cultivate and handle, and convenient to
analyse its behaviour. Ants would indeed be the first candidate, and
a great deal of impressive results has been published on ant-colony
inspired computing [10, 24], however ant colonies require substantial
laboratory resources, experience and time in handling them. Actually
1

2

ANDREW ADAMATZKY AND SELIM G. AKL

very few, if any, papers were published on experimental laboratory
implementation of ant-based optimisation, the prevalent majority of
publications being theoretical. There is however an object which is
extremely easy to cultivate and handle, and which exhibits remarkably
good foraging behaviour and development of transport networks. This
is the plasmodium of Physarum polycephalum.
Plasmodium is a vegetative stage of acellular slime mould P. polycephalum, a syncytium, that is, a single cell with many nuclei, which
feeds on microscopic particles [25]. The plasmodium is a unique userfriendly biological substrate from which experimental prototypes of
massive-parallel amorphous biological computers are designed [4]. During its foraging behaviour the plasmodium spans scattered sources of
nutrients with a network of protoplasmic tubes. The protoplasmic
network is optimised to cover all sources of food and to provide a robust and speedy transportation of nutrients and metabolites in the
plasmodium body. The plasmodium’s foraging behaviour can be interpreted as computation. Data are represented by spatial configurations of attractants and repellents, and results of computation by structures of a protoplasmic network formed by the plasmodium on the data
sets [16, 18, 4]. The problems solved by plasmodium of P. polycephalum
include shortest path [16, 18], implementatiton of storage modification
machines [1], Voronoi diagram [23], Delaunay triangulation [4], logical
computing [29], and process algebra [22]; see overview in [4].
Previously [2] we have evaluated a road-modeling potential of P.
polycephalum, however no conclusive results were presented back in
2007. A step forward, namely, biological-approximation, or evaluation, of human-made road networks was done in our previous papers
on approximation of motorways/highways in the United Kingdom [3],
Mexico [5] and the Netherlands [6] by plasmodium of P. polycephalum.
For all three countries we found that, in principle, the network of protoplasmic tubes developed by plasmodium matches, at least partly,
network of human-made transport arteries. The shape of a county and
the exact spatial distribution of urban areas (represented by source
of nutrients) may play a key role in determining the exact structure
of the plasmodium network. Also we suspect that a degree of matching between Physarum networks and motorway networks is determined
by original government designs of motorways in any particular country. This is why it is so important to collect data on development
of plasmodium networks in all major countries, and then undertake a
comparative analysis.
What are unique properties of the Canadian transport system? The
Canadian Highway System gives us a good example of a logically

SLIME MOULD IMITATES CANADIAN HIGHWAYS

3

designed transportation system whose key goal is to connect all the
provinces together by highways. The highway network was built as a
federal-provincial territorial cooperative effort with great effort taken
in coordinating work on different parts. Another attractive property
of the highway system is that it was designed to provide an access to
remote areas where no spots of high population density exist.
The paper is structured as follows. We present experimental techniques used in Sect. 2. Properties of protoplasmic networks built by
P. polycephalum are discussed in Sect. 3. We compare slime mould
networks with the Canadian highway network in Sect. 4 and slime
mould and human-made networks with proximity graphs in Sect. 5. In
Sect. 6 we show how the slime mould transport network restructures
in response to a spreading contamination.
2. Methods
The plasmodium of P. polycephalum is cultivated in plastic containers, on paper kitchen towels sprinkled with still drinking water and fed
with oat flakes (Asda’s Smart Price Porridge Oats). For experiments
we use 12 × 12 cm polyestyrene square Petri dishes. Agar plates, 2%
agar gel (Select agar, Sigma Aldrich), are cut in a shape of Canada. We
consider the elven most populated urban areas U of Canada (Fig. 1a)
and five transport nodes:
(1) Toronto area (including Hamilton, London,
St.
CatharinesNiagara,
Windsor, Oshawa, Barrie,
Guelph, and Kingston)
(2) Montreal area (incuding
OttawaGatineau, Quebec
City, Sherbrooke, TroisRivieres)
(3) Vancouver area (including Victoria, Abbotsford,
Kelowna)
(4) Calgary

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)

Edmonton
Winnipeg
Halifax-Moncton
Saskatoon-Regina
St. John’s
Sudbury
Thunder Bay
Inuvik
Wrigley
Yellowknife
Thompson
Radisson

The last five entries from Inuvik to Radisson, are not highly populated urban areas. They are transport nodes added for completeness,
i.e. to present slime mould with the same number of principle transport
nodes as the human-made highways system (Fig. 1a). Some transport

4

ANDREW ADAMATZKY AND SELIM G. AKL

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Experimental setup. (a) Urban areas and
transport nodes to be represented by oat flakes, from [9].
(b) Snapshot of protoplasmic transport network developed by P. polycephum; the snapshot is made on a highway map.

SLIME MOULD IMITATES CANADIAN HIGHWAYS

5

nodes as Fort McMurray, La Ronge, Flin Flon, and so on, are not included in the list due to their proximity to already chosen major urban
areas.
To project regions of U onto agar gel we place oat flakes in the
positions of these regions of U (Fig. 1). In each experiments we tried
to match the size and shape of areas in (Fig. 1) by selecting rolled oat
of corresponding size and shape. At the beginning of each experiment
a piece of plasmodium, usually already attached to an oat flake in the
cultivation box, is placed in the Toronto area (region 1 in Fig. 1a). The
Petri dishes with plasmodium are kept in darkness, at temperature
22-25 Co , except for observation and image recording. Periodically
(usually in 12 h or 24 h intervals) the dishes are scanned in Epson
Perfection 4490. We undertook 23 experiments.

3. Foraging on urban areas
It usually takes the plasmodium of P. polycephalum 2-5 days to span
all urban areas. How fast the plasmodium colonises the space depends
on many unknown factors, including seasonal variations, plasmodium’s
age, etc. ’Younger’ plasmodia, which were just recently ’woken up’
from the sclerotium phase do usually colonise the experimental arena
quicker than old plasmodia, which were replanted several times in culture boxes. Images of protoplasmic networks presented in the paper
are taken when all oat flakes, representing U, were colonised by plasmodium. Examples of the protoplasmic networks are shown in Fig. 2.
As every living creature does, the plasmodium of P. polycephalum
rarely repeats its foraging pattern, and almost never builds exactly
the same protoplasmic network twice. To generalise our experimental results we constructed a Physarum graph with weighted-edges. A
Physarum graph is a tuple P = hU, E, wi, where U is a set of urban
areas, E is a set edges, and w : E → [0, 1] associates each edge of E
with a probability (or weights). For every two regions a and b from
U there is an edge connecting a and b if a plasmodium’s protoplasmic
link is recorded at least in one of k experiments, and the edge (a, b)
has a probability calculated as a ratio of experiments where protoplasmic link (a, b) occurred in the total number of experiments k = 23.
For example, if we observed a protoplasmic tube connecting areas a
5
and b in 5 experiments, the weight of edge (a, b) will be w(a, b) = 23
.
We do not take into account the exact configuration of the protoplasmic tubes but merely their existence. Further we will be dealing with
threshold Physarum graphs P(θ) = hU, T (E), w, θi. The threshold

6

ANDREW ADAMATZKY AND SELIM G. AKL

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 2. Examples of protoplasmic networks developed by P. polycephalum on major urban areas and
transport nodes U. Grey-scale images.

SLIME MOULD IMITATES CANADIAN HIGHWAYS

(a) θ = 0

(b) θ =

8
23

(c) θ =

9
23

(d) θ =

17
23

(e) θ =

18
23

(f) θ =

19
23

(g) θ =

22
23

Figure 3. Configurations Physarum-graph P(θ) for
various cutoff values of θ. Thickness of each edge is proportional to the edge’s weight.

7

8

ANDREW ADAMATZKY AND SELIM G. AKL

Physarum graph is obtained from Physarum graph by the transformation: T (E) = {e ∈ E : w(e) > θ}. That is all edges with weights
less than or equal to θ are removed. Examples of threshold Physarum
graphs for various values of θ are shown in Fig. 3.
A ’raw’ Physarum graph P(0) is a non-planar graph due to the presence of protoplasmic tube connecting Saskatoon-Regina (8) with Yellowknife (14) (Fig. 3a). It also exhibits two cross-Canada transport
links Inuvik (12) to Radisson (16) and Sudbury (10) to Yellowknife
(14). Nevertheless, these are links that might be considered as senseless from a geographical point of view because they are crossing massive
of mountains and forests.
All three links disappear when we increase θ to 8 (Fig. 3b). Four
more links become trimmed off when θ = 8: Sudbury (10) — Thompson
(15), Montreal area (2) — Sudbury (10), Sudbury (10) — Radisson
(16), Montreal area (2) — St. John’s (9).
8
P( 23
) is the last connected graph in a series of threshold Physarum
graphs, P(θ), 0 ≤ θ ≤ 23. Urban areas St. Johns’s (9) and Radisson
9
(16) become isolated in P( 23
) due to the disappearance of transport
links from the Montreal area (2) to Radisson (16) and from Radisson
to St. John’s (9) (Fig. 3c).
The Physarum graph splits into a tree and two isolated nodes for θ =
17
(Fig. 3d). Five long distance routes from urban areas to transport
23
nodes are removed: Vanvouver area (3) – Inuvik (12), Vancouver area
— Wrigley (13), Edmonton (5) — Wrigley, Saskatoon-Regina (8) —
Thompson (15), Winnipeg (6) — Thompson; and, two short-distance
routes between major urban areas: Vancouver area (3) — Edmonton
(5) and Calgary (4) — Saskatoon-Regina (8).
18
The graph P( 23
) consists of several disconnected components: two
isolated nodes, St. John’s and Sudbury, two-node segment Inuvik —
Wrigley, and a tree spanning the rest of the urban ares (Fig. 3e). A
further increase of θ to 19
(Fig. 3f) leads to the formation of
23
• five isolated nodes: Vancouver area, St. John’s, Yellowknife,
Thompson, Winnipeg;
• a segment: Inuvik — Wrigley;
• a chain: Calgary — Edmonton — Saskatoon-Regina — Winnipeg — Thunder Bay;
• a chain: Sudbury — Toronto area — Montreal area — HalifaxMoncton.
Only segment-routes Calgary to Edmonton and Winnipeg to Thunder Bay are represented by protoplasmic tubes in almost all experiments (Fig. 3g).

SLIME MOULD IMITATES CANADIAN HIGHWAYS

(a)

(c) P(0)

(b) H

T

8
(d) P( 23
)

H

(e) P( 17
23 )

T

T

H

H

Figure 4. Physarum vs highway network. (a) Highway
network in Canada [9]. (b) Highway graph H. (cde) Intersection of threshold Physarum graph with highway
8 17
graph for θ = 0, 23
, 23 .

9

10

ANDREW ADAMATZKY AND SELIM G. AKL

4. Physarum network vs highway network
We construct the highway graph H as follows. Let U be a set of
urban regions, for any two regions a and b from U, the nodes a and
b are connected by an edge (a, b) if there is a motorway starting in
the vicinity of a and passing in the vicinity of b and not passing in the
vicinity of any other urban area c ∈ U. Highway graph H shown in
Fig. 4b is extracted from a scheme of the Canadian transport network
(Fig. 4a).
in the vicinity of a and passing in the vicinity of b and not passing
in the vicinity
Finding 1. Physarum almost approximates the Canadian highway network.
’Raw’ Physarum graph P(0) approximates 21 of 22 edges of highway
graph H. Only one edge, Vancouver area to Calgary, of the highway
graph H is not represented by protoplasmic tubes in any of the 23
experiments undertaken (Fig. 4c). The ’raw’ physarum graph gives us
a rather relaxed approximation because it includes even links which
8
occurred just once in a set of experiments. Let us look at P( 23
) which
represents links which occurred in over 35% of experiments. Physarum
8
graph P( 23
) approximates 18 of 22 edges of H (Fig. 4d). The only
8
) are Vancouver area to Yellowknife,
edges of H not represented in P( 23
Sudbury to Radisson, Sudbury to Montreal area, and St. John’s to
Montreal area.
Finding 2. A core component of the Physarum transport network and
the Canadian highway network consists of a chain passing along the
south border from Halifax-Monctron area to Edmonton, and a fork
attached to Edmonton; the south branch of the fork is Edmonton —
Calgary — Vancouver area and the north branch is Edmonton – Yellowknife – Wrigley.
The component above is the only connected component in the intersection of P( 17
) with H (Fig. 4e).
23
5. Proximity graphs
A planar graph consists of nodes which are points of the Euclidean
plane and edges which are straight segments connecting the points. A
planar proximity graph is a planar graph where two points are connected by an edge if they are close in some sense. A pair of points is
assigned a certain neighbourhood, and points of the pair are connected

SLIME MOULD IMITATES CANADIAN HIGHWAYS

(a) GG

(c) GG

T

11

(b) RNG = MST

H

(d) RNG

T

H

Figure 5. Proximity graphs and their intersection with
highway graph H. (a) Gabriel graph. (b) Relative neighbourhood graph and minimun spanning tree. (c) Intersection of Gabriel graph with highway graph. (d) Intersection of relative neighbourhood graph with highway
graph.
by an edge if their neighbourhood is empty. Here we consider the most
common proximity graph as follows.
• GG: Points a and b are connected by an edge in the Gabriel
Graph GG if disc with diameter dist(a, b) centered in middle
of the segment ab is empty [11, 15] (Fig. 5a).
• RNG: Points a and b are connected by an edge in the Relative
Neighbourhood Graph RNG if no other point c is closer to a
and b than dist(a, b) [28] (Fig. 5b).
• MST: The Euclidean minimum spanning tree (MST) [20] is
a connected acyclic graph which has minimum possible sum of
edges’ lengths (Fig. 5b).

12

ANDREW ADAMATZKY AND SELIM G. AKL

In general, the graphs relate as MST ⊆ RNG ⊆ GG [28, 15, 12].
Finding 3. For a given configuration of nodes of U RNG = MST.
The finding implies that the configuration of urban areas of U is
’spanning friendly’.
Finding 4. Let Ti be a minimum spanning tree rooted in node i ∈ U
then Ti = Tj for any i, j ∈ U.
We demonstrated this by direct computation of all possible spanning
trees on U.
T
Finding T
5. St. John’s and Inuvik urban areas are isolated in GG RNG
and GG MST.
Finding 6. MST/{(Inuvik — Wrigley), (Halifax-Moncton — St. John’s)}
⊂H
This means that Canadian highway network is almost optimal (Fig. 5de).
Intersections of Physarum graphs for principle values of threshold θ
with the Gabriel graph and the minimum spanning tree are shown in
Fig. 6.
Finding 7. GG/{(Inuvik — Wrigley), (Thunder Bay — Radisson)}
⊂H
Finding 8. MST ⊂ P(0)
’Raw’ Physarum includes an ’ideal’ acyclic spanning network MST.
This somehow characterises a good quality of a slime mould approximation of a transport network. The minimum spanning tree is not
17
included in the high-threshold Physarum graph P( 23
). However, there
is a ’strong’ component of MST which is included in the high-threshold
Physarum graph (Fig. 6). The strong component is a tree rooted in the
Toronto area. The tree’s stem is Toronto — Winnipeg — SaskatoonRegina — Edmonton. It has three branches. A small branch Winnipeg
— Thompson, and two end branches Edmonton — Calgary — Vancouver area and Edmonton — Yellowknife — Wrigley — Inuvik.
6. Response to contamination
To imitate propagating contamination we place a crystal of sea salt
(SAXA Coarse Sea Salt, a crystal weight around 20 mg), in the place of
Bruce Nuclear Power station. Inorganic salts are chemo-repellents for
P. polycephalum therefore sodium chloride diffusing in agar gel causes
plasmodium to retreat from a contaminated zone. We studied plasmodium’s response circa 24 h after initiation of contamination. During

SLIME MOULD IMITATES CANADIAN HIGHWAYS

0
)
(a) P( 23

T

GG

0
)
(b) P( 23

T

MST

8
)
(c) P( 23

T

GG

8
)
(d) P( 23

T

MST

(e) P( 17
23 )

T

GG

(f) P( 17
23 )

T

MST

13

Figure 6. Intersection of (ace) Gabriel graph GG and
(bdf) minimum spanning tree MST with Physarum
8
graphs P(θ) for (ab) θ = 0, (cd) θ = 23
, (ef) θ = 17
.
23

24 h a contamination zone expands as far as Winnipeg an Thompson
in the west and St. John’s in the east. In some cases contamination

14

ANDREW ADAMATZKY AND SELIM G. AKL

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 7. Physarum response to contamination.
(ab) Migration outside Canada. (c–f) Compensating activation of transport network unaffected by contamination. (ace) Original images. (bdf) Binarized images:
only pixels from (ace) which red and green components
exceed 100 and blue component is less than 100 are
drawn as black pixels in (bdf), otherwise white.

SLIME MOULD IMITATES CANADIAN HIGHWAYS

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

15

Figure 8. Physarum sprouting in response to contamination. (ab) Sprouting from edges. (cd) Sprouting from
nodes. (ac) Original colour images. (bd) Binarized images.

spreads till Saskatoon-Moncton. In a few experiments plasmodium
colony occupying St. Jonn’s remains unaffected.
Finding 9. In response to contamination propagating from Bruce Nuclear Power station, the plasmodium of P. polycephalum takes one or
more of the following actions: migrates outside Canada, enhances the
transport network outside the contaminated zone, sproutes indiscriminately from urban areas and transport links.
The plasmodium’s reactions are illustrated in Figs. 7 and 8. Four
types of responses are observed in laboratory experiments.

16

ANDREW ADAMATZKY AND SELIM G. AKL

• Plasmodium migrates outside Canada (Fig. 7ab). Typical waves
of migration are from Nunavut towards Baffin Bay and Greenland and from British Columbia towards Washington and Oregon in USA. Due to the growth substrate being an agar plate
cut in the shape of Canada, the plasmodium ends up on the bare
plastic bottom of a Petri dish, therefore it does not migrate far
away from Canada.
• Plasmodium enhances it foraging and colonisation activity in
the parts unaffected by contamination (Fig. 7c–f), mainly in
Alberta, British Columbia, Northern Territories, Yukon and
Nunavut. Protoplasmic tubes themselves are often increased in
size and intensity of their colours, which reflects increased propagation of cytoplasm inside the tubes. For example, in Fig. 7cd
plasmodium clearly shows hyper-activity in the Nunavut area,
with the whole territory covered by spreading plasmodium. Fig. 7cd
illustrates hyper-activation of transport routes, particularly links
Inuvik — Wrigley, Yelloknife — Wrigley, Edmonton — Wrigley,
Edmonton — Vancouver area, Saskatoon-Regina — Edmonton,
and Winnipeg — Saskatoon.
• Plasmodium expands outside oat flakes and also produces processes protruding from the protoplasmic tubes (Fig. 8a–d). This
a common reaction of plasmodium in response to mechanical
damage, e.g. cutting of protoplasmic tubes [4].
7. Discussion
To imitate transport networks in Canada we represented major urban areas and transport nodes with oat flakes, inoculated plasmodium
of Physarum polycephalum, allowed the plasmodium to span all oat
flakes with its network of protoplasmic tubes and analysed the structure of the protoplasmic network. We found that in over 75% of experiments P. polycephalum an acyclic transport network consisting of
a chain spanning urban areas along the south boundary of Canada,
from Halifax-Moncton to Vancouver area, with branches Edmonton to
Yellowknife to Wrigley to Inuvik and Yellowknife to Thompson. In
all experiments slime mould approximates all but Vancouver to Calgary links of Canadian highways networks. Both slime mould and
Canadian highway networks have a strong spanning tree component
and thus can be thought of as optimal transport networks. In laboratory experiments with slime mould we also detailed possible scenarios
of transport network restructuring in a response to a spreading contamination. We believe our results make a substantial contribution

SLIME MOULD IMITATES CANADIAN HIGHWAYS

17

towards nature-inspired analyses and design of human-made transport
networks. Further experiments are necessary to determine how natural and geographical conditions, especially terrain, affect the exact
topology of developing transport networks.

References
[1] Adamatzky A. Physarum machine: implementation of a KolmogorovUspensky machine on a biological substrate. Parallel Processing Letters 17
(2007) 455–467.
[2] Adamatzky A. From reaction-diffusion to Physarum computing. Invited talk at
Los Alamos Lab workshop “Unconventional Computing: Quo Vadis?” (Santa
Fe, NM, March 2007).
[3] Adamatzky A. and Jones J. Road planning with slime mould: If Physarum
built motorways it would route M6/M74 through Newcastle Int J Bifurcaton
and Chaos (2010). http://arxiv.org/abs/0912.3967
[4] Adamatzky A. Physarum Machines (World Scientific, 2010).
[5] Adamatzky A., Martinez G. J., Chapa-Vergara S. V., Asomoza-Palacio R.,
Stephens C. R. Approximating Mexican highways with slime mould (2010)
arXiv:1010.0557v1 [nlin.PS] http://arxiv.org/abs/1010.0557
[6] Adamatzky A. and Sloot P. Bio-development of motorway networks in the
Netherlands: Slime mould approach (2010).
[7] Barrat A., Barthelemy M., Vespignani A. Dynamical processes in complex
networks. Cambridge University Press (2008)
[8] Beuthe M., Himanen V., Reggiani A., Zamparini L. (Eds.) Transport Developments and Innovations in an Evolving World Springer, 2004.
[9] Canadas National Highway System. Condition Report 2008. Council of Ministers Responsible for Transportation and Highway Safety, 2009.
[10] Dorigo M. and Statzle T. Ant Colony Optimization. Bradford Books, 2004.
[11] Gabriel K. R. and R. R. Sokal. A new statistical approach to geographic variation analysis. Systematic Zoology, 18 (1969) 259–278.
[12] Jaromczyk J. W. and G. T. Toussaint, Relative neighborhood graphs and their
relatives. Proc. IEEE 80 (1992) 1502–1517.
[13] Kirkpatrick D. G. and Radke J. D. A framework for computational morphology.
In G. Toussaint, editor, Computational Geometry (1985) 217–248.
[14] Larsen J., Urry J., Axhausen K. Mobilities, Networks, Geographies. Ashgate
Publishing, 2006.
[15] Matula D. W. and Sokal R. R. Properties of Gabriel graphs relevant to geographical variation research and the clustering of points in the same plane.
Geographical Analysis 12 (1984) 205–222.
[16] Nakagaki T., Yamada H., Ueda T. Interaction between cell shape and contraction pattern in the Physarum plasmodium, Biophysical Chemistry 84 (2000)
195–204.
[17] Nakagaki T., Smart behavior of true slime mold in a labyrinth. Research in
Microbiology 152 (2001) 767-770.
[18] Nakagaki T., Yamada H., and Toth A., Path finding by tube morphogenesis
in an amoeboid organism. Biophysical Chemistry 92 (2001) 47-52.

18

ANDREW ADAMATZKY AND SELIM G. AKL

[19] Nakagaki T., Iima M., Ueda T., Nishiura y., Saigusa T., Tero A., Kobayashi R.,
Showalter K. Minimum-risk path finding by an adaptive amoeba network.
Physical Review Letters 99 (2007) 068104.
[20] Nesetril J., Milkova E., Nesetrilova H., Otakar Boruvka on minimum spanning
tree problem, Discrete Mathematics 233 (2001) 3–36.
[21] Olariu S., Weigle M.C. Vehicular Networks: From Theory to Practice. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2009.
[22] Schumann A. and Adamatzky A. Physarum spatial logic. In: Proc. 1th
Int. Symp. on Symbolic and Numeric Algorithms for Scientific Computing
(Timisoara, Romania, September 26-29, 2009).
[23] Shirakawa T., Adamatzky A., Gunji Y.-P., Miyake Y. On simultaneous construction of Voronoi diagram and Delaunay triangulation by Physarum polycephalum. Int. J. Bifurcation and Chaos (2009), in press.
[24] Solnon C. Ant Colony Optimization and Constraint Programming. WileyISTE, 2010.
[25] Stephenson S. L. and Stempen H. Myxomycetes: A Handbook of Slime Molds.
(Timber Press, 2000).
[26] Taplin J. H. E. Qiu M., Han R. Cost-Benefit Analysis And Evolutionary Computing: Optimal Scheduling of Interactive Road Projects Edward Elgar Publishing, 2005.
[27] Tero A., Kobayashi R. and Nakagaki T., Physarum solver: A biologically
inspired method of road-network navigation. Physica A 363 (2006) 115–119.
[28] Toussaint G. T., The relative neighborhood graph of a finite planar set, Pattern
Recognition 12 (1980) 261–268
[29] Tsuda S., Aono M., Gunji Y.-P. Robust and emergent Physarum logicalcomputing. Biosystems 73 (2004) 45–55.
(Andrew Adamatzky) University of the West of England, Bristol, UK
(Selim G. Akl) School of Computing, Queen’s University, Kingston,
Ontario, Canada

