Investigation of bone resorption within a cortical basic
multicellular unit using a lattice-based computational model
P R Buenzlia , J Jeonb,1 , P Pivonkaa , D W Smitha and P T Cummingsb,c
a

Engineering Computational Biology Group, FECM, The University of Western Australia, WA 6009, Australia
Deptartment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA
c
Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA

b

October 14, 2011

arXiv:1105.5093v3 [q-bio.TO] 22 Nov 2011

Abstract
In this paper we develop a lattice-based computational model focused on bone resorption by osteoclasts in a single
cortical basic multicellular unit (BMU). Our model takes into account the interaction of osteoclasts with the bone matrix,
the interaction of osteoclasts with each other, the generation of osteoclasts from a growing blood vessel, and the renewal
of osteoclast nuclei by cell fusion. All these features are shown to strongly influence the geometrical properties of the
developing resorption cavity including its size, shape and progression rate, and are also shown to influence the distribution,
resorption pattern and trajectories of individual osteoclasts within the BMU. We demonstrate that for certain parameter
combinations, resorption cavity shapes can be recovered from the computational model that closely resemble resorption
cavity shapes observed from microCT imaging of human cortical bone.
Keywords: bone resorption cavity, cortical Bone Multicellular Units (BMU), osteoclast–osteoclast interaction, osteoclast–
bone interaction, osteoclast fusion, computational model

1

Introduction

analysis of BMUs using stereology has been a primary focus
of Frost (1969, 1983), Parfitt (1979, 1983b) and Martin
(1994). As a result of the research based on histomorphometric data, we now have reasonably reliable quantitative
estimates for resorption properties, and we can define the
general properties of a hypothetical ‘average cortical BMU’.
For example, quantitative estimates have been made of resorption properties including osteoclast number, osteon diameter, and the duration and speed of movement of the
BMU through cortical bone (Parfitt, 1994; Robling et al.,
2006).
This histomorphometric data is supplemented by in vivo
data, which has given additional insights into osteoclast behaviour at the front of the BMU. Most importantly, autoradiographic studies of cell migration in cortical BMUs have
revealed that thymidine-labelled nuclei from osteoclast precursor cells fuse randomly with existing osteoclasts (Jaworski et al., 1981; Miller, 1981; Parfitt, 1994; Parfitt et al.,
1996). This fusion process leads to the continual renewal
of the nuclei within the active osteoclasts at the front of
BMUs, which is believed to account for an increase in the
osteoclasts’ lifespan and/or the persistence of their resorptive activity.
This histomorphetric data and in vivo data are supplemented by in vitro cell-culture data, which has given additional insights into osteoclast behaviour. For example, the
microscopic bone dissolution process operated by active osteoclasts is now known to be achieved by the release of hydrogen ions and proteases into the ‘resorption pit’ beneath
the ruffled border of the osteoclast (Hall, 1991; Väänänen
and Zhao, 2008). Interestingly, observations on in vitro osteoclasts suggest that they resorb bone matrix for a period
of time, then detach from the bone surface, before continuing resorption at a different site of the bone surface (Hall,
1991; Martin, 2002; Väänänen and Zhao, 2008). However,
it is known that in vitro observations need to be interpreted

The functional unit of cells in bone remodelling is the ‘basic multicellular unit’ or BMU (Frost, 1969; Parfitt, 1983b;
Parfitt et al., 1987). BMUs are transient functional grouping of cells that progress through the bone, removing old
bone and replacing it with new bone. A single BMU comprises active multinucleated osteoclasts resorbing bone matrix at the front of the BMU, and active osteoblasts towards
the rear of the BMU forming osteoid, which is later mineralized to form new bone matrix. As the BMU progresses,
the resorbing osteoclasts open-up a void space in the bone
matrix called a BMU ‘cutting cone’, while the osteoblasts
reduce the void space as bone is formed in a so-called BMU
‘closing cone’ (Parfitt, 1994).
This paper focuses on a computational model of one aspect of cortical BMU function, namely, osteoclasts opening
up the cutting cone at the front of a single cortical BMU.
This resorption process determines in particular the diameter and morphology of the secondary osteon created by
the BMU. Here we show that for certain parameter combinations, we can demonstrate good agreement between the
cutting cone shapes and osteon morphologies generated by
the computational model, and the cutting cone shapes and
osteon morphologies observed experimentally.
The development of our computational model relies upon detailed quantitative experimental observations.
Much of what is known about the behaviour of cortical
BMUs has been obtained from quantitative analysis of two
dimensional histomorphometric data. Indeed, quantitative
1
Corresponding author
Email addresses:

pascal.buenzli@uwa.edu.au (P R Buenzli),
junhwan.jeon@vanderbilt.edu (J Jeon),
peter.pivonka@uwa.edu.au (P Pivonka),
david.smith@uwa.edu.au (D W Smith),
peter.cummings@vanderbilt.edu (P T Cummings)

1

with caution, as osteoclasts in vitro often exhibit obviously
different behaviours (such as low bone resorption activity), raising questions about their phenotype (Susa et al.,
2004). Whether this detachment-delay-reattachment behaviour actually occurs in vivo is not known (Everts et al.,
2002), but this question is explored here using our computational model.

volves osteoclasts and focuses on the formation of the resorption cavity at the front of a single cortical BMU, it is
helpful to be more specific about what the model does not
include. The model does not include other cells in the BMU
(e.g. osteoblasts, osteocytes, endothelial cells or immune
cells) and does not include other processes occurring in the
BMU (e.g. osteoid formation and mineralization, and osteocytic signals). Though much research in bone biology
since the 1990s has been focused on discovering and understanding signaling pathways that coordinate cells and processes within a BMU, the computational model developed
here does not include explicit cell-cell signaling or explicit
intracellular signal-transduction pathways. Specifically, the
model does not include explicit signaling processes leading to osteoclast formation, or explicit signaling processes
that may operate within the cutting cone. Rather, in this
paper we have taken the approach of simulating key osteoclast behaviours that enable formation of a resorption cavity that are consistent with experimental observations. We
simply establish a lattice-based computational model of osteoclast resorption, and identify some of the requirements
that are particularly important for the development of normal resorption cavity shapes consistent with experimental
observations.
The computational model is investigated through ‘parameter variations’. In much the same way that underexpression or over-expression of a gene illustrates the effect
of that gene in an in vivo system, so parameter variation illustrates the effect of that parameter in an in silico system
(that is, in the computational model). By this means, key
influences on the outputs of the computational model can
be identified.
The paper is organised as follows: in Section 2 we describe our lattice-based computational model for the evolution of the BMU resorption cavity (a precise mathematical
description of this model is given in Appendix A). In Section 3 we first identify the importance of cell-cell adhesion,
cell-bone adhesion and osteoclast access to the resorption
surface for normal cavity shape formation, and then go on
to identify the critical importance that the position of the
tip of the blood vessel within the resorption cavity has on
the evolution of the shape of the resorption cavity. The influence on resorption cavity shape and osteon morphology
of osteoclast number, osteoclast longevity and nuclei fusion
is also reported in Section 3. In Section 4 we discuss these
results and make predictions of osteoclast movement patterns within the resorption cavity, which to date have not
been possible to observe experimentally. We also compare
model predictions with experimental data on osteon shape
and BMU resorption cavity shape. Finally, in Section 5, we
conclude and note future research directions.

Serial histological sectioning of bone in humans and
other animals has revealed that osteons are irregular cylindrical structures that vary in cross-sectional shape and
anastomose extensively with one another, forming a complex network structure (Cohen and Harris, 1958; Tappen,
1977; Stout et al., 1999; Moshin et al., 2002). More recently, microCT imaging has enabled the direct visualisation of the resorption cavity shape and of the network structure of Haversian canals in three spatial dimensions (Britz
et al., 2009; Cooper et al., 2006). In particular, Cooper
et al. (2006) found that the morphology of the BMU spaces
was varied, and included unidirectional, bi-direction and
branched BMU morphologies. More specifically, the cutting cones of the BMUs imaged by Cooper et al. (2006)
showed a generally ellipsoidal shape, but often the exact
shape of the cutting cone is variable. In some image reconstructions shown in (Cooper et al., 2006), the surface of the
cutting cone is noticeably rough. Our computational model
enables us to hypothesise processes by which the network
structure of osteons might emerge or that influence the size
and shape of the resorption cavity.
After many decades of dedicated research by bone biologists, there now appears to be sufficient quantitative data
and observations to develop a computational model describing the evolution of the cutting cone in a single BMU in
cortical bone. Our aim in this paper is to begin the process
of integrating and assessing some of the reported data and
observations identified above, and in doing so, start to develop a ‘dynamic picture’ of osteoclast resorption and cutting cone evolution at the front of a moving cortical BMU.
Computational models of bone remodelling by BMUs
have been proposed previously. For example, in (Buenzli
et al., 2011; Ryser et al., 2009), the spatio-temporal organisation of bone cells within a single BMU was investigated.
Other works have focused on the external mechanical conditions of BMUs (van Oers et al., 2008a,b; Burger et al.,
2003; García-Aznar et al., 2005). Our model is similar to
the discrete model of van Oers et al. (2008a,b), which is
based on a cellular Potts model (Glazier and Graner, 1993).
In (van Oers et al., 2008b), a relationship between osteon
diameter and strain is investigated, but the generation and
maintenance of osteoclasts is solely determined by the local strain energy density at the bone surface. Furthermore,
that relationship is not explained in terms of properties of
the constituents of a BMU (such as number and activity of
osteoclasts). Several biological processes influence osteoclastogenesis in a cortical BMU. To our knowledge, our
model is the first to address how important biological processes that support osteoclastic resorption in cortical bone
(in particular, the growth of a blood vessel and osteoclastic nuclei renewal) influence the shape of a BMU’s cutting
cone, osteon diameter and a BMU’s progression rate.

2

Model description

We first summarise current biological knowledge of osteoclastic resorption in cortical BMUs before outlining the
main features of the model.
Osteoclasts are known to resorb bone matrix to form the
so-called ‘cutting cone’ at the front of a cortical BMU (Martin et al., 1998; Parfitt, 1994). To dissolve the bone matrix,

While the computational model developed here only in2

an osteoclast first attaches to the bone surface, forming a
‘sealing zone’ that encircles a small portion of the bone surface that will be resorbed (Hall, 1991; Väänänen and Zhao,
2008). Within this sealed portion of the bone surface, hydrogen ions and proteases released through the osteoclast’s
‘ruffled border’ dissolves both the mineral and collageneous
components of the bone matrix. In vitro studies suggest
that complete dissolution of the collageneous component
of the bone matrix may require exposure to the extracellular microenvironment, where several proteases (such as
MMPs) secreted by other cells in the BMU are known to be
able to degrade this organic component (Everts et al., 2002;
Väänänen and Zhao, 2008). While osteoclasts can also degrade this organic component through the production of
cathepsins (Baron et al., 1993), they are observed in vitro to
physically detach from the bone surface before continuing
their resorption at more highly mineralised bone locations
(Hall, 1991; Chambers et al., 1985; Matsuoka et al., 1998;
Schilling et al., 2006). It is not known whether this behaviour occurs in vivo (Martin, 2002; Väänänen and Zhao,
2008). The resorption process is sustained by the growth of
a blood vessel, which provides the local BMU microenvironment with both nutrients and precursor cells (in particular
precursor osteoclasts) (Parfitt, 1998). The maturation of
osteoclasts in a BMU is the result of a cascade of events that
take place around the tip of the blood vessel. This cascade
of events involves several cell types and molecules (such
as pre-osteoblasts, MCSF, and RANKL, see e.g. (Roodman,
1999; Martin, 2004)) and includes the fusion of mononucleated pre-osteoclasts. This leads to the generation of mature, multinucleated osteoclasts at the front of the BMU
(Parfitt, 1998). Multinucleated osteoclasts, however, are
believed to be dynamic entities. Autoradiographic studies of cell migration in cortical BMUs have revealed that
thymidine-labelled nuclei from osteoclast precursor cells
fuse randomly with existing osteoclasts (Jaworski et al.,
1981; Miller, 1981; Parfitt, 1994; Bronckers et al., 1996;
Fukushima et al., 1991). This process leads to the continual renewal of the nuclei within osteoclasts at the front of
BMUs, which is believed to account for an increase in the
osteoclasts’ lifespan and/or the persistence of their resorptive activity.

Figure 1 – Schematic representation of a BMU and two-dimensional lattice. Active osteoclasts are resorbing bone matrix at the front of a BMU.
They are generated through the fusion of mononuclear precursor cells provided by a blood vessel. In our two dimensional square lattice model, each
lattice site denotes either bone (gray), partially resorbed bone (purple),
resorbed but momentarily inaccessible bone (blue), an active osteoclast
(green), a migrating mature osteoclast (yellow), blood vessel components
(red), or loose connective tissue stroma (black).

(ii) our purpose is to simulate the individual and collective
behaviours of osteoclasts, and to understand how these behaviours in turn influence bone resorption within a single
BMU. The consideration of individual osteoclasts in this
agent-based approach allows us to represent complex biochemical mechanisms (such as osteoclast–bone adhesion)
directly at the level of individual cells: the biochemical
mechanisms are represented mathematically as ‘evolution
rules’ for the migration behaviour and resorption activity
of the osteoclasts. To simplify the mathematical representation, we further assume that space is discretised: the individual osteoclasts in the BMU are assumed to migrate on
a two-dimensional lattice (see Figure 1). The lattice step
size σ = 40 µm is taken to correspond to the average size
of multinucleated osteoclasts.
The biological processes of osteoclastic resorption summarised above are captured in our model by the following
model features. A flow chart of these model features is
shown in Figure 2:

In this paper, we consider a two-dimensional slice of cortical bone being resorbed by osteoclasts, as would be seen
in a thin longitudinal section running through the centreline of a cortical BMU (Figure 1). To investigate this system,
we take a modelling approach in which each osteoclast is
tracked individually and the position and activity of the osteoclasts (resorbing or not) is updated at regular time intervals. This type of modelling approach is known as ‘agentbased modelling’, and has been widely used in recent years
for computational models of tumours and other biological
systems (Mansury et al., 2002; Walker et al., 2004; Zhang
et al., 2009; Anderson et al., 2006; Gerlee and Anderson,
2007; Jeon et al., 2010). It differs from the more commonly
used continuous approaches that use ordinary or partial differential equations, in that discrete cells are represented,
rather than “smeared” quantities. The choice of this modelling approach is made here because: (i) a BMU contains
only few osteoclasts confined within a very small volume;

• Fully mature osteoclasts are assumed to be generated
at a rate ηOC (in day−1 ) from the tip of a blood vessel
(BV) which grows towards the front of the BMU at a
maximum rate vBV (in µm/day) (Figure 2, A);
• An osteoclast can be in either of two states: ‘migrating’
(not resorbing) or ‘active’ (resorbing). We denote a
migrating osteoclast by OCm and an active osteoclast
by OCa . An osteoclast becomes active as soon as it
reaches a bone surface. It remains active and immotile
until all of its surrounding bone sites are resorbed, at
which point it becomes a migrating osteoclast again
(Figure 2, B);
• Dissolution of the bone matrix by an OCa is represented by a kinetic dissolution law that gradually reduces bone density in time. Bone matrix at a lattice
3

derstanding of the specific influence of each of these events
on the dynamics of bone resorption in the BMU. However,
some of these influences can be studied using our model.
To this end, we develop an understanding of the model by
including model features incrementally. We denote this incremental introduction of model features by Simulation I,
Simulation II and Simulation III, in increasing order of complexity. The model features taken into account in each of
these simulations are highlighted in Figure 2.1
A key model output that is used to narrow down a physiologically realistic parameter space is the shape and extent
of the resorption cavity after a simulation of 30 days. This
choice of the duration of the simulation enables the system
to evolve from its initial conditions and to reach a pseudo
steady state at the front of the BMU, where the shape of
the cutting cone as well as the relative spatial distribution
of cells is no longer changing over time on average. This
simulation duration is also well within the average lifespan of a BMU, which is estimated to be about 6–12 months
(Parfitt, 1994).

Figure 2 – Flow chart of the model, where OCm denotes a mature, migrating osteoclast, OCa denotes an actively resorbing osteoclast, and BV stands
for supply from a blood vessel. The encircled regions A–F correspond to
the model features introduced in Section 2. In Section 3, Simulation I–III
include incrementally more model features as shown.

site that has been resorbed by more than 90% is assumed to become a cavity site filled with connective
tissue stroma. However, such a site is deemed inaccessible to OCm s for a time period τinhib to allow for
possible extracellular collagen digestion (Figure 2, C);

3.1

• The migration of OCm s through the connective tissue
stroma is modelled as a ‘biased random walk’. At
each time increment, the OCm chooses a lattice site
to migrate to with a probability that depends on the
presence of other components in its vicinity. The interaction of the OCm with these components is described by ‘interaction energies’. For example, EOC−OC
denotes an osteoclast–osteoclast adhesion energy, and
EOC−BONE denotes an osteoclast–bone adhesion energy.
The lower the total energy at a neighbouring lattice
site, the higher the probability of migrating towards
this site (Figure 2, D);

Simulation I has the fewest model features (Figure 2). In
Simulation I, osteoclasts are neither dynamically generated
nor eliminated. The total number of osteoclasts is fixed
and their lifespan is assumed to be infinite (no blood vessel nor nuclei renewal mechanism is considered for this
study). While this simulation is clearly not physiological, it
allows us to develop an understanding of how osteoclast–
osteoclast interaction, osteoclast–bone adhesion and extracellular collagen digestion (via the parameters EOC−OC ,
EOC−BONE and τinhib , respectively) influence the dynamics of
bone resorption, without the additional complexity of birth
and death processes of the osteoclasts. The initial configuration for the simulation consists of nine osteoclasts placed
at the nine central sites of the cavity shown in Figure 11(a).
Interestingly, a unidirectional resorption pattern (resulting in an elongated cavity) spontaneously emerges for
an osteoclast–osteoclast adhesion much stronger than an
osteoclast–bone adhesion (EOC−OC  EOC−BONE < 0). However, one expects the physiological situation to be the reverse case, where osteoclast–bone adhesion is strong compared to an osteoclast–osteoclast interaction (EOC−BONE 
EOC−OC ≤ 0). Indeed, it is well established that mature
osteoclasts are found in the vicinity of bone surfaces and
can strongly adhere to bone through the formation of a
dense actin ring (the sealing zone) (Väänänen and Zhao,
2008). But mature osteoclasts do not seem to strongly adhere to one another through the expression of specific adhesion molecules after their formation, though there are
possibly some cadherin molecules on the mature osteoclast
surface (Helfrich et al., 2008; Civitelli et al., 2008). To
represent this fact, and because mature osteoclasts are not
usually found isolated in cortical BMUs, a small osteoclast–

• Osteoclasts that are newly generated are initially assigned a fixed lifespan τOC . To account for a lifespanincreasing nuclei renewal process in our simulations,
a migrating OCm can fuse with an existing OCa or OCm
(with different probabilities, depending on the ‘fusion
fusion
fusion
energies’ EOC
and EOC
, respectively). The
m −OCa
m −OCm
lifespan of the osteoclast resulting from this fusion is
increased by the remaining lifetime of the fusing OCm
(Figure 2, E);
• When the age of an osteoclast reaches its alloted lifespan (whether that lifespan has been increased by nuclei renewal or not), the cell is removed from the system (Figure 2, F).
The technical details of the model are discussed in Appendix A, and a full list of the model parameters is given
in Table 1. For each parameter, Table 1 also lists the range
of values investigated in Section 3, and a so-called ‘default’
value, which is assigned unless that parameter is explicitly
varied.

3

Simulation I

1
It is noted that Simulation I and Simulation II can be retrieved from
the full model (Simulation III) by considering extreme values for some
parameters. Specifically, Simulation II is obtained from Simulation III by
fusion
fusion
impeding nuclei renewal by fusion (EOC
= EOC
= ∞) and
m −OCm
m −OCa
Simulation I is obtained from Simulation II by assuming non-renewed osteoclasts (ηOC = 0, vOC = 0, τOC = ∞).

Simulation results

A multiplicity of physiological events takes place in the resorption cone of a BMU and it can be difficult to gain an un4

!"#$%&'&()*+,*+&-.&!/01/23&
&
Simulation I

-1
-2

EOC-OC [FT]

0

corner is larger than bone surface along a flat edge. Such
a diagonal bias introduces an unavoidable anisotropy from
a lattice model. However, this shows that the local curvature of the bone surface directly affects osteoclastic bone
resorption.
Our results from Simulation I suggest that the magnitude of osteoclast–bone adhesion energy EOC−BONE should
be chosen large compared to EOC−OC so that bone resorption is more persistent and to avoid osteoclasts being far
from a bone surface. As discussed above, these parameter
values are in fact expected physiologically, but importantly,
we observe that by themselves, they do not lead to a unidirectional progression of the resorption cavity. Rather, they
lead to directionless openings that grow larger over time. It
is apparent that the parameter τinhib (extracellular collagen
digestion period) needs to be fairly small, as a large value
strongly reduces the amount of bone resorption possible
(see Figure 3; τinhib = 5 days).

3.2

0
&

1
!inhib [day]

Simulation II

The absence of a preferred direction for the resorption of
bone in Simulation I is a clear indication that the model
requires additional processes to produce a ‘cutting cone’.
Such an outcome can be obtained by including the growth
of a blood vessel. This model feature can account for both
the renewal of the osteoclast population and the unidirectional progression of the BMU. Three new parameters are
introduced in Simulation II, namely: the maximal rate of
growth of the blood vessel (vBV ), the generation rate of osteoclasts (ηOC ) and the lifespan of osteoclasts (τOC ). The
initial configuration of the simulation is depicted in the appendix (Figure 11(b)). Experimentally, osteons have a diameter of the order of 200–350 µm and BMUs progress
through bone at a rate of 20–40 µm/day (Parfitt, 1983a,
1994; Robling et al., 2006). To retrieve such osteon diameters and BMU progression rates in our simulations, a combination of both values of vBV of 20–40 µm/day and small
values of τinhib needs to be chosen (see Figure 4(a)). For
such small values of τinhib , osteoclasts are not observed to
migrate away from a previous resorption site before starting to resorb again. This suggests that ‘detachment–delay–
reattachment’ behaviour of an osteoclast is very localised
within a cortical BMU (with no significant migration before
reattachment). We infer that extracellular collagen dissolution is unlikely to be a rate limiting step for resorption
within a cortical BMU.
Figure 4(b) shows the combined effect of the generation
rate of osteoclasts (ηOC ) and of the lifespan of osteoclasts
(τOC ) on the resorption cavity. These model parameters
affect both the average number of osteoclasts in the cavity (which is equal to ηOC τOC ) and the renewal rate of
this population (which is equal to 1/τOC ). The generation rate and lifespan of osteoclasts are often disrupted
in bone diseases (Manolagas, 2000), and they may also
slightly vary locally or in different bone sites, leading to
local inhomogeneities of osteon morphology or BMU cutting cone shape (see Section 4). Not surprisingly, osteon
diameter strongly depends on the number of osteoclasts
in the cavity: it increases as either ηOC or τOC (or both)

5

Figure 3 – Simulation I. Snapshots of the lattice at t = 30 days showing
&
the effect of osteoclast–osteoclast interaction (EOC−OC ) and extracellular
collagen digestion period (τinhib ). The portion of the lattice shown in
these snapshots is a rectangle of 40×56 sites, corresponding to 1600 µm×
2240 µm. (Colour code as in Figure 1.)

osteoclast interaction energy EOC−OC is selected (see Table 1). In our simulations, a relatively strong osteoclast–
bone adhesion energy EOC−BONE makes bone resorption
more persistent. At weaker values of EOC−BONE , the osteoclast spends most of its time migrating within the connective tissue stroma and may be found far from a bone surface.
Figure 3 shows the combined effect of osteoclast–
osteoclast interaction and extracellular digestion time on
the resorption cavity. Preventing osteoclast attachment for
a period τinhib for extracellular collagen digestion strongly
affects the behaviour of bone resorption. With increasing
values of τinhib , the osteoclast migrates for longer periods
of time. At smaller values of τinhib , several osteoclasts are
observed to resorb bone matrix side by side at the beginning. But they move apart from each other and independently resorb bone matrix at later times by branching out
from the original resorption cavity and go their separate
ways. Increasing the strength of osteoclast-osteoclast interaction EOC−OC slightly reduces the occurrence of branching.
Collagen digestion time τinhib strongly affects branching behaviour, but this parameter also strongly influences the efficacy of bone resorption, as can be seen in Figure 3 for
τinhib = 5 days.
From Figure 3, one also sees that bone resorption in our
model occurs preferentially in diagonal directions. Due to
the relatively strong osteoclast–bone adhesion, OCm s preferentially maximise contact with bone surfaces, leading to
diagonal movement on the lattice, since bone surface at a
5

!"#$%&''&()*+&),&!-./-01&

!"#$%&''&(!)*&+,&")*-&

&

(a)

&

(b)

Simulation II

8
2

4

!OC [day]

20
4

vBV [µm/day]

40

Simulation II

0
&

1
!inhib [day]

5

1.25
&

1.66
"OC [1/day]

2.5

Figure 4 – Simulation
II. Snapshots of a 1600 µm × 2240 µm portion of the lattice at t = 30
&
& days. (a) Effect of maximum rate of growth of the blood
vessel (vBV ) and
& extracellular collagen digestion period (τinhib ); (b) Effect of generation rate
& of osteoclasts (ηOC ) and lifespan of osteoclasts (τOC ).
(Colour code as in Figure 1.)

&&

increases in Figure 4(b). The renewal rate of the osteoclast population for a given number of osteoclasts only
marginally affects osteon diameter. However, this renewal
rate modifies the roughness of the cavity surface. In Figure 5, we reproduce four snapshots of the lattice from Figure 4, but organise them according to the average number
of osteoclasts and osteoclast population renewal rate. The
snapshots reproduced correspond to the snapshots of Figure 4 obtained for (ηOC , τOC ) = (1.25/day, 4 days), and
(2.5/day, 2 days), which both have an average number
of 5 osteoclasts but population renewal rates of 0.25/day
and 0.5/day, respectively, and the snapshots obtained for
(ηOC , τOC ) = (1.25/day, 8 days), and (2.5/day, 4 days),
which both have an average number of 10 osteoclasts and
population renewal rates of 0.125/day and 0.25/day, respectively. A smaller population renewal rate is seen to induce slightly more ragged cavities. Indeed, low renewal
rates allow the long-living osteoclasts to resorb for a long
time away from the front of the BMU. This leads to budding of resorption cavities (and thus rougher surfaces),
particularly as seen in the snapshots of the lattice with
τOC = 8 days in Figure 4.

model with experimental data, but to our knowledge, there
are no experimental studies investigating how roughness at
the cement line of osteons may vary in various bone diseases or drug treatments targetting osteoclasts.

3.3

Simulation III

The life history of osteoclasts (from their generation to
their apoptotic death) is a fundamental feature influencing bone resorption (Parfitt et al., 1996; Manolagas, 2000).
The lifespan and/or activity of osteoclasts is believed to
be dynamically influenced by the renewal of their nuclei.
However, it is not yet experimentally possible to follow the
paths of single osteoclasts in vivo, and so where and how
osteoclasts are degraded remains unclear (Parfitt et al.,
1996; Bronckers et al., 1996; Boyce et al., 2002; Burger
et al., 2003). To investigate the interplay between osteoclast removal and nuclei renewal, we include in Simulation III the possibility that OCa s renew their nuclei (and
thereby increase their lifetime) through fusion with OCm s
(Fukushima et al., 1991). In Simulation III, all the model
features presented in Section 2 now play a significant role,
except for extracellular collagen digestion period τinhib ,
which is set to 0 days, and for fusion between two OCm s,
which is ruled out (see Appendix A).
Figure 6 shows the probability distribution of the age
reached by osteoclasts in our model before their removal
from the BMU, whether by apoptotic death or by fusion
into an existing OCa . This probability distribution thus rep-

Our results from Simulation II are consistent with the
expectation that the number of osteoclasts in a BMU significantly affects the osteon diameter (Martin et al., 1990;
van Oers et al., 2008b; Britz et al., 2009). Our simulations suggest in addition that osteoclast population renewal
rate influences the roughness at the osteonal cement line.
It would be interesting to compare this prediction of our
6

!"#$%&'''&(!)*&+,&-.)*/0)*12&
&
Simulation III

4

0.25

2

5

ð OCs

0.125

!OC [day]

10

ð OCs

8

Simulation II

0.25
0.5
Pop. renewal @1dayD

-8

-4
0
fusion
E OC
[F
]
T
a "OC m

+"

&

Figure 7 – Simulation III. Snapshots of a 1600 µm × 2240 µm portion of
fusion
the lattice at t = 30 days. When EOC
= +∞, no fusion process
m −OCa
!
takes place and the snapshots from Simulation II (second column of Figure 4(b)) are reproduced. (Colour code as in Figure 1.)

Figure 5 – Simulation II. Four snapshots of the lattice from Figure 4 are
reproduced here in dependence upon average number of osteoclasts and
osteoclast population renewal rate (see text).

from the location where new OCm s are generated, making
fusion less likely (see Section 4 for further discussion).
Figure 7 shows that there is a striking difference in osteon morphology and osteon diameter between increasing
the lifespan of osteoclasts through τOC (the initial lifespan
of OCm s at their birth) or through nuclei renewal. Indeed,
while increasing τOC increases the average osteon diameter
as in Simulation II (see columns of Figure 7), the strength
fusion
of fusion affinity (EOC
) impacts the morphology of the
m −OCa
osteon more strongly than its diameter (see rows of Figure 7). This can also be appreciated in Figure 8, where the
fusion
influence of EOC
and τOC on the average osteon diamm −OCa
eter, on the cavity surface roughness, on the BMU progression rate, and on the mean resorption rate per osteoclast is
shown.2
From the snapshots of the lattice in Figure 7 at constant
τOC , nuclei renewal appears to support the emergence of
‘budding branches’ from the main resorption cavity. The
osteonal structures in humans and other animals is known
to branch and anastomose into a network structure (Cohen and Harris, 1958; Tappen, 1977; Stout et al., 1999;
Moshin et al., 2002; Cooper et al., 2006). In our simulations, these branches do not progress further as we do not
model branching of the central blood vessel, so osteoclasts
are not renewed in the buds.
An interesting observation from our simulation results is
that the BMU progression rate is a poor indicator of the
mean resorption rate per osteoclast (and vice-versa). Comparing Figures 8(c) and (d), one sees that the BMU progression rate is mainly independent of τOC (the initial lifespan
fusion
of OCm s at their birth) but depends on EOC
(the fusion
m −OCa

Figure 6 – Simulation III. Probability distribution of osteoclast age at the
time of their apoptotic death or their fusion into another osteoclast.

resents the likelihood for a nuclei renewal process to occur
in our simulations. In Simulation II, every osteoclast undergoes apoptosis at an age exactly equal to τOC = 2 days and
such a probability distribution is uniquely peaked at 2 days.
By contrast, in Simulation III the various peaks reflect modification of the lifespans upon nuclei renewal. Any peak before 2 days corresponds to OCm s that are removed by fusion
with an existing OCa . Any peak after 2 days corresponds
to OCa s whose nuclei have been renewed once or several
times. It is seen that the most probable fate of OCm s is to
fuse with an existing OCa shortly after their generation, at
0.2 days of age. Due to the observed decay in peak height
with age, the probability for an OCa of undergoing a nuclei
renewal process decreases with time in our model. This is
because long-lived osteoclasts gradually move further away

2
For the calculation of these quantities, the initial rectangular cavity,
still visible in the lower part of the snapshots in Figure 7, is discarded.

7

(a) Osteon diameter

(a)

(b) Cavity roughness

(c)

(d)

(b)

(c) Mean resorption rate/OC (d) BMU progression rate

Figure 9 – Comparison of simulation results with experimental images.
(a) Simulation II, with default parameter values; (b) Simulation III, with
the same parameter values but taking into account osteoclastic nuclei renewal; (c) Osteonal morphology for dogs, which closely resembles human osteons, redrawn from (Cohen and Harris, 1958); (d) BMU cutting
cone morphology and Haversian canal network for humans, redrawn from
(Cooper et al., 2006) (see original for colours).
Figure 8 – Simulation III. Some average resorption properties of the model
fusion
are shown in dependence upon fusion affinity (EOC
) and lifespan
m −OCa
of osteoclasts (τOC ). (a) Osteon diameter (cavity width, averaged over
rows of the lattice) [µm]; (b) Surface roughness (standard deviation of
osteon diameter) [µm]; (c) Mean resorption rate per osteoclast (number
of resorbed bone sites divided by the number of created osteoclasts and by
the duration of the simulation) [day−1 ]; (d) BMU progression rate (cavity
length averaged over columns of the lattice divided by duration of the
simulation) [µm/day].

tures of osteons and BMUs are revealed by these experimental techniques, no information on the underlying cellular processes coordinating osteoclast movement and resorption behaviour is obtained. But it is the behaviour of
osteoclasts and their interaction with each other and the
bone matrix that create these complex network structures.
In this paper, we have developed a novel computational
model to gain a deeper understanding about the way osteoclast properties and cell-cell and cell-bone interactions
can lead to different structural features of resorption cavities.
We found that osteoclast–bone adhesion has to be strong
to prevent osteoclasts from migrating far from the bone surface and that extracellular collagen digestion time (τOC ) is
unlikely to be a rate limiting step in osteoclastic bone resorption. In our model, a critical parameter determining
unidirectionality of osteons is the growth direction of the
blood vessel.
In Figure 9, we compare osteonal shapes obtained from
Simulation II and Simulation III with experimental data
from Cohen and Harris (1958) and Cooper et al. (2006).
Qualitatively our simulation results resemble the experimentally observed osteonal structures. For a suitable choice
of model parameters osteonal diameters are in the range
of experimentally observed diameters, i.e. ≈ 200–350 µm
(Parfitt, 1983a; Robling et al., 2006). The osteon diameter
is found to be strongly dependent on the average number of
osteoclasts in the resorption cavity. Furthermore, we found
that the osteoclast population renewal rate is related to the
roughness of the osteon boundary at the cement line. Looking carefully at Figure 9(c) one can see that the cement
line is ragged, reflecting nonuniformity in the osteoclast resorption process, as in Figures 9(a) and (b) for our model.
Figure 9(d) clearly shows the complex network stucture of
Haversian systems (grey) and a branching secondary os-

energy), while the reverse is true of the mean resorption
rate per osteoclast. These results show that the nuclei renewal process plays an important role in how fast a BMU
may resorb a path through bone, indicating that the trajectories of the individual osteoclasts within the resorption
cone are influenced by the nuclei renewal process.
Our results from Simulation III suggest that an increase
in lifespan of osteoclasts by nuclei renewal could possibly
lead to different typical trajectories of the osteoclasts in the
cutting cone of the BMU, and so may influence the occurrence of branching. This nuclei renewal process has, to our
knowledge, not been considered in a computational model
previously. The systematic study of cavity properties as well
as the age probability distribution of the osteoclasts may
provide ways to deduce how often nuclei renewal in an osteoclast occurs before it undergoes apoptosis.

4

Discussion

Osteoclast resorption behaviour in cortical BMUs is complex. Histological serial sectioning and microCT technology have revealed branching osteon structures, and have
identified the non-uniformity between individual osteons
and BMUs (Cohen and Harris, 1958; Tappen, 1977; Stout
et al., 1999; Moshin et al., 2002; Cooper et al., 2006). Osteons and BMU cutting cones may have different diameters,
morphologies, and roughnesses. While these structural fea8

(a) Simulation II

teon (red). The osteoclast nuclei renewal process suggested
in our model seems to support the occurrence of branching,
as can be seen by comparing Figures 9(a) and (b). Figures 9(a) and (b) are obtained with the same parameter
values except that nuclei renewal is taken into account in
Figure 9(b). We do not account for branching of the blood
vessel, so buds of the cavity do not evolve into progressing
branches. Still, osteoclast nuclei renewal is seen to have a
distinctive effect on osteonal morphology, which is partly
due to osteoclasts living longer but also due to osteoclasts
taking different trajectories within the BMU cavity. We now
consider osteoclast trajectories within a BMU.
Nuclei renewal in Simulation III occurs through a fusion
process, but fusion only takes place if two osteoclasts are
found in the same region of space. This mechanism for
lifespan extension is thus conditional and local. An osteoclast’s nuclei are more likely to be renewed in the vicinity
of the tip of the blood vessel, where new OCm s are generated. But an osteoclast’s nuclei may also be renewed further away from the osteoclast source, in OCa s that would
otherwise undergo apoptosis. It can thus be expected that
a nuclei renewal mechanism may influence, on average,
the typical trajectory of osteoclasts within the BMU cutting
cone.
The question of the specific trajectories taken by osteoclasts within a BMU cutting cone has been raised by Burger
et al. (2003). Burger et al. (2003) hypothesised that osteoclasts may follow a ‘treadmill’ movement pattern (i.e. following a trajectory from the tip of the blood vessel, where
they are formed, to the front of the BMU, where they mature, and down the sides of the cavity). In Figure 10, we
show the relative trajectories in the BMU taken by all osteoclasts created during 30 days in Simulation II and Simulation III.3 These trajectories are shown from the point of
view of an observer moving with the tip of the blood vessel,
and so represent the trajectories of the osteoclasts within
the cutting cone. In Figure 10, each osteoclast is assigned
a different symbol and a slight offset within a lattice site to
be able to distinguish overlapping paths. In both models,
osteoclasts are generated in the middle and progressively
move towards the sides of the cavity. Most osteoclasts are
found to stay within a layer approximately two lattice sites
thick against the cavity wall near the front of the BMU.
However, it is seen that the nuclei renewal mechanism introduced in Simulation III modifies the movement pattern
of the osteoclasts compared to Simulation II. The increase
in lifespan due to nuclei renewal allows osteoclasts to progressively come further towards the back of the BMU in
Simulation III, suggestive of the ‘treadmill’ movement pattern referred to by Burger et al. (2003).

5

(b) Simulation III

BV

BV

Figure 10 – Typical relative trajectories of individual osteoclasts in a reference frame co-moving with the tip of the blood vessel. (a) Simulation II;
and (b) Simulation III. The site occupied by the tip of the blood vessel is
shown as well as red arrow lines representing the ‘treadmill’ movement
pattern of osteoclasts.

and the effect of the osteoclasts’ life history on their collective resorption behaviour is a challenge that computational modelling is able to shed some light on. Our model
shows the importance of osteoclast–bone adhesion and of
the growth of a blood vessel. Our model suggest that the
‘clean-up’ of the resorption site by extracellular components
following resorption by an osteoclast is unlikely to be rate
limiting. The model is able to generate cavity shapes that
closely resemble those observed experimentally, and produces osteoclast trajectories within the BMU that are consistent with a previous hypothesis by Burger et al. (2003).
Clearly, our simulations already capture essential features
of osteoclast resorption behaviour.
Nevertheless, future models can be improved. For example, representing the three dimensional geometry of the
BMU cavity would be expected to lead to more realistic simulations of osteoclast movement within the BMU cavity. In
our current model, the growth of the blood vessel influences strongly resorption cavity shape, but it is likely that
resorption cavity shape in turn influences the growth of the
blood vessel, in a feedback interaction. And finally, the
BMU progresses through a stress field in bone matrix, encountering osteocytes and various signalling molecules. Including these features in future models is expected to help
explain BMU initiation, the diversity of resorption cavity
shapes, changes in direction, branching and BMU termination.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Colin R. Dunstan for helpful discussions and comments in the preparation of the
manuscript, the late Gregory R. Mundy for his insightful
discussions, as well as one of the anonymous reviewers for
his/her remarks on osteoclast biology. Support by the Australian Research Council in the framework of the project
Bone regulation - cell interactions to disease (project number
DP0879466, PP), by the National Cancer Institute (grant
number U54CA113007, PTC), and by the National Science
Foundation (grant number EPS-0919436, PTC) is gratefully
acknowledged.

Conclusions

Our novel computational approach has allowed the investigation of resorption within a single BMU. In particular, the
study of the movement pattern of osteoclasts in the BMU
3
We have checked that these trajectories are typical and representative for both Simulation II and Simulation III by running the simulations
several times with different ‘random seeds’.

9

Appendix A

Model description

(a) Simulation I

(b) Simulation II and III

The technical details of the model description outlined in
Section 2 are given below.
Lattice composition. The region around the cutting cone
of a cortical BMU is known to be mainly composed of
mineralised bone matrix, active osteoclasts, bone precursor cells, a blood vessel, and loose connective tissue stroma
filling the space between these components (Parfitt, 1998;
Martin et al., 1998). Accordingly, each lattice site of the
model carries one of the following: (i) mineralised bone
matrix, (ii) an osteoclast, (iii) components of a blood vessel, or (iv) loose connective tissue stroma (see Figure 1).
Bone precursor cells are not considered explicitly in the
present model, but their effect for osteoclastogenesis is implicitly accounted for by the generation of new osteoclasts
near the tip of a blood vessel.

E(r)
E1(r)

r

Figure 11 – (a) Initial configuration for Simulation I; (b) initial configuration for Simulation II and Simulation III. In (a), the sites numbered 0–8
denote the nine neighbouring lattice sites of the so-called ‘Moore neighbourhood’ of the OCm (in yellow) located at position r on the lattice.
These nine lattice sites correspond to the possible locations where the OCm
can migrate to during a time increment, including no movement (resting
phase). The total energies E(r ) at r , and E1 (r ) at the Moore neighbour
‘1’, are also mentioned.

Blood vessel. The blood vessel (BV) in a cortical BMU
provides the local BMU microenvironment with both nutrients and precursor cells (in particular precursor osteoclasts) that are necessary to sustain the remodelling process (Parfitt, 1998). The blood vessel is assumed in the
model to occupy a width of one lattice site and to grow
towards the front of the BMU at a maximum rate vBV (in
µm/day) provided it has enough cavity space to do so. A
minimal vertical distance of 280 µm (corresponding to 7
lattice sites) between the tip of the blood vessel and the
bone surface (Parfitt, 1998) is always enforced by slowing
this rate of growth if necessary.

pathway (Roodman, 1999; Martin, 2004). In our model,
it is considered that a mature osteoclast becomes ‘active’
as soon as it is adjacent to or diagonal with a bone lattice
site (i.e., as soon as it is in the so-called ‘Moore neighbourhood’ of a bone lattice site, see Figure 11(a)). An active
osteoclast OCa is assumed to stay active until all the bone
sites in its Moore neighbourhood are resorbed, after which
the OCa becomes a migrating OCm again (Fukushima et al.,
1991).

Maturation and activation of osteoclasts. The maturation of osteoclasts in a BMU is the result of a cascade of
events that take place around the tip of the blood vessel. This cascade of events is known to involve several cell
types and molecules (such as pre-osteoblasts, MCSF and
RANKL etc., see (Roodman, 1999; Martin, 2004)). While
these cell types and molecules are not explicitly considered
in the present model, we assume that their net effect is
to generate new mature osteoclasts at a rate ηOC (in units
of day−1 ) at a distance of about 240 µm or 6 lattice sites
ahead of the tip of the blood vessel.4 These mature osteoclasts (which we denote by OCm s) are assumed to be fully
differentiated: they represent multinucleated cells capable
of migrating through the connective tissue stroma and of
attaching to the bone surface for its resorption. Mature
osteoclasts that are attached to the bone surface and are
actively resorbing the bone matrix are referred to as active
osteoclasts (which we denote by OCa s). The attachment of
an osteoclast to the bone surface and its activation is in
reality a complex process that requires several signalling
pathways to be activated, in particular the RANK-RANKL

Migration behaviour of osteoclasts—evolution rules.
Several mathematical approaches exist in the literature
to represent the migration of cells in their microenvironment (Noble, 1987; Schweitzer, 2003; Peruani and Morelli,
2007; Othmer et al., 1988). Here, we represent the migration of OCm s through connective tissue stroma as a biased
random walk (van Kampen, 1998; Schweitzer, 2003; Othmer and Stevens, 1997). The migration behaviour of an
OCm is specified in the model by so-called ‘evolution rules’.
The evolution rules determine towards which neighbouring
site the OCm will migrate during the next time increment.
This site is chosen randomly in the Moore neighbourhood
of the OCm with unequal probabilities that depend on the
lattice composition in the OCm ’s surroundings. The immediate surroundings of an osteoclast predominantly determine the cell’s migration through the extracellular connective tissue stroma, or the cell’s adhesion to other cells or the
bone surface, via a number of local biochemical signals mediated by enzymes, cytokines, cell adhesion molecules etc.
However, to an individual cell, these biochemical signals
have a fluctuating character. Fluctuations are due to smallscale inhomogeneities in the connective tissue, or to fluctuations in signalling pathways or in biochemical reactions
occurring at multiple levels; from the molecular level (e.g.
thermal fluctuations) to the cellular level (e.g. membrane
fluctuations) to the organism level (e.g. food intake and
other exogeneous fluctuations) (Schienbein et al., 1994;
Mombach and Glazier, 1996). The probabilistic character

4
The exact position at which newly-generated OCm s are placed in the
model depends on whether a lattice site is free of other osteoclasts. Specifically, this position is chosen to be in a range of 160–240 µm ahead of the
tip of the blood vessel (Parfitt, 1998), corresponding to 4–6 lattice sites.
New OCm s are thus placed at a distance of 40–120 µm (1–3 lattice sites)
from the front of the cavity surface. In all the simulations performed,
this range always allowed the positioning of new OCm s on osteoclast-free
stromal sites, ensuring a constant generation rate ηOC at all times.

10

of the migration behaviour of the OCm s precisely accounts
for such fluctuations in local biochemical signals. The total interaction energy E(r ) between an OCm located at position r on the lattice and entities located in the Moore
neighbourhood of the OCm determines the strength of the
biases introduced in the random walk.

neighbour index and the total energy is the sum:
E(r ) =

exp(−Ei (r )/F T )
8
P

,

N jOC E OC−OC
+ N jBONE E OC−BONE
j
j

j=0

o
+ N jBV E OC−BV
,
j

In (Beysens et al., 2000; Drasdo and Hoehme, 2005;
Block et al., 2007), the strength of the above-mentioned
background of metabolic fluctuations is quantified by the
so-called ‘metabolic energy’ F T . Depending on the strength
of the metabolic energy F T relative to the total interaction
energy E(r ), the migration behaviour of the OCm is given
more or less randomness, much in the same way that thermal energy gives more or less random fluctuations in ‘Brownian motion’ of atoms or molecules at the molecular level.
The probability for an OCm at r to migrate to its Moore
neighbour i (Figure 11(a)) is assumed to be given by
Pi (r ) =

8 n
X

(2)

where N jα = NJα (r ) is equal to 1 if the Moore neighbour j
is occupied by the entity α, and equal to 0 otherwise (α =
OC, BONE, BV). We define E OC−OC
, E OC−BONE
and E OC−BV
j
j
j
by

fusion
j = 0,
 EOC−OC ,
OC−OC
Ej
(3)
= EOC−OC < 0,
∀ j = 1, ..., 8,

0
j 6∈ Moore neighbour,

j = 0,
+∞,
E OC−BONE
=
E
<
0,
∀
j = 1, ..., 8,
j
 OC−BONE
0
j 6∈ Moore neighbour,

(1)

(4)

exp(−E j (r )/F T )

j=0

¨
E OC−BV
=
j

where Ei (r ) denotes the total energy at the Moore neighbour i. The migration scheme (1) is such that the cell is
more likely to migrate towards neighbouring lattice sites i
at which the OCm ’s total energy Ei (r ) is minimum. The
P8
denominator ensures that i=0 Pi (r ) = 1. If the metabolic
energy is high (F T  |Ei (r )|), biases in the probabilities
Pi (r ) are reduced, leading to more erratic migration. If the
metabolic energy is low (F T  |Ei (r )|, biases in the probabilities Pi (r ) are accentuated, leading to more persistent
migration towards the local minimum of energy.

+∞,
0,

j = 0,
∀ j 6= 0,

(5)

where j = 0, ..., 8 indexes the Moore neighbours of the
OCm . In Eq. 3–5, the energy value at j = 0 represents an
‘exclusion energy’. If infinite, this exclusion energy corresponds to a so-called ‘hard-core repulsion’. If finite, the
OCm may coexist with another entity on the same lattice
site. Energy values at j = 1, ..., 8 determine short-range
interaction between the OCm and an entity on a neighbouring site. These energy values determine the adhesion properties of the OCm with its neighbouring entities. Consequently:

Schemes similar to Eq. (1) have been previously used for
cellular automata in the literature (see, e.g., (Block et al.,
2007; Ghaemi and Shahrokhi, 2006)). The scheme (1)
essentially differs from the traditional Glauber dynamical
scheme and the Metropolis dynamical scheme (Glauber,
1963) in that the system does not evolve towards equilibrium of the metabolic energy F T (corresponding to thermal
equilibrium if F T = kB T ).5 This is not contradictory, as a
cortical BMU is a nonequilibrium entity, requiring a continual source of new cells and metabolic energy to maintain
itself.

fusion
• Eq. (3) specifies that if EOC−OC
is finite (< +∞), an
OCm may migrate onto a site previously occupied by
another osteoclast, in which case fusion with this existing osteoclast is assumed to take place (see also ‘nuclei renewal’ below). Because EOC−OC is negative, an
osteoclast–osteoclast adhesion is assumed;

• Eq. (4) specifies that an OCm cannot occupy the same
lattice site as bone. Because EOC−BONE is negative, an
osteoclast–bone adhesion is assumed;6
• Eq. (5) specifies that an OCm cannot occupy the same
lattice site as blood vessel components, and that an
OCm shows no particular preference to adhere to blood
vessel components.

Interaction energies. The total energy E(r ) of an OCm at
r on the lattice is the sum of the interaction energy between
the OCm and other osteoclasts, the interaction energy between the OCm and bone, and the interaction energy between the OCm and blood vessel components. We denote
these interaction energies by E OC−OC
, E OC−BONE
and E OC−BV
,
j
j
j
respectively. The subscript j indicates the relative position
of the entity that the OCm interacts with. The range of
these interaction energies is assumed to be restricted to the
Moore neighbourhood of the OCm , so j represents a Moore

The concept of ‘interaction energies’ is a high-level simplification for complex molecular processes, but it allows
to integrate the underlying biochemical signals and resultant cell properties into a single concept. In (Beysens et al.,
6
The assumption that the interaction with an orthogonal site ( j =
2, 4, 6, 8) has the same strength as that with a diagonal site ( j = 1, 3, 5, 7)
in Eqs. (3) and (4) implicitly introduces a lattice anisotropy. Such lattice anisotropies are unavoidable in any regular lattice (Markus and Hess,
1990; Drasdo, 2005; Nishiyama and Tokihiro, 2010). Still, the Moore
neighbourhood is expected to limit lattice artefacts compared to the von
Neumann neighbourhood (Poplawski et al., 2007) and it allows in our
model to maximise the interaction of an osteoclast with bone sites.

5
Indeed, the scheme (1) does not satisfy detailed balance of the corresponding Master equation with Boltzmann-like stationary distribution
(van Kampen, 1998).

11

2000; Drasdo and Hoehme, 2005; Block et al., 2007), it is
estimated that such biochemically-induced interaction energies are typically of the order 1 F T –10 F T . In this paper,
all energies are measured in units of the metabolic energy
F T and their physiological range is assumed to be within
0 F T –10 F T .7

When the age of an osteoclast reaches its alloted lifespan (whether that lifespan has been increased by nuclei
renewal or not), the cell is assumed to undergo apoptosis
irrespective from its activity state (migrating or resorbing)
and it is removed from the system. We assume that the
renewal of an osteoclast’s nuclei does not influence that
osteoclast’s activity state (Miller, 1981; Fukushima et al.,
1991).

Migration behaviour examples. We provide two examples of the migration behaviour of an OCm in response to
its surrounding. (i) When an OCm ’s microenvironment is
composed of connective tissue stroma only, all neighbouring lattice sites have the same total interaction energy and
the probability to migrate to any of those sites is equal: the
OCm ’s migration resembles a so-called ‘random walk’ (van
Kampen, 1998; Schweitzer, 2003; Othmer and Stevens,
1997) and results in an isotropic diffusive motion for the
OCm , with an effective diffusion coefficient DOC (see below). (ii) For the situation depicted in Figure 11(a), the
OCm located on the lattice site ‘0’ is more likely to migrate
to even-numbered sites than to odd-numbered sites. Indeed, on even-numbered sites, the presence of a neighbouring bone site lowers the energy due to a negative
osteoclast–bone adhesion energy EOC−BONE .

Bone matrix dissolution. An OCa resorbs a single neighbouring bone site at a time, in such a way that the density
of this bone site decreases exponentially with time:
dm(t)
dt

or

m(t + ∆t) = m(t)e−γ∆t ,

(7)

where m(t) ∈ [0, 1] denotes the relative bone density (normalised by fully-mineralised bone density) and γ = 10/day
is the dissolution rate. The kinetic law (7) for dissolution,
which prescribes a rate of bone density loss proportional to
bone density, is motivated by chemical bone dissolution kinetics, where the efficiency of the dissolution changes with
the mineral component composition and density (Boyde
and Jones, 1991; Grynpas and Cheng, 1988; Huang et al.,
2006). Bone matrix with density lower than a critical bone
density value m∗ = 0.1 is assumed to become a cavity site
filled with connective tissue stroma.
To account for a possible rate-limiting extracellular collagen digestion, we introduce in our model a hypothetical
inhibition period τinhib during which a newly exposed bone
surface (due to resorption) is inaccessible to OCm s. This is
achieved within the scheme (1) by tagging newly-resorbed
sites momentarily (before they become stromal sites) as
“quiescent” bone sites: an OCm in the proximity of such
a site is prevented to migrate through it and is prevented
to become activated into an OCa , unless other bone sites
are in the OCm ’s neighbourhood.

Osteoclast lifespan: nuclei renewal, cell apoptosis. In
our model, OCm s that are newly generated near the tip of
the blood vessel are initially assigned a fixed lifespan τOC .
To account for a lifespan-increasing nuclei renewal process
in our simulations, we consider that migrating OCm s can
fuse with existing OCa s or OCm s with different probabilifusion
fusion
ties EOC
and EOC
, respectively (see Eq. (3)). The
m −OCa
m −OCm
lifespan of the osteoclast resulting from this fusion is increased by the remaining lifetime of the fusing OCm , and
the latter OCm is removed from the system. This fusion
process is assumed to refresh at once the nuclei of the resulting osteoclast. The resulting osteoclast is not assumed
to grow any bigger as a result of nuclei fusion. It is implicitly assumed that older nuclei of the cell are degraded
and removed when new nuclei are added. This fusion algorithm between two multinucleated cells can be interpreted
to represent multiple fusions by mononuclear cells jointly
with individual nuclei degradation.
fusion
Depending on whether the fusion energy EOC−OC
is
greater or lesser than the adhesion energy EOC−OC , fusion or adhesion is preferentially selected by the stochastic scheme (1)–(3). According to the observations by
Fukushima et al. (1991), we assume that an OCm and
an OCa should preferentially fuse, while two OCm s should
preferentially not fuse. We thus consider that
fusion
fusion
EOC
 EOC−OC  EOC
,
m −OCa
m −OCm

= −γm(t),

Initial conditions and simulation parameters. The initial lattice configurations used in Simulation I, Simulation II and Simulation III are shown in Figure 11. The
evolution of the system is simulated for 30 days with time
increments of ∆t = 0.1 day. At each time increment, all
osteoclasts are selected in random order and an update of
their state and position is performed according to the flow
chart in Figure 2 (i.e., asynchronous update). The dissolution of bone sites by the OCa s is implemented in this selected order too. The possible growth of the blood vessel as
well as the generation of new OCm s is performed last.
Finally, it is noted that the time increment ∆t cannot be
chosen arbitrarily. Indeed, ∆t and the lattice step size σ
determine the diffusion coefficient DOC for the pure random walk (in stromal tissue only) of the OCm s. With
the Moore neighbourhood, one has DOC = σ2 /(3∆t) ≈
6.2 · 10−10 cm2 /s.8

(6)

fusion
and take EOC
= +∞ (no fusion between two OCm s).
m −OCm
Note that when an OCm has several nearby osteoclasts that
it could fuse with, the algorithm selects preferentially the
ones that are active and next to the maximum number of
bone sites. In case of osteoclasts with identical properties,
the probability to fuse with any one of them is equal.

8
For random walks in two dimensions, the mean square displacement is 〈R2 (t)〉 = 4DOC t, where DOC is the diffusion coefficient. This
mean square displacement can also be formulated as the product of
the mean number of time steps 〈k〉 required to observe a jump with
nonzero length and the mean square displacement 〈`2 〉 during such a
jump. Considering that the 2D Moore neighbourhood includes the pos-

7
This narrow range of values restricts the allowable parameter space
substantially.

12

In Table 1 we list all the parameters of the model along
with the range of values investigated in Section 3, and a socalled ‘default’ value, which is assigned unless that parameter is explicitly varied. These ranges of values implicitly
exclude regions of the parameter space that were either not
physiological, or that were leading to physiologically unrealistic results (e.g. an abnormally-large resorption cavity
or a too slow BMU progression rate). Default values are
shown in bold, and do lead to realistic resorption cavity
geometries (see Section 4).

sibility of resting, jumps of nonzero length only occur 8/9th of the time,
so 〈k〉 = (8/9)t/∆t. Thep
average length of a jump with nonzero length
is 〈`2 〉 = 81 [4 · σ2 + 4 · (σ 2)2 ] = (3/2)σ2 . Thus, DOC = 〈R2 (t)〉/(4t) =

(1/4) · (3/2)σ2 · (8/9)/∆t = σ2 /(3∆t).

13

Table 1 – List of model parameters

Parameters
σ
DOC
EOC−OC
EOC−BONE

Description
lattice step size
diffusion coefficient of an osteoclast (pure random walk)
osteoclast–osteoclast adhesion energy
osteoclast–bone adhesion energy

Values (default)
40 µm
0.62 × 10−10 cm2 /s
[−4, 0] (−1) F T
[−4, 0] (−4) F T

fusion
EOC
m −OCa

fusion energy between a mature osteoclast and an active osteoclast

[−8, 0] (−4) F T

fusion
EOC
m −OCm

fusion energy between mature osteoclasts
initial relative bone density at all bone sites
critical relative bone density under which a bone site is removed
dissolution rate of relative bone density by active osteoclasts
initial lifespan of osteoclasts
generation rate of osteoclasts by the blood vessel
maximum rate of growth of the blood vessel
period of inhibition of further resorption at a newly-resorbed bone site

+∞ F T
1
0.1
10/day
2, 4, 6, 8 days
1.25, 1.66, 2.5, 5.0 day−1
4, 8, 20, 40 µm/day
0, 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 10 days

m0
m∗
γ
τOC
ηOC
vBV
τinhib

14

References

spheroids. Phys. Biol., 2:133–147.
Everts, V., Delaissé, J. M., Korper, W., Jansen, D. C.,
Tigchelaar-Gutter, W., Saftig, P., and Beertsen, W. (2002).
The bone lining cell: its role in cleaning Howship’s lacunae and initiating bone formation. J. Bone Miner. Res.,
17:77–90.
Frost, H. M. (1969). Tetracycline-based histological analysis of bone remodeling. Calcif. Tissue Res., 3:211–237.
Frost, H. M. (1983). The skeletal intermediary organization. Metab. Bone Dis. Rel. Res., 4:281–290.
Fukushima, O., Bekker, P. J., and Gay, C. V. (1991). Characterization of the functional stages of osteoclast by enzyme histochemistry and electron microscopy. Anat. Rec.,
231:298–315.
García-Aznar, J. M., Rueberg, T., and Doblaré, M. (2005). A
bone remodelling model coupling microdamage growth
and repair by 3D BMU-activity.
Biomech. Model
Mechanobiol., 4:147–167.
Gerlee, P. and Anderson, A. R. A. (2007). An evolutionary
hybrid cellular automaton model of solid tumour growth.
J. Theor. Biol., 246:583–603.
Ghaemi, M. and Shahrokhi, A. (2006). Combination of the
cellular Potts model and lattice gas cellular automata for
simulating the avascular cancer growth. In El Yacoubi,
S., Chopard, B., and S., B., editors, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 4173, pages 297–303. Springer.
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Cellular Automata for Research and Industry (ACRI).
Glauber, R. J. (1963). Time-dependent statistics of the Ising
model. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 4(2):294–307.
Glazier, J. A. and Graner, F. (1993). Simulation of the differential adhesion driven rearrangement of biological cells.
Phys. Rev. E, 47:2128–2154.
Grynpas, M. D. and Cheng, P.-T. (1988). Fluoride reduces
the rate of dissolution of bone. Bone and Mineral, 5:1–9.
Hall, B. K., editor (1991). Bone, volume 2: The osteoclast.
CRC Press.
Helfrich, M. H., Stenbeck, G., Nesbitt, S. A., and Horton,
M. A. (2008). Integrins and other cell surface attachment molecules of bone cells. In Bilezikian, J. P., Raisz,
L. G., and Martin, T. J., editors, Principles of bone biology,
volume 1, pages 385–424. Academic Press, San Diego, 3
edition.
Huang, J., Zhang, T.-L., Xu, S.-J., Li, R.-C., Wang, K., Zhang,
J., and Xie, Y.-N. (2006). Effects of Lanthanum on composition, crystal size, and lattice structure of femur bone
mineral of wistar rats. Cacif. Tissue Int., 78:241–247.
Jaworski, Z. F. G., Duck, B., and Sekaly, G. (1981). Kinetics of osteoclasts and their nuclei in evolving seconday
Haversian systems. J. Anat., 133:397–405.
Jeon, J., Quaranta, V., and Cummings, P. T. (2010). An offlattice hybrid discrete-continuum model of tumor growth
and invasion. Biophys. J., 98:37–47.
Manolagas, S. C. (2000). Birth and death of bone cells:
basic regulatory mechanisms and implications for the
pathogenesis and treatment of osteoporosis. Endocr. Rev.,
21:115–137.
Mansury, Y., Kimura, M., Lobo, J., and Deisboeck, T. S.
(2002). Emerging patterns in tumor systems: Simulating the dynamics of multicellular clusters with an

Anderson, A. R. A., Weaver, A. M., Cummings, P. T., and
Quaranta, V. (2006). Tumor morphology and phenotypic
evolution driven by selective pressure from the microenvironment. Cell, 127:905–915.
Baron, R., Chakraborty, M., Chatterjee, D., Home, W.,
Lomri, A., and Ravesloot, J. H. (1993). Biology of the
osteoclast. Handbook Exp. Pharmacol., 107:111–147.
Beysens, D., Forgacs, G., and Glazier, J. A. (2000). Cell
sorting is analogous to phase ordering in fluids. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 97:9467–9471.
Block, M., Schöll, E., and Drasdo, D. (2007). Classifying
the expansion kinetics and critical surface dynamics of
growing cell populations. Phys. Rev. Lett., 99:248101.
Boyce, B. F., Xing, L., Jilka, R. L., Bellido, T., Weinstein,
R. S., Parfitt, A. M., and Manolagas, S. C. (2002). Apoptosis in bone cells. In Bilezikian, J. P., Raisz, L. G., and Rodan, G. A., editors, Principles of bone biology, volume 1,
pages 151–168. Academic Press, San Diego, 2 edition.
Boyde, A. and Jones, r. J. (1991). Pitfalls in pit measurements. Calcif. Tissue Int., 49:65–70.
Britz, H. M., Thomas, C. D. L., G., C. J., and L., C. D. M.
(2009). The relation of femoral osteon geometry to age,
sex, height and weight. Bone, 45:77–83.
Bronckers, A. L. J. J., Goel, W., Luo, G., Karsenty, G.,
D’Souza, R. N., Lyaruu, D. M., and Burger, E. H. (1996).
DNA fragmentation during bone formation in neonatal
rodents assessed by transferase-mediated end labelling.
J. Bone Miner. Res., 11:1281–91.
Buenzli, P. R., Pivonka, P., and Smith, D. W. (2011).
Spatio-temporal dynamics of cell distribution in
Bone Multicellular Units.
Bone, 48:918–926.
doi:10.1016/j.bone.2010.12.009.
Burger, E. H., Klein-Nulend, J., and Smit, T. H. (2003).
Strain-derived canalicular fluid flow regulates osteoclast
activity in a remodelling osteon - a proposal. Journal of
Biomechanics, 36(10):1453–1459.
Chambers, T. J., Darby, J. A., and Fuller, K. (1985). Mammalian collagenase predisposes bone surfaces to osteoclastic resorption. Cell Tissue Res., 241:671–675.
Civitelli, R., Stains, J. P., Shin, C. S., and orgensen, J.
(2008). Intercellular junctions and cell-cell communication in the skeletal system. In Bilezikian, J. P., Raisz,
L. G., and Martin, T. J., editors, Principles of bone biology,
volume 1, pages 425–445. Academic Press, San Diego, 3
edition.
Cohen, J. and Harris, W. H. (1958). The three-dimensional
anatomy of Haversian systems. J Bone Joint Surg Am,
40(2):419–434.
Cooper, D. M., Thomas, C. D. L., Clement, J. G., and Hallgrimsson, B. (2006). Three-dimensional microcomputed
tomography imaging of basic multicellular unit-related
resorption spaces in human cortical bone. The Anatomical Record Part A: Discoveries in Molecular, Cellular, and
Evolutionary Biology, 288A(7):806–816.
Drasdo, D. (2005). Coarse-graining in simulated cell populations. Advances in Complex Systems, 8:319–363.
Drasdo, D. and Hoehme, S. (2005). A single-cell-based
model of tumor growth in vitro: monolayers and
15

agent-based spatial agglomeration model. J. Theor. Biol,
219:343–370.
Markus, M. and Hess, B. (1990). Isotropic cellular automaton for modelling excitable media. Nature, 347:56–58.
Martin, R. B. (1994). On the histologic measurement of
osteonal BMU activation frequency. Bone, 15:547–549.
Martin, R. B., Burr, D. B., and Sharkey, N. A. (1998). Skeletal Tissue Mechanics. New York, Springer.
Martin, R. B., Pickett, J. C., and Zinaich, S. (1990). Studies
of skeletal remodeling in aging men. Clin. Orthop. Relat.
Res., 149:268–282.
Martin, T. J. (2002). Some light shines on the resorption
cavity. IBMS BoneKEy, doi:10.1138/2002025.
Martin, T. J. (2004). Paracrine regulation of osteoclast formation and activity: milestones in discovery. J. Musculoskel. Neuron. Ineract., 4:243–53.
Matsuoka, H., Nakamura, T., Takadama, H., Yamada, S.,
Tamura, J., Okada, Y., Oka, M., and Kokubo, T. (1998).
Osteoclastic resorption of bone-like apatite formed on a
plastic disk as an in vitro assay system. J. Biomed. Mat.
Res., 42:278–285.
Miller, S. C. (1981). Osteoclast cell-surface specializations
and nuclear kinetics during egg-laying in Japanese quail.
Am. J. Anat., 162:35–43.
Mombach, J. C. M. and Glazier, J. A. (1996). Single cell
motion in aggregates of embryonic cells. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
76:3032–3035.
Moshin, S., Taylor, D., and Lee, L. C. (2002). Threedimensional reconstruction of Haversianc systems in
ovine compact bone. European J. Morphology, 40:309–
315.
Nishiyama, A. and Tokihiro, T. (2010). Construction of
an isotropic cellular automaton for a reaction-diffusion
equation by means of a random walk. Preprint online:
arXiv:1001.0505.
Noble, P. B. (1987). Extracellular matrix and cell migration: locomotory characteristics of MOS-11 cells within
a three-dimensional hydrated collagen lattice. J. Cell Science, 87:241–248.
Othmer, H. G., Dunbar, S. R., and Alt, W. (1988). Models
of dispersal in biological systems. J. Math. Biol., 26:263–
298.
Othmer, H. G. and Stevens, A. (1997). Aggregation,
blowup, and collapse: The ABC’s of taxis in reinforced
random walks. SIAM J. Appl. Math., 57:1044–1081.
Parfitt, A. M. (1979). Quantum concept of bone remodeling and turnover: implications for the pathogenesis of
osteoporosis. J. Cell. Biochem., 28:1–5.
Parfitt, A. M. (1994). Osteonal and hemi-osteonal remodeling: The spatial and temporal framework for signal traffic in adult human bone. J. Cell. Biochem., 55:273–286.
Parfitt, A. M. (1998). Osteoclast precursors as leukocytes:
Importance of the area code. Bone, 23:491–494.
Parfitt, A. M., Mundy, G. R., Roodman, D., Hughes, D. E.,
and Boyce, B. F. (1996). A new model for the regulation
of bone resorption with particular reference to the effects
of bisphosphonates. J. Bone Miner. Res., 11:150–159.
Parfitt, M. A. (1983a). The physiological and clinical significance of bone histomorphometric data. In Recker, R. R.,
editor, Bone histomorphometry: Techniques and interpre-

tation, pages 143–223. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
Parfitt, M. A. (1983b). Stereologic basis of bone histomorphometry: Theory of quantitative microscopy and reconstruction of the third dimension. In Recker, R. R., editor, Bone histomorphometry: Techniques and interpretation, pages 53–87. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
Parfitt, M. A., Drezner, M. K., Glorieux, F. H., Kanis, J. A.,
Malluche, H., Meunier, P. J., Ott, S. J., and Recker, R. R.
(1987). Bone histomorphometry: Standardization of
nomenclature, symbols and units: Report of the ABMR
histomorphometry nomenclature committee. J. Bone
Miner. Res., 2:595–610.
Peruani, F. and Morelli, L. G. (2007). Self-propelled particles with fluctuating speed and direction of motion in
two dimensions. Phys. Rev. Lett., 99:010603.
Poplawski, N. J., Swat, M., Gens, J. S., and Glazier, J. A.
(2007). Adhesion between cells, diffusion of growth factors, and elasticity of the AER produce the paddle shape
of the chick limb. Physica A-Statistical Mechanics and its
Applications, 373:521–532.
Robling, A. G., Castillo, A. B., and Turner, C. H. (2006).
Biomechanical and molecular regulation of bone remodeling. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 8:455–498.
Roodman, G. D. (1999). Cell biology of the osteoclast. Exp.
Hematol., 27:1229–41.
Ryser, M. D., Nigma, N., and Komarova, S. V. (2009). Mathematical modeling of spatio-temporal dynamics of a single Bone Multicellular Unit. J. Bone Miner. Res., 24:860–
870.
Schienbein, M., Franke, K., and Gruler, H. (1994). Random
walk and directed movement: comparison between inert
particles and self-organized molecular machines. Phys.
Rev. E, 49:5462–5471.
Schilling, A. F., Filke, S., Brink, S., Korbmacher, H., Amling,
M., and Rueger, J. M. (2006). Osteoclasts and biomaterials. Europ. J. Trauma, 32:107–113.
Schweitzer, F. (2003). Brownian agents and active particles.
Springer.
Stout, S. D., Brunsden, B. S., Hildebolt, C. F., Commean,
P. K., Smith, K. E., and Tappen, N. C. (1999). Computerassisted 3D reconstruction of serial sections of cortical
bone to determine the 3D structure of osteons. Calcif.
Tissue Int., 65:280–284.
Susa, M., Luong-Nguyen, N.-H., Cappellen, D., Zamurovic,
N., and Gamse, R. (2004). Human primary osteoclasts:
in vitro generation and applications as pharmacological
and clinical assay. J. Transl. Med., 2:6. doi:10.1186/14795876-2-6.
Tappen, N. C. (1977). Three-dimensional studies of resorption spaces and developing osteons. Am. J. Anat.,
149:301–332.
Väänänen, H. K. and Zhao, H. (2008). Osteoclast function:
biology and mechanisms. In Bilezikian, J. P., Raisz, L. G.,
and Martin, T. J., editors, Principles of bone biology, volume 1, pages 193–209. Academic Press, San Diego, 3
edition.
van Kampen, N. G. (1998). Stochastic processes in Physics
and Chemistry. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 3 edition.
van Oers, R. F. M., Ruimerman, R., Tanck, E., Hilbers, P.
A. J., and Huiskes, R. (2008a). A unified theory for os-

16

teonal and hemi-osteonal remodeling. Bone, 42(2):250–
259.
van Oers, R. F. M., Ruimerman, R., van Rietbergen, B., ,
Hilbers, P. A. J., and Huiskes, R. (2008b). Relating osteon
diameter to strain. Bone, 43:476–482.
Walker, D. C., Southgate, J., Hill, G., Holcombe, M., Hose,
D. R., Wood, S. M., Mac Neil, S., and Smallwood, R. H.
(2004). The epitheliome: agent-based modelling of the
social behaviour of cells. Biosystems, 76:89–100.
Zhang, L., Wang, Z., Sagotsky, J. A., and Deisboeck, T. S.
(2009). Multiscale agent-based cancer modeling. J.
Math. Biol., 58:545–559.

17

