Topological Conditions of Scale-free Networks for Cooperation to Evolve
Dong-Ping Yang,∗ Hai Lin, Chen-Xu Wu, and J W Shuai†
Department of Physics and Institute of Theoretical Physics and Astrophysics, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, P.R.China
(Dated: July 11, 2011)

arXiv:1106.5386v2 [q-bio.PE] 8 Jul 2011

Evolutionary game theory is employed to study topological conditions of scale-free networks for the
evolution of cooperation. We show that Apollonian Networks (ANs) are perfect scale-free networks,
on which cooperation can spread to all individuals, even though there are initially only 3 or 4 hubs
occupied by cooperators and all the others by defectors. Local topological features such as degree,
clustering coefficient, gradient as well as topology potential are adopted to analyze the advantages of
ANs in cooperation enhancement. Furthermore, a degree-skeleton underlying ANs is uncovered for
understanding the cooperation diffusion. Constructing this kind degree-skeleton for random scalefree networks promotes cooperation level close to that of Barabási-Albert networks, which gives
deeper insights into the origin of the latter on organization and further promotion of cooperation.
PACS numbers: 87.23.Kg, 89.75.Fb, 02.50.Le

Cooperation phenomena are ubiquitous and essential
in natural and human systems [1]. Since selfish actions
provide a short-term higher benefit, evolutionary game
theory [2] has been employed widely to understand how
and why cooperation emerges and survives. The Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD) game captures the essence of this
problem. In PD game, each individual adopts cooperation or defection. Mutual cooperation or mutual defection provides them both R or P , respectively, while a defector can gain largest benefit T from a cooperator, which
in turn receives S. From the order T > R > P ≥ S, it is
obviously better to defect, regardless of the opponent’s
strategy. In the well-mixed population, a strategy receiving higher payoffs spreads within a population and the
proportion of cooperators vanishes asymptotically.
The interaction structure in real societies are more naturally to be described by complex networks and various
networks have been reported to provide an asymptotic
survival of cooperation [3]. Notably, cooperation is enhanced significantly in scale-free networks [4, 5]. Especially on the so-called Barabási-Albert (BA) networks
[6], the strong correlation between individuals renders
cooperation as the dominating trait. While progress has
been made in understanding general properties of social
networks for enhancing cooperation [7–10], the question
why BA networks possess such a great potential of cooperation enhancement remains poorly understood. Furthermore, is there any better network for cooperation to
evolve and what are the significant topological conditions
in scale-free networks?
In this Letter, we start from discussing perfect networks for cooperation to evolve: Apollonian Networks
(ANs) [11]. We discover that cooperation can spread
over the whole population on ANs throughout the entire Pareto-efficient parameter range (T + S < 2R), even
though initially only 3 or 4 most-linked nodes (hubs)
are occupied by cooperators and all the others by defectors. Then, a hidden degree-skeleton is introduced and
demonstrated to be essential for cooperation spreading

and further enhancement on ANs as well as BA networks.
Constructing a degree-skeleton for random scale-free networks [12] promotes the cooperation level close to that of
BA networks. Our findings deepen the insights into the
origin of BA networks on cooperation organization and
enhancement.
ANs are constructed by adding a new node inside one
of the existing triangles orderly, starting from a triangle.
They are grown generation by generation and in each
generation new nodes are just inserted into each triangle
created in the last generation. The new node is attached
to the three vertices of this triangle, which create three
new triangles for next generation. We perform simulations of learning/replicator dynamics on ANs with size
N = 104 . Note that ANs with 104 nodes are not complete for 10 generations [11]. Whether ANs are complete
or not makes no difference.
Following common practice [13], parameters of the PD
game are chosen as R = 1, P = S = 0, and T = b > 1,
where b represents the advantage of defectors over cooperators and b ≤ 2 means Pareto-efficient. Once ANs are
constructed, the dynamics is carried out. Initially, cooperators and defectors are distributed randomly in the
network with equal probability unless noted otherwise.
At each round, each agent i plays once with all its neighbors and accumulates payoffs stored in πi . Then, all individuals update their strategies synchronously as well as
asynchronously by the following rules: Each individual i
selects at random a neighbor j and only if πj > πi , the
player i adopts the strategy of its neighbor j with probability Πi→j = (πj − πi )/ max{ki , kj }b for next round
robin.
For simulations, let the system evolve for a transient
time of 5 × 104 rounds and then several time windows
of 103 rounds for checking whether the evolutionary dynamics reaches a stationary regime. In each time window, we record down the time evolution of cooperators
q proportion ρC (t). If the relative fluctuation F =
2

ρC (t)2 − ρC (t) /ρC (t) is not larger than 0.008 and the

2
1 .0
0 .8

φC

0 .6

3 h u b s C
4 h u b s C
5 0 % C

0 .4
0 .2
0 .0

1 .2

1 .6

2 .0

2 .4

2 .8

b
FIG. 1. (a) The probability φC that the final state is ρC = 1 as
a function of b on ANs for three different initial states: only
first 3 hubs, only first 4 hubs, and randomly half of nodes,
occupied by cooperators.

slope of ρC (t) is smaller that 10−3 , we stop the simulation and employ the average cooperation ρC obtained in
the last time window to be the asymptotic cooperation
level. All results reported below are averaged over 103
different realizations of networks and initial conditions.
On ANs the population evolves definitely into two final
states: ρC = 1 or ρC = 0. Fig. 1 shows the dependency of
φC on the defector’s temptation b, where φC denotes the
probability that the population reaches the final state of
all cooperators (ρC = 1). All cooperation can be reached
with certainty on ANs up to b = 2.4 and then φC decreases to 0 rapidly when b increases up to 3, in the case
that half of the population behave as cooperators initially [14]. Surprisingly, just first 3 or 4 hubs initially
occupied by cooperators and all other nodes by defectors
can induce all cooperation for b < 2. These results imply that the hubs are extremely stable for cooperation
with considerable powerful influences on their neighbors
and even the whole population. The outstanding potential for cooperation to evolve on ANs drives us to discuss
their underlying topological properties in the following.
First of all, ANs are scale-free networks with low degree exponent: P (k) ∼ k −γ with γ = 1.59 [11]. By the
nature of PD game and updating rule, the most prominent mechanism of scale-free networks for promoting cooperation lies in the stability of cooperation on hubs [15].
A defector on the hub often induces most of his neighbors to be defectors and reduces the payoff of himself
in return. Thus it can be easily invaded by cooperating
neighbors with higher payoffs. On the contrary, cooperators on hubs strengthen their stability via assimilating
their neighbors to be cooperators and get higher payoffs.
Especially on networks with strong age-correlations, interconnections of hubs contribute furthermore the dominance of cooperation for b < 2 [4], such as BA networks
(γ = 3.0) generated via growth and preferential attachment. Notice that growth and preferential attachment
can be also obtained via local rules of attachment, such

as the minimal model [16] and ANs. Furthermore, due
to the lower degree exponent, the larger hubs in ANs will
strengthen this effect, which results in further enhancement of cooperation. But we will show below that it just
partly gives rise to our results in Fig. 1.
Secondly, ANs are highly clustered with clustering coefficient Ccl = 0.83 and the correlation Ccl (k) ∼ k −1 [11].
The clustering coefficient [17] describes the connection
probability of two neighbors. Enhancement of cooperation in highly clustered scale-free networks has also been
discussed in detail in Ref.[7]. For networks with Ccl close
to 0, the conversion of cooperation into defection is explained as a progressive invasion of the degree classes by
defectors: The larger the value of b, the more degree hierarchies defectors have invaded [18]. High degree nodes
are more resistant to defection and there is a well-defined
minimum preference of cooperation for intermediate degree classes. For highly clustered scale-free networks, in
contrast, the density of triangles around hubs enhances
the fixation of cooperation in low degree nodes when b
is low, but homogenizes the invasion process of degree
classes by defectors and then decreases the survival of
low densities of cooperators at large b. For this reason,
cooperation can be fixated over the whole population at
low b and go to extinction when b is high. The following
discussion will be persuasive on this point.
Thirdly, ANs possess great local topological conditions
for cooperation to stabilize. Another two local topological quantities: gradient g and topology potential U , introduced in [19], have been shown a significant positive
correlation with node’s strategy preference. The gradient
gi of node i is defined as the average
distance
q Euclidian
P
1
of degrees with its neighbors gi = ki j∈Gi (ki − kj )2 ,
while the topology potential Ui is given by coupling node
i’s degree and gradient, Ui = ki ∗ gi . When highly connected hubs tend to be occupied by cooperators stably,
defectors can only manage to survive at nodes with low
g and U . The players on nodes with higher g and U will
pay more time to cooperate due to the influences from
high-payoff cooperating neighbors [19]. In other words,
higher g or U indicates more stability of cooperation on
these nodes. We have checked cooperation stability of
hubs on ANs in Fig. 1. And Fig. 2 shows that ANs possess nodes with high g and U , which will be demonstrated
as an important factor for the promotion of cooperation
on ANs below.
Finally, we find that the special underlying global
structure–degree-skeleton is another important factor for
cooperation to fixate on ANs. The degree-skeleton is a
tree spanned by the maximal linked hub with gradual
decrease of node’s degree and traveling the whole network. It describes the condition that any node except the
maximal-degree one has at least one higher-degree neighbor. In networks with a degree-skeleton, the asymmetric learning/replicator dynamics can be fully conducted

3
1 .0

r a n d o m ly r e lin k e d n e tw o r k s
d e g r e e - s k e le to n r e b u ilt n e tw o r k s
d e g r e e - s k e le to n k e p t n e tw o r k s
A N s

(a )
0 .5

C

c l

0 .2

ρC

R e la tiv e F r e q u e n c y

0 .3

= 0 .1 5

0 .0
1 .0

(b )

0 .1

0 .5

C
0 .0
0 .0
0

1

2

L o g

1 0

g

3

1

2

3

L o g

1 0

4

U

1 .0

c l

= 0 .0 2
1 .5

2 .0

2 .5

3 .0

b

FIG. 2. (Color online) Distributions of gradient g and topology potential U for four different networks with identical degree distribution. The first three are derived from ANs with
clustering coefficient Ccl = 0.02.

FIG. 3. Density of cooperators ρC vs temptation b for randomly relinked networks (square), degree-skeleton rebuilt networks (triangle) and degree-skeleton kept networks (circle),
which are derived from ANs with various identical Ccl and
identical degree distribution.

on the degree-skeleton. With cooperation stabilized on
hubs, therefore, it will diffuse effectively from large degree nodes to small degree nodes and eventually diffuse
over the whole network.
In order to demonstrate last two points, we employ
the Xulvi-Brunet–Sokolov algorithm [20] to relink the
original ANs. At each step, two edges with four different vertices are randomly relinked. This relink keeps
the degree distribution but gradually destroys other local topological features, including Ccl , g and U . The
process is repeated in two ways: randomly relinking or
keeping degree-skeleton, both until an identical given Ccl
is achieved, which detaches the effect of clustering coefficient. The latter holds a degree-skeleton, which somehow
keeps to a certain degree the above advantages: higher g
and U as shown in Fig. 2. For comparison, we rebuild a
random degree-skeleton for randomly relinked networks
by attaching every local degree-maximum node to any
higher-degree node, which belongs to the set of nodes
spanned by the maximal linked hub through the pathway
decreasing degree [21]. These shortcuts change the global
connection totally, but with few influence on all properties of local topological conditions (Fig. 2). Thus, degreeskeleton rebuilt networks possess a degree-skeleton compared to randomly relinked networks, but lower g and U
than degree-skeleton kept networks.
Randomly relinking destroys the degree-hierarchical
structure and gives rise to many nodes to be local degreemaxima. The resulting random scale-free networks create
some particular conditions where defectors can manage
to survive [18]. Such topological property hinders the cooperation to spread and induces the competition between
local degree-maxima nodes as the case of dipole model
[8]. At Ccl = 0.02, certainly, the dependency of ρC on b
(Fig. 3(b), square) can be well understood in terms of the
cooperation enhancing properties in the heterogeneously
random networks [9]. From this, we are sure that the
fixation of cooperation in ANs must not be simply an

outcome of having higher hubs. And higher cooperation
level at Ccl = 0.15 (Fig. 3(a)) confirms the above point:
the effect of clustering coefficient in cooperation enhancement.
Rebuilding a random degree-skeleton to the above networks enhances cooperation a lot and induces full cooperation at low b (Fig. 3, triangle), whatever the networks are highly or lowly clustered. The degree-skeleton
provides a pathway for cooperation stability to spread
and sweeps away defector’s surviving space. Specially,
for degree-skeleton kept networks, the special degreeskeleton underlaid in ANs promotes cooperation significantly by organizing the advantageous local topology
conditions (higher g and U ) for cooperation stability.
The fixation of cooperation on them can be hold to much
larger b, even though Ccl is reduced to 0.02 (Fig. 3(b),
circle). These results indicate that degree-skeleton improves cooperation condition indeed and the association
of degree-skeleton and higher g and U can enhance cooperation further. So we can arrive at the conclusion
that the exactly special degree-skeleton underlying ANs
provides a strong power for cooperation to fixate [22].
The deeper insight is that degree-skeleton can naturally lead to the exact one cluster of pure cooperators (the
constant cooperators in all rounds after transient time),
which was called as the cooperator core in Ref. [5]. Specially in BA networks, the single cluster of pure cooperators [5] is also supposed to be induced by the underlying
degree-skeleton. Here, we have checked that due to the
age-correlation effect, a degree-hierarchical subnetwork
spanned by the highest-degree hub indeed covers almost
all nodes. There are just 2 ∼ 5 local degree-maxima
nodes and 10 ∼ 30 nodes of 104 nodes excluded outside
that subnetwork. Completing a degree-skeleton for BA
networks makes almost no difference in the promotion
of cooperation (Fig. 4(a)). In contrast, in random scalefree networks [12], which usually have many local degreemaxima nodes, much lower cooperation level is achieved.

4
1 .0

dation of China under Grant No. 30970970.
(a )

0 .8

ρC

0 .6
0 .4
B A
ra n
d e g
d e g

0 .2
0 .0

n e
d o
re
re

tw o rk
s c a
e -s k e
e -s k e
m

1 .0

1 .5

2 .0

b

[1]

3 .0

[2]
(b )

C C

N

†

2 .5

2 .0
1 .5

∗

s
le - fr e e n e tw o r k s
le to n c o m p le te d B A n e tw o r k s
le to n c o n s tr u c te d r a n d o m s c a le - fr e e n e tw o r k s

r a n d o m s c a le - fr e e n e tw o r k s
d e g r e e - s k e le to n c o n s tr u c te d r a n d o m

s c a le - fr e e n e tw o r k s

1 .0

[3]
1 0

-2

ρP

1 0

-1

1 0

0

C

FIG. 4. (a) Density of cooperators ρC vs temptation b for four
networks with or without a full degree-skeleton. (b) Cluster
number of pure cooperators vs the fraction of pure cooperators ρP C for random scale-free networks and degree-skeleton
constructed random scale-free networks, respectively. The figure clearly shows that by constructing a degree skeleton for
random scale-free networks, clusters of pure cooperators can
merge together and then promote cooperation significantly.

However, constructing a degree-skeleton for these networks enhances the cooperation level close to that of BA
networks (Fig. 4(a)) by merging clusters of pure cooperators together (Fig. 4(b)). With cooperation stability
on hubs, thereby, degree-skeleton indeed provides an important pathway for cooperation stability to diffuse on
non-clustered scale-free networks. These results imply
that degree-skeleton is indeed an essential element for
enhancement as well as organization of cooperation on
scale-free networks.
In summary, we have found perfect networks–ANs for
cooperation to evolve and even fixate, as long as just 3
or 4 cooperators taking up the most-linked hubs. ANs
are highly clustered scale-free network with lower degree
exponent and much better local topological conditions
for cooperation to stabilize. Importantly, our results unveil a special degree-skeleton underlying ANs providing
a pathway for cooperation to spread over the whole network. Degree-skeleton is also vital in the mechanism of
promoting cooperation on BA networks compared to random scale-free networks, which can also get as high cooperation level as BA networks just by constructing a
random degree-skeleton. Due to usually asymmetrical
interactions between hubs and other nodes, the heterogeneous networks may induce many remarkable phenomena for various dynamics on them, such as signal transduction and response, synchronization and transport and
so on [23]. It is worthwhile to investigate the function of
degree-skeleton on different kinds of dynamics performed
on scale-free networks.
This work is supported by the National Science Foun-

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]

dpyang@xmu.edu.cn
jianweishuai@xmu.edu.cn
R. Axelrod and W. Hamilton, Science 211, 1390 (1981);
E. Fehr and U. Fischbacher, Nature 425, 785 (2003).
J. M. Smith, Evolution and the Theory of Games (Cambridge University Press, Combridge, 1982);
M. A.
Nowak, Evolutionary Dynamics: Exploring the Equations of Life (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA,
2006).
F. C. Santos, J. M. Pacheco, and T. Lenaerts, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 103, 3490 (2006); H. Ohtsuki, C. Hauert,
E. Lieberman, and M. A. Nowak, Nature 441, 502 (2006);
G. Szabó and G. Fáth, Phys. Rep. 446, 97 (2007).
F. C. Santos and J. M. Pacheco, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95,
098104 (2005).
J. Gómez-Gardeñes, M. Campillo, L. M. Florı́a, and
Y. Moreno, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 108103 (2007).
A.-L. Barabási and R. Albert, Science 286, 509 (1999).
S. Assenza, J. Gómez-Gardeñes, and V. Latora, Phys.
Rev. E 78, 017101 (2008).
L. M. Florı́a, C. Gracia-Lázaro, J. Gómez-Gardeñes, and
Y. Moreno, Phys. Rev. E 79, 026106 (2009).
S. Devlin and T. Treloar, Phys. Rev. E 79, 016107 (2009).
A. Pusch, S. Weber, and M. Porto, Phys. Rev. E 77,
036120 (2008); S. Devlin and T. Treloar, ibid. 80, 026105
(2009); Y.-S. Chen, H. Lin, and C.-X. Wu, Physica A
385, 379 (2007).
J. S. Andrade, H. J. Herrmann, R. F. S. Andrade, and
L. R. da Silva, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 018702 (2005).
M. Molloy and B. Reed, Random Struct. Algorithms 6,
161 (1995).
M. A. Nowak and R. M. May, Nature 359, 826 (1992).
All cooperation can also definitely be reached throughout
the entire parameter range of snowdrift game on ANs.
F. Santos, J. Rodrigues, and J. Pacheco, Proc. R. Soc.
London, Ser. B 273, 51 (2006).
S. N. Dorogovtsev, J. F. F. Mendes, and A. N. Samukhin,
Phys. Rev. E 63, 062101 (2001).
M. E. J. Newman, SIAM Rev. 45, 167 (2003).
J. Gómez-Gardeñes, J. Poncela, L. M. Florı́a, and
Y. Moreno, J. Theor. Biol. 253, 296 (2008).
D.-P. Yang, J. Shuai, H. Lin, and C.-X. Wu, Physica A
388, 2750 (2009).
R. Xulvi-Brunet and I. M. Sokolov, Phys. Rev. E 70,
066102 (Dec 2004).
Notice that we need to check that the attached node still
keeps at least one higher-degree neighbor.
We have checked that just keeping connections of first 4
hubs doesn’t promote cooperation level on randomly relinked network. Thus the function of degree-skeleton on
cooperation enhancement doesn’t just lie in the connections of hubs.
L. Huang, K. Park, Y.-C. Lai, L. Yang, and K. Yang,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 164101 (2006); J. A. Acebrón,
S. Lozano, and A. Arenas, ibid. 99, 128701 (2007);
J. Gómez-Gardeñes, Y. Moreno, and A. Arenas, ibid. 98,
034101 (2007); J. Gómez-Gardeñes, S. Gómez, A. Arenas, and Y. Moreno, ibid. 106, 128701 (2011).

