March 26, 2015

1:10

WSPC - Trim Size: 9.75in x 6.5in

folding

arXiv:1109.6065v1 [physics.bio-ph] 28 Sep 2011

1

Conformation changes and protein folding induced by φ4 interaction
M. Januar
Department of Physics, University of Indonesia, Kampus UI Depok, Depok 16424, Indonesia
A. Sulaiman
Badan Pengkajian dan Penerapan Teknologi, BPPT Bld. II (19th floor), Jl. M.H. Thamrin 8,
Jakarta 10340, Indonesia
E-mail: asulaiman@webmail.bppt.go.id, sulaiman@teori.fisika.lipi.go.id
L.T. Handoko
Group for Theoretical and Computational Physics, Research Center for Physics, Indonesian
Institute of Sciences, Kompleks Puspiptek Serpong, Tangerang, Indonesia
E-mail: handoko@teori.fisika.lipi.go.id, handoko@fisika.ui.ac.id, laksana.tri.handoko@lipi.go.id
Department of Physics, University of Indonesia, Kampus UI Depok, Depok 16424, Indonesia
A model to describe the mechanism of conformational dynamics in protein based on matter interactions using lagrangian approach and imposing certain symmetry breaking is
proposed. Both conformation changes of proteins and the injected non-linear sources are
represented by the bosonic lagrangian with an additional φ4 interaction for the sources.
In the model the spring tension of protein representing the internal hydrogen bonds
is realized as the interactions between individual amino acids and nonlinear sources.
The folding pathway is determined by the strength of nonlinear sources that propagate
through the protein backbone. It is also shown that the model reproduces the results in
some previous works.
Keywords: protein dynamics, protein folding, lagrangian, φ4 interaction

1. Introduction
The pathway of proteins are determined by the sequences of its amino acid constituents. The time ordered of protein folding sequence leads from the primary to
the secondary and subsequent structures. The secondary structure consists of the
shape representing each segment of a polypeptide tied by hydrogen bonds, van
der Walls forces, electrostatic interaction and hydrophobic effects. It is moreover
formed around a group of amino acids considered as the ground state. Then it is
extended to include adjacent amino acids till the blocking amino acids are reached,
and the whole protein chain along the polypeptide adopted its preferred secondary
structure.
Our understanding on the underlying above-mentioned mechanism has unfortu-

March 26, 2015

1:10

WSPC - Trim Size: 9.75in x 6.5in

folding

2

nately not been at the satisfactory level. For instance, the studies based on statistical
analysis of identifying the probabilities of locating amino acids in each secondary
structure are still at the level of less than 75% accuracy. Moreover, the main mechanism responsible for a structured folding pathway have not yet been identified at
all. On the other hand, it is known that the protein misfolding has been identified
as the main cause of several diseases like cancers and so on.1
Recently, Mingaleev et.al. have shown that the nonlinear excitations play an important role in conformational dynamics by decreasing the effective bending rigidity
of a biopolymer chain leading to a buckling instability of the chain.2 Following this
understanding, a model to explain the transition of a protein from a metastable
to its ground conformation induced by solitons has been proposed.3 In the model
the mediator of protein transition is the Davydov solitons propagating through the
protein backbone.
At present, the most reliable theoretical explanation for this kind of the conformational dynamics of biomolecules is the so-called ab initio quantum chemistry
approach. This however requires astronomical computational power to deal with
realistic biological systems.4,5 In contrary, there are some phenomenological model
describing the folding pathway as a result of the interplay between the energy transfer from a solitary solution that travels along the protein backbone and string tension.6 There are also some attempts to describe the dynamics in term of elementary
biomatter using field theory approach7 and open quantum system.8,9
This paper follows the later approach, but starting from the first principle using the lagrangian method to derive the responsible interactions and to clarify its
origins. The paper is organized as follows. First, the model and the underlying
assumptions are explained in detail. It is then followed by the derivation of relevant equation of motions (EOMs). Summary and conclusion based on the numerical
analysis are given at the end of the paper.
2. The models
The model is an extension of the toy model proposed in.10 More than considering
a self-interaction mechanism as proposed in10 and subsequently developed in,3,6
more realistic model is introduced. In the model, the dynamics of amino acids
forming proteins is initially considered as a free and linear system of bosonic matters.
Further, external nonlinear sources, like laser or light bunch, are introduced. The
sources which propagate through the protein backbone interact each other with the
amino acids to induce conformation changes.
The model describes the conformation changes as the dynamics of amino acids
using a free and massive (relativistic) bosonic lagrangian as below,
1
†
lc = (∂µ φc ) (∂ µ φc ) + m2φc φ†c φc ,
2

(1)
T

where φc represents the conformation field. The hermite conjugate is φ† ≡ (φ∗ )
for a general complex field φ. On the other hand, the nonlinear sources represented

March 26, 2015

1:10

WSPC - Trim Size: 9.75in x 6.5in

folding

3

by the field φs are also governed by a massless bosonic lagrangian,
†

ls = (∂µ φs ) (∂ µ φs ) + V (φs ) ,

(2)

with an additional potential V (φs ) taking the typical φ4 − self-interaction,
1
(3)
V (φs ) = λ (φ†s φs )2 ,
4
where λ is the coupling constant. It should be noted that both scalar fields, φc =
φc (t, x) denotes the local curvature of the conformation at position x with φc (x) = 1
or 0 for α or β−helix.
The choice of interactions in Eqs. (1) and (2) are justified by the following
considerations,
• The conformation changes are assumed to be linear. It is actually not necessarily massive. Although one can put by hand the mass term m2φc φ†c φc
in the lagrangian as written above, the massive conformational field could
also be generated dynamically through certain symmetry breaking as shown
later.
• The source is assumed to be massless concerning the laser or light source
injected to the protein chains to induce the foldings.
• Its non-linearity is realized by introducing the φs self-interaction which
leads to the non-linear EOM.
• For the sake of simplicity, the lagrangian is imposed to be symmetry under
certain transformations, for instance in the present case is time and parity
symmetry, i.e. φ(t, x) → −φ(−t, −x) for one-dimensional space.
We should remark here that the model is although written in a relativistic form,
after deriving relevant EOMs one can take its non-relativistic limits to obtain final
EOMs describing the desired dynamics. Secondly, instead of using the vector electromagnetic field Aµ to represent the nonlinear sources, like laser for instance, it is
more convenient to consider the nonlinear source as a bunch of light or laser such
that one might represent it in a ’macrosocopic’ scalar field φs .
Considering the dimensional counting and the invariance on time-parity symmetry, the most general interaction between the conformation field and nonlinear
sources is,
lint = −Λ (φ†c φc )(φ†s φs ) ,

(4)

with Λ denotes the strength of the interaction. Eqs. (3) and (4) lead to the total
potential in the model,
1
(5)
Vtot = λ (φ†s φs )2 − Λ (φ†c φc )(φ†s φs ) .
4
Eqs. (1), (2) and (5) provide the underlying interactions in the model.
Concerning the minima of the total potential in term of source field, that is

∂Vtot 
=0,
(6)
∂φs 
hφs i,hφc i

March 26, 2015

1:10

WSPC - Trim Size: 9.75in x 6.5in

folding

4

at the vacuum expectation values (VEV) of the fields yields the non-trivial solution,
r
2Λ
hφc i .
(7)
hφs i =
λ
Imposing certain local symmetry, namely the phase or U(1) symmetry to the
above total lagrangian, the VEV in Eq. (7) obviously breaks the symmetry. The
symmetry breaking at the same time shifts the mass term for φc as follow,
m2φc → m2φc ≡ m2φc −

2Λ2
hφc i2 ,
λ

(8)

from Eq. (4).
On the other hand, Eq. (7) induces the ’tension force’ which plays an important
role to enable folded pathway in the present model. This will be discussed in the
following section.
3. EOMs and its behaviours
Having the total lagrangian at hand, one can derive the EOM’s using the EulerLagrange equation,
∂ltot
∂ltot
− ∂µ
=0,
∂φ
∂(∂µ φ)

(9)

where ltot = lc + ls + lint .
Substituting Eqs. (1), (2) and (4) into Eq. (9) in term of φc and φs , one immediately obtains a set of EOMs,

 2
1 ∂2
1 2 2
∂
2
(10)
− 2 2 − 2 mφc c + 2Λ φs φc = 0 ,
∂x2
c ∂t
~
 2

∂
1 ∂2
−
+ 2Λ φ2c − 3λ φ2s φs = 0 .
(11)
∂x2
c2 ∂t2
Here the natural unit is restored to make the light velocity c and ~ reappear in the
equation.
The last term in Eq. (11) determines the non-linearity of the EOM of source.
One should also put an attention in the last term of Eq. (10), i.e. ∼ k φc with k ∼
2Λhφs i2 . This actually induces the tension force in the dynamics of conformational
field enabling the folded pathway as expected.
Hence, solving both EOMs in Eqs. (10) and (11) simultaneously would provide
the contour of conformational changes in term of time and one-dimensional space
components.
4. Numerical analysis
Since the EOMs under consideration involves non-linear term, one should solve them
numerically. The numerical analysis and simulation in the present paper are done
using the finite difference method.11 Throughout numerical works, non-relativistic

March 26, 2015

1:10

WSPC - Trim Size: 9.75in x 6.5in

folding

5

Fig. 1.

The discretized grid for solving the EOMs over the coordinate space R.

limit v = ∂x/∂t ≪ c and the following boundary conditions for both fields are
deployed,

φs (0, t) = φs (L, t) = 0 and φc (0, t) = φc (L, t) = 0 for 0 ≤ t ≤ b ,
φs (x, 0) = f (x) and φc (x, 0) = p(x)
for 0 ≤ x ≤ L ,
∂φc (x, 0)
∂φs (x, 0)
= g(x) and
= q(x)
for 0 < x < L ,
∂t
∂t

(12)

with f (x), p(x), g(x) and q(x) are newly introduced auxiliary functions. In finite
difference scheme, it is more convenient to replace φs and φc with u and w respectively, and rewrite them in discrete forms. Then, let us consider the coordinate
space R = {(x, t) : 0 ≤ x ≤ L, 0 ≤ t ≤ b} discretized on a grid consisting of
(N − 1) × (M − 1) rectangles with side length ∆x = δ and ∆t = ǫ shown in Fig. 1.
Solving the equations over the grid gives us the desired numerical solutions.
Both coupled EOMs in Eqs. (10) and (11) are rewritten in explicit discrete forms

March 26, 2015

1:10

WSPC - Trim Size: 9.75in x 6.5in

folding

6

as follows,
ui,j+1
wi,j+1


ui+1,j − 2ui,j + ui−1,j
2
3
+ 2Λwi,j ui,j − 3λui,j (13)
,
= 2ui,i − ui,j−1 + c ǫ
δ2

wi+1,j − 2wi,j + wi−1,j
= 2wi,i − wi,j−1 + c2 ǫ2
+ 2Λu2i,j wi,j
δ2

c2 2
(14)
− 2 mφc wi,j ,
~
2 2



for i = 2, 3, · · · , N − 1 and j = 2, 3, · · · , M − 1. In order to calculate all values of
Eqs. (13) and (14), the initial values for two lowest rows in Fig. 1 must be given.
On the other hand, the value at t1 is fixed by the boundary conditions in Eq. (12).
The second order of Taylor expansion can also be used to determine the values in
the second row. Therefore, the values at t2 are determined by,


c2 ǫ2 fi+1 − 2fi + fi−1
2
3
+ 2Λpi fi − 3λfi ,
(15)
ui,2 = fi − ǫgi +
2
δ2


c2 ǫ2 pi+1 − 2pi + pi−1
c2 2
2
wi,2 = pi − ǫqi +
(16)
+
2Λf
p
−
m pi ,
i
i
2
δ2
~2 φc
for i = 2, 3, · · · , N − 1.
For the initial stage, suppose the nonlinear sources has a particular form f (x) =
2sech(2x) ei2x and g(x) = 1 to generate the α-helix, while g(x) = q(x) = 0 for the
sake of simplicity. Then, one can obtain the initial values in this case using Eqs. (15)
and (16). The subsequent values are generated by substituting the preceeding values
into Eqs. (13) and (14). The higher order values can be obtained using iterative
procedure.
The result is given in Fig. 2. The left figure in each box describes the propagation
of nonlinear sources in protein backbone, while the right one shows how the protein
is folded. As can be seen in the figure, the protein backbone is initially linear before
the nonlinear source injection. As the soliton started propagating over the backbone,
the conformational changes appear. It should be remarked that the result is obtained
up to the second order accuracy in Taylor expansion. In order to guarantee that the
numerical solutions do not contain large amount of truncation errors, the step sizes
δ and ǫ are kept small enough. Nevertheless, this should be good approximation to
describe visually the mechanism of protein folding.
5. Conclusion
An extension of phenomenological model describing the conformational dynamics of
proteins is proposed. The model based on the matter interactions among the relevant
constituents, namely the conformational field and the nonlinear sources represented
as the bosonic fields φc and φs . It has been shown that from the relativistic bosonic
lagrangian with φ4s self-interaction, the nonlinear and tension force terms appear
naturally as expected in some previous works.6

March 26, 2015

1:10

WSPC - Trim Size: 9.75in x 6.5in

folding

7

Fig. 2. The soliton propagations and conformational changes on the protein backbone inducing
protein folding. The vertical axis in soliton evolution denotes time in second, while the horizontal
axis denotes its amplitude. The conformational changes are on the (x, y, z) plane.

However, the present model has different contour since the EOMs governing
the whole dynamics are the linear and nonlinear Klein-Gordon equations. Note
that the original model by Berloff deployed the linear Klein-Gordon and nonlinear
Schrodinger equations.
Moreover, the present model has inhomogenous tension force, in contrast with
the homogeneous tension force in the Berloff’s model, due to simultaneous solutions
of Eqs. (10) and (11). These lead to wrigling folded pathways as shown in Fig. 2
which should be more natural than the homogeneous one.

Acknowledgments
The authors greatly appreciate fruitful discussion with T.P. Djun throughout the
work. AS thanks the Group for Theoretical and Computational Physics LIPI for
warm hospitality during the work. This work is partially funded by the Indonesia
Ministry of Research and Technology and the Riset Kompetitif LIPI in fiscal year
2010 under Contract no. 11.04/SK/KPPI/II/2010.

March 26, 2015

1:10

WSPC - Trim Size: 9.75in x 6.5in

folding

8

References
1. C. M. Dobson, Nature 426, p. 884 (2003).
2. S. F. Mingaleev, Y. B. Gaididei, P. L. Christiansen and Y. Kivshar, Europhys. Lett.
59, p. 403 (2002).
3. S. Caspi and E. Ben-Jacob, Phys. Lett. A 272, p. 124 (2000).
4. A. Garcia and J. Onuchi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, p. 13898 (2003).
5. J. N. Onuchi and P. G. Wolynes, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 14, p. 70 (2004).
6. N. G. Berloff, Phys. Lett. A 337, p. 391 (2005).
7. A. Sulaiman and L. T. Handoko, J. Compt. Theor. Nanoscience in press (2010).
8. A. Sulaiman, F. P. Zen, H. Alatas and L. T. Handoko, Phys. Rev. E 81, p. 061907
(2010).
9. A. Sulaiman, F. P. Zen, H. Alatas and L. T. Handoko, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A in press
(2010).
10. S. Caspi and E. Ben-Jacob, Europhys. Lett. 47, p. 522 (1999).
11. J. H. Mathews and K. D. Fink, Numerical Methods using Matlab 4th Ed. (PrenticeHall, 2004).

