The plasticity of TGF-β signaling

arXiv:1111.0201v2 [q-bio.MN] 2 Nov 2011

Geraldine Cellière1,† , Georgios Fengos1,2,† , Marianne Hervé1 and Dagmar Iber1,2,∗
1

Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zurich, Mattenstrasse 26, 4058 Basel,
Switzerland
2 Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics
† The authors contributed equally to the work.
Email: DI: dagmar.iber@bsse.ethz.ch GC: gcellier@student.ethz.ch GF: georgios.fengos@bsse.ethz.ch MH: mh.herve@gmail.com;
∗ Corresponding

author

1

Abstract
Background: The family of TGF-β ligands is large and its members are involved in many different signaling

processes. These signaling processes strongly differ in type with TGF-β ligands eliciting both sustained or
transient responses. Members of the TGF-β family can also act as morphogen and cellular responses would then
be expected to provide a direct read-out of the extracellular ligand concentration. A number of different models
have been proposed to reconcile these different behaviours. We were interested to define the set of minimal
modifications that are required to change the type of signal processing in the TGF-β signaling network.
Results: To define the key aspects for signaling plasticity we focused on the core of the TGF-β signaling

network. With the help of a parameter screen we identified ranges of kinetic parameters and protein
concentrations that give rise to transient, sustained, or oscillatory responses to constant stimuli, as well as those
parameter ranges that enable a proportional response to time-varying ligand concentrations (as expected in the
read-out of morphogens). A combination of a strong negative feedback and fast shuttling to the nucleus biases
signaling to a transient rather than a sustained response, while oscillations were obtained if ligand binding to the
receptor is weak and the turn-over of the I-Smad is fast. A proportional read-out required inefficient receptor
activation in addition to a low affinity of receptor-ligand binding. We find that targeted modification of single
parameters suffices to alter the response type. The intensity of a constant signal (i.e. the ligand concentration),
on the other hand, affected only the strength but not the type of the response.
Conclusions: The architecture of the TGF-β pathway enables the observed signaling plasticity. The observed

range of signaling outputs to TGF-β ligand in different cell types and under different conditions can be
explained with differences in cellular protein concentrations and with changes in effective rate constants due to
cross-talk with other signaling pathways. It will be interesting to uncover the exact cellular differences as well as
the details of the cross-talks in future work.

2

Background
Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) signaling has been implicated as an important regulator of
almost all major cell behaviors, including proliferation, differentiation, cell death, and motility [1]. Which
response is induced or repressed depends on the cell type and context in which the signal is received.
The complexity of the biological outcomes elicited by TGF-β stands in stark contrast to the apparent
simplicity of the signaling cascade. In response to TGF-β, type 1 (ALKs 1-7 in humans) and type 2
receptors (ActR-IIA, ActR-IIB, BMPR- II, AMHR-II and TbR-II, in humans) form complexes and the
constitutively active type 2 serine/threonine kinase phosphorylates the type 1 receptor. The activated type
1 receptor transduces the signal into the cell by phosphorylating the regulatory Smads (R-Smad: Smad 2
and 3 in case of the TGF-β subfamily, and Smad 1,5 and 8 for the BMP subfamily). Once activated
R-Smads form homomeric complexes and heteromeric complexes with the common Smad, Co-Smad (Smad
4) [2]. Smads continuously shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm [3]. TGF-β signaling biases Smad
localisation to the nucleus [4] where Smad complexes associate with chromatin and regulate the
transcription of hundreds of genes [5]. Signal termination is achieved through continuous
dephosphorylation of the R-Smad (mainly in the nucleus [3]) and induction of inhibitory Smads (I-Smad:
Smad 6 for the BMP subfamily, and Smad7 for the TGFβ subfamily). I-Smads act through diverse
mechanisms: by targeting active receptor for proteasomal degradation [6, 7], inducing receptor
dephosphorylation [8] and competing with R-Smad for the receptor binding site [9]. Rapid shuttling and
inactivation enables a continuous sensing of the extracellular ligand concentrations [3]. This is likely to be
particular important when members of the TGF-β ligand family acts as morphogen and determine cell-fate
in a concentration-dependent manner.
Beyond the core components of this signaling pathway many other factors modulate the signal and thereby
contribute to the versality of the response. At the membrane level, the access to receptor is controlled by
soluble proteins that sequester TGF-β ligand (i.e. decorin) [10], and by membrane-bound co-receptors that
promote binding (i.e. betaglycan) [11]. The receptor activity is further regulated by several receptor
internalization routes [12], and by receptor turnover. Intracellularly, many processes require auxiliary
proteins (i.e. SARA for the binding of R-Smad to the receptor and Schnurri for the binding of the
R-Smad/Co-Smad complex to the DNA binding element) [2, 13]. The restriction of those auxiliary factors
to specific cell-types will make the response cell context dependent [14]. Diversity can also be generated by
the huge number of different possible combinations of type 1 and type 2 receptors [2] and the multiple
3

crosstalks of the TGF-β signaling cascade with other pathways. One example of regulation by cross-talk is
the phosphorylation of R-Smads in the linker region by Ras-activated MAPK [15],
calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II [16] or CDKs [17]. Phosphorylation reduces the
transcriptional activity of the R-Smad [18].
Several mathematical models have been developed to gain further insights into the complex
TGF-β-dependent signaling network [19]. An early model by Clarke and co-workers (2006) [20] focused on
the nuclear accumulation of Smad complexes. Their conclusion on the central role of the imbalance
between R-Smad phosphorylation and dephosphorylation rates were confirmed by a more detailed model
by Schmierer et al. (2008) [3]. Experiments suggest that the duration of the response to a ligand
stimulation strongly impacts on the cellular response. Thus epithelial cells that elicit sustained nuclear
Smad complex accumulation respond to TGF-β with cell growth arrest, whereas pancreatic tumor cells
that elicit a transient response continue proliferating (while keeping other TGF-β induced behaviors) [21].
Much theoretical work therefore focused on how sustained, transient, or switch-like responses could be
obtained by adjusting the receptor dynamics, ligand depletion, and the I-Smad dependent negative
feedback. Melke et al. (2006) [22] focused on the potential role of I-Smads in generating transient
responses while Vilar et al. (2006) focused on the receptor dynamics to explain the occurrence of both
transient and sustained responses. Zi et al. (2007) [23] included a simple model of the Smad dynamics and
highlighted the importance of the balance between clathrin-dependent endocytosis and non-clathrin
mediated endocytosis. All pathway elements were finally brought together by Chung et al. (2009) [24] in a
more comprehensive model, used to examine the contradictory roles of TGF-β in cancer progression.
Lately Zi et al. (2011) [25] published a study that highlights the potential of TGF-β ligand depletion in
converting short-term graded signaling responses into long-term switch-like responses. Unlike for other
pathways oscillations have not yet reported for the TGF-β signaling pathway [26, 27]. TGF-β type ligands
are also acting as morphogens, and the response to these appears to be proportional. Recently, Paulsen
and co-workers published a study on the impact of synexpression of the feedback inhibitors BAMBI,
Smad6, and Smad7 on the read-out of morphogen gradients during embryogenesis [28].
While the many published studies explain the different behaviours for the different situations for which
they are observed and highlight the many mechanisms that enable the different response types it remains
largely unclear how easily the response type can be changed. We wondered how the TGF-β signaling
pathway accomplishes the flexibility in its responses and which and how many parameters have to be
4

altered for cells to respond differently. To efficiently explore the canonical response we focused on the core
signaling architecture, and did not consider the detailed receptor dynamics and cross-talks in the model;
they are included indirectly through the parameters that they modulate. We explored the response types
and in particular changes in the response type as we explored the parameter values within biologically
meaningful ranges. We find that relatively small changes in single parameters can alter the response.
Cellular protein concentrations are a particular powerful point of control and this explains how different
cell types can show different responses. Importantly we also identify key parameters that affect the
response and we can relate these to observed points of cross-talk between signaling pathways. The
particular architecture of the TGF-β network thus allows for the great flexibility in the response.

Methods
The model
Several models for the TGF-β signaling network have been developed that focus on different aspects of the
TGF-β signaling network, i.e. the receptor dynamics [23, 29], the shuttling between the cytoplasm and the
nucleus [3], and the negative feedback via the I-Smad (Smad7/Dad) [22]. These different aspects have lately
been combined in a model that addresses differences in TGF-β signaling between normal and cancerous
cells [24]. The models of the TGF-β signaling pathway showed that stimulation could result in either
transient and sustained responses dependent on the choice of parameters [3, 22–25, 29]. Transient responses
could be obtained through complex receptor dynamic [29], the I-Smad-mediated negative feedback [3, 22],
or ligand depletion [25]. Negative feedbacks can in principle also give rise to oscillatory behaviour. We
wondered whether all three qualitative behaviours (sustained, transient, or oscillatory response) could be
obtained already with the most simple intracellular feedback mechanism, and how these behaviours would
depend on the parameters. Since the more complex interactions (that we ignore) effectively modulate the
parameter values in our model an in-depth understanding of the parameter dependencies in the simple
model should also enable a better understanding of the complex network interactions that are found in the
cell. The different response types can also (trivially) be obtained by modulating the protein concentrations
accordingly. We, however, keep the concentrations of receptors, ligand, R-Smad and Co-Smad constant and
thus include these effects only indirectly as changes in the effective binding rates.
Accordingly, we formulated a detailed model of TGF-β signaling that focused on the negative feedback,
but did not include any complex receptor dynamics as these require changes in the receptor and ligand
concentrations. Our model describes the dynamics of TGF-β ligand (TGF-β), receptor (T GF βR),
5

regulatory R-Smads (denoted simply Smad), Co-Smads, I-Smads, their complexes as well as the expression
intermediates of the I-Smad. Importantly, we include two compartments, the nucleus and the cytoplasm,
and the Smad and Co-Smad complexes can shuttle between the two compartments as first described in [3].
The regulatory interactions are summarized in Fig. 1 (a SBML file is provided in Additional file 3). Thus
the ligand TGF-β reversibly binds to the TGF-β receptor (reactions 1 and 2 in Fig. 1), which is then
phosphorylated to become fully active (3 and 4). The active receptor induces phosphorylation of R-Smad
(7), which in turn can reversibly dimerize or form a complex with Co-Smad (10 and 11). Those two
reactions can take place either in the cytoplasm or in the nucleus and the five species Smad,
phosphorylated Smad, Co-Smad, homodimers and heterodimers can shuttle from the cytoplasm to the
nucleus and back (8, 9 and 12). Nuclear Smad/Co-Smadf complexes act as transcription factors and trigger
the transcription of I-Smad mRNA in the nucleus (14 and 15). The I-Smad mRNA then shuttles to the
cytoplasm (16), where it can be degraded (17) or translated into I-Smad (18). I-Smad mediates a negative
feedback by sequestering the active receptor (5 and 6) and can be degraded (19). The response to a
stimulus by TGF-β ligand is a change in the transcriptional activity, monitored as the nuclear
concentration of Smad/Co-Smad complexes.
We translated those interactions into sets of ODEs using the law of mass action where appropriate. To
reduce the complexity of the model we also employed Hill functions to describe the regulation by
cooperative interactions. To efficiently investigate the impact of changes in total concentration of receptors,
R-Smad, and Co-Smad we used a total concentration rather than production and degradation rates for
these species.
To respond to TGF-β cells must be able to detect changes in the ligand concentration and convert the
differences into different transcriptional responses. Transcriptional activity is determined by the
concentration of transcription factors in the nucleus. We therefore monitor the nuclear concentration of
R-Smad/Co-Smad complexes as a measure of transcriptional activity, in response to a change in the
extracellular TGF-β concentration.

Parameter screening and simulations
We are interested in the signaling capacity of the TGF-β pathway within its physiological limits. These
physiological limits are set by the plausible range that the parameter values can take. We established a
likely range for each parameter value based on available data and estimates (Additional file 1, Table S1 and

6

Table S2). While previous measurements and estimates are necessarily of limited accuracy and differences
are likely to exist between different cells and different cell types [3, 22–24, 29] we expect that basing
ourselves on the available data will not too much distort the ranges that we screen. Most parameters were
varied over 3 or 4 orders of magnitude, centered around the mean of values found in the literature. Since
there are no good estimates for the I-Smad expression rates k14 and k15 were varied over 5 orders of
magnitude. The rates of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation (k7 and k13) were varied only over two
orders of magnitude because a large fraction of the simulations failed when these rate constants were varied
over a wider range. To avoid a bias to the few parameter sets that do not lead to extreme dynamics we had
to constrain these two parameters to only vary over two orders of magnitude. To determine the possible
range of pathway responses to a defined stimulus, we carried out 106 independent simulations with
parameter values randomly picked from a uniform logarithmic distribution of parameter values within the
set ranges (as discussed in Geier et al. [30]) and compared the predicted nuclear concentration of
R-Smad/Co-Smad complexes in response to the ligand stimulus. In a first step, we let the system
equilibrate for 1hour with almost no ligand (concentration of 10−6 pM to avoid failure of the solver) and
initial cellular concentrations T GF βR = 1nM , Smad= 60nM and Co-Smad= 100nM . We then used the
steady-state value of the first step and solved the simulations for 10hours with a constant ligand
concentration of 200pM. Using MATLAB’s ode15s routine the 106 simulations took in total approximately
140 hours of CPU time.
Criteria to define the different TGF-β signaling responses
In response to ligand exposure we observed five different qualitative responses, i.e. unresponsive, sustained,
transient, dampened oscillatory or sustained oscillatory responses (Fig. 2). Additional file 2, Fig. S1, S2,
S3, and S4 show the evolution of the concentration of each species over time in a representative transient
and a representative sustained response (Additional file 1, Table S3). To define the parameter dependency
of the different response types we made the following definitions: We speak of unresponsiveness if the
concentration of nuclear R-Smad/Co-Smad complexes remains below a chosen threshold θ within ten hours
of stimulation. Accordingly we speak of responsiveness if the concentration exceeds the threshold
concentration θ, and here we distinguished four distinct behaviours, inspired by the work of Ma et al. [31]
and based on the subsequent dynamics:
1. Sustained response: After the initial peak the response must retain at least 90% of its maximal
value (called Opeak). To exclude slowly increasing responses we further require that 90% of the peak
7

value Opeak is reached within less than 7200 s (2 hours).
2. Transient response: After the initial peak the response must drop to levels lower than 10% of its
peak value Opeak within less than two hours and the final value (after 10hours) (called Oend) must
be lower than 0.1 × θ.
3. Oscillations: After the initial peak the amplitude (difference between the local maximum and local
minimum) must exceed 0.1 × θ at least 4 times.
3.1 Dampened oscillations: The fifth amplitude must be less than half the second amplitude.
3.2 Sustained oscillations: The fifth amplitude must be higher than half the second amplitude.
We characterized the long-term behaviour of oscillations based on the relative amplitudes of the second
and fifth peak because the first peak can be particularly high (Fig. 2D), and most dampened simulations
have no more than five peaks.
Quantitative data on the physiological concentrations of the cellular proteins and the transcription factor
complex (nuclear Smad/CoSmad complex) do not exist, and we therefore had to set our detection
threshold arbitrarily to θ = 10pM when analysing a unique constant stimulus with 200 pM TGF-β ligand.
When the response to several ligand concentrations or with several protein concentrations was studied we
used the maximal response value as θ. Simulations were run for 10 hours. In case if oscillations, if the
amplitude of oscillations was still larger than 0.1 × θ after 10 hours, the simulation was continued until the
oscillations vanished, but for a maximum 100 hours. In this way we avoid any impact of period length on
the classification of oscillations, and the length of the period indeed does not bias our characterisation of
oscillations to dampened or sustained oscillatory behaviour (Additional file 2, Fig. S5C). The time
thresholds 2 hours and 10 hours were chosen based on experimental data [21].

Results and Discussion
In response to a sustained stimulus (200 pM ligand) our simple model for TGF-β signaling can give rise to
sustained (Fig. 2A), transient (Fig. 2B), or oscillatory (Fig. 2C,D) responses. The sustained/transient
distinction is particularly relevant, as it has been shown that those two qualitative behaviors are related to
the growth inhibitory effect of TGF-β [21]. To better understand the conditions for these different
behaviours we sought to identify parameter families that would give rise to a certain response type. We

8

hoped that a comparison of those families would reveal the critical parameters that determine the response
type. To that end we screened a large number of parameter sets and classified them according to their
responses as described in detail in the Materials and Methods section.

Parameter-dependent distinct qualitative responses
Our criteria in Fig. 2 are very strict (i.e. the speed of responses is an important criterium) and there is a
wide undefined range between sustained and transient responses. As a consequence most parameter sets
(57.5%) do not fall into any of the defined categories (Additional file 2, Fig. S5A, black sets). Of those that
can be classified most (25.5% of the parameter sets tested) led to no response (Additional file 2, Fig. S5A,
marked in grey). Among the ”responsive” parameter sets most lead to sustained responses (14.8% of the
parameter sets tested) (Additional file 2, Fig. S5A, marked in red) while transient responses are observed
less frequently (2.2%of the parameter sets tested) (Additional file 2, Fig. S5A, marked in green). All three
behaviors have previously been observed in various models of TGF-β signaling. We find that in addition in
a minority of cases (306 simulations, i.e 0.046%) also oscillatory responses can be produced (Additional file
2, Fig. S5B). Even though the number of sets that give rise to oscillations in the concentration of nuclear
transcription factor complexes is small, these may occupy a sufficiently dense subspace in the parameter
space to be physiologically relevant. The oscillations can either be sustained or dampened, depending on
how fast their amplitude decays (Fig. 2C,D). As expected sustained oscillations have a larger number of
peaks (Additional file 2, Fig. S5B). While the period of the oscillations is not biased to dampened or
sustained oscillatory behaviour (Additional file 2, Fig. S5C), the duration (the time until oscillations
vanish) depends on both the number of peaks and the duration that tends to be higher for sustained
oscillations (Additional file 2, Fig. S5D).
Oscillatory behavior has been reported for a number of other signaling pathways (i.e. the ERK
cascade [32]), but so far no experimental evidence exists for oscillations in the TGF-β pathway. However,
standard biochemical experiments average over a large number of non-synchronized cells. If the nuclear
concentration of transcription factor indeed oscillated, only sophisticated single-cell assays would reveal
these.

The impact of kinetic parameters on the response type
We wondered which kinetic parameters would be critical for the different response types. Our sampling
space is huge (23 parameters, with most of them sampled over 4 orders of magnitude, Additional file 1,
9

Table S1) and we looked for parameters that would be constrained in the different response types. In
Fig. 3 we plot the sampled ranges in grey, and the parameter ranges that correspond to the different
response types in colours. Since we are sampling from a uniform logarithmic distribution parameters that
are not affecting the response type should remain uniformly logarithmically distributed in the parameter
subsets. In Fig. 3A we compare the parameter ranges of sustained (red) and transient (green) responses.
We notice that whereas some parameter values remain (almost) uniformly distributed, others are
constrained. Constrained parameters include the rates that describe the I-Smad dependent negative
feedback loop (parameters k5, k6, k14, k15, k17, k18, and k19), the shuttling rate between cytoplasm and
nucleus (k8), the dynamics of the Smad homo- and heterodimer formation/dissolution(k10,and k11), and
the dephosphorylation of Smad (k13). Fig. 4A shows the clear segregation of the ”sustained” (red) and
”transient” (transient) parameter sets in a plane spanned by the parameters that determine the strength of
the negative feedback ((k14 × k18)/(k15 × k17 × k19) × k5/k6) and the speed of Smad dephosphorylation,
k8 × (k11 × k13)/k10. To favour transient responses over the sustained responses the I-Smad dependent
negative feedback must be strong and dephosphorylation of Smad must be fast. The need for rapid
dephosphorylation likely arises also because of our requirement that adaptation must happen within 2
hours. We notice that the size of the parameter set that permits transient responses is considerably smaller
than the parameter set that permits sustained responses. However, transient responses can also result from
degradation of core signaling components and ligand which is not considered here.
Transient and oscillatory responses are similar in that the response must decay quickly in spite of the
continuous presence of ligand. A similar comparison of the parameter ranges that permit transient (green)
or oscillatory (blue and magenta) responses (Fig. 3B) indeed reveals that similar restrictions apply (i.e.
large shuttling rate between cytoplasm and nucleus, k8, and strong negative feedback, k14, k15, k17, k18,
and k19). However, in case of oscillations the response restarts and in addition we indeed notice a strong
restriction of the rate of ligand-receptor binding k2 in case of oscillatory responses. Fig. 4B shows the clear
segregation of the parameter sets that give rise to ”transient” (green), dampened (blue) or sustained
(purple) oscillatory responses in a plane spanned by the receptor-ligand binding rate k2 and the speed of
I-Smad turn-over (k16 × k17 × k19). Oscillations are observed only when k2 is small such that ligand binds
slowly to its receptor and the pool of free receptor is depleted gradually (Additional file 2, Fig. S6A). As a
consequence free receptor is still available when I-Smad has downregulated the response and ligand can
still trigger a further response. Conversely, if k2 is large, receptors are rapidly bound to the ligand (whose

10

concentration is constant in this model), and once the response has terminated, there is no free receptor
available to induce a new response (Additional file 2, Fig. S6B). k2, and thus the speed with which the free
receptor concentration decreases, critically determine the dampening of oscillations. A 10-fold change in
the value of k2 can transform sustained oscillations in highly dampened ones (compare panels A and B in
Additional file 2, Fig. S6). Rapid degradation of I-Smads is important for sustained oscillations because
otherwise all receptors become rapidly sequestered by I-Smad and the response is terminated. Accordingly
inclusion of receptor endocytosis and recycling to the membrane (cycling) combined with the removal of
the I-Smad would allow further oscillatory cycles.
Each parameter in our simple model integrates the effects of many further interactions as may also arise
from cross-talk. Thus it has been shown that the phosphorylation of Smad in its linker region by
Ras-activated MAPK induces a cytoplasmic retention of R-Smads [15], which in our system would be
represented by a lower shuttling rate into the nucleus (k8). Interestingly k8 indeed strongly influenced the
response type. Another parameter that appears to be important in determining the response
characteristics is the binding rate of TGF-β to the receptor (k2). Our description of the processes at the
cell membrane is very simple and thus k2 has also to take in account the regulation of TGF-β outside the
cell by soluble sequestering factors and membrane-bound co-receptors as well as processes that affect the
receptor density on the cell membrane. Those auxiliary factors play therefore a crucial role in the TGF-β
pathway flexibility. We should stress that all parts of the parameter space should be readily reachable for
the cell and small adjustments in the parameter values should thus be sufficient to alter the response type.

The regulatory impact of cellular protein concentrations
The kinetic rate constants of a reaction depend on the particular protein chemistry. While rate constants
may be different between species, rate constants are unlikely to differ between individuals of one species
and even more unlikely to differ within a single individual. However, during the development of an
organism the same signaling network can elicit qualitatively different responses at different times and
locations. We therefore wondered whether changes in the protein concentrations (which can be easily
adjusted by an organism or result from crosstalks with other signaling pathways) would enable the required
regulatory flexibility. To find parameter ranges that would permit such flexibility we repeated our previous
screen with different concentrations of receptors, R-Smad or Co-Smad: for each of the three species we first
carried out 3 screens where concentrations were increased or decreased from their reference concentration

11

c0 to c0 /100 or c0 × 100. We then looked for parameter sets that would permit a switch between a
transient and a sustained output response as the protein concentrations changed. Our parameter sampling
space is huge (23 parameters, with most of them sampled over 4 orders of magnitude, Additional file 1,
Table S1) and a switch could be observed for less than 1% of the sets (Fig. 5A, black bars). When we
plotted the parameter ranges for which we observed switching we noted that a number of parameter ranges
were restricted compared to the initial sampling range (Additional file 2, Fig. S7). We therefore wondered
whether there would be particular parameter ranges for which concentration-dependent switching would be
more frequent. Indeed when we reduced the sampling ranges of the parameter values (Additional file 2,
Fig. S7) about 20% of the parameter sets enabled switching as the R-Smad concentration was varied, 25%
as the receptor concentration was varied, and almost 30% as the Co-Smad concentration was varied
(Fig. 5A, grey bars). We notice that the only rates that were not restricted while enhancing the fraction of
parameter sets that permit switching were the rate of ligand-T GF βR unbinding (k1) and of I-Smad
mRNA export (k16). These rates thus appear to have very little influence on the overall kinetics within the
screened range. We next wondered what would be the minimal change needed in protein concentration to
allow the switch. To that end we carried out 9 supplementary screens for each of the three species where
concentrations were increased or decreased from their reference concentration c0 over a 100-fold range in
multiples of 3, i.e. c0 (n) = c0 3n with n = [−4, −3, . . . , 3, 4]. Interestingly, while a change in the response
type was observed most frequently in response to changes in the Co-Smad concentration (Fig. 5A, grey
bars), switches could be achieved with much smaller concentration changes when the receptor or R-Smad
concentration were varied (Fig. 5B). Thus only a 3-10 fold change in the receptor and R-Smad
concentration was typically required while the Co-Smad concentration typically needed to be changed by
20-100-fold. The I-Smad Smad6 has indeed been reported to inhibit TGF-β signaling by sequestering the
Co-Smad Smad4 in an inactive complex [33]. It has further been argued that cross-talk between different
TGF-β pathways may be integrated via a competition for Co-Smads. Based on our observations such
competition would need to greatly alter the concentration of available Co-Smad to be effective and the
receptor and the R-Smad would offer a more sensitive point of control. Previous models have focused on
the dynamical control of the TGF-β receptor and have shown that this indeed offers great regulatory
flexibility [29]. Experiments further show that the I-Smad may also affect the turn-over rate of R-Smads
and thus affect their cellular concentration [34].

12

TGF-β dose-dependent response
Finally we wondered how different ligand concentrations would affect the cellular response. The impact of
different TGF-β concentrations have already been studied by Clarke et al. [35] and Zi et al. [25], but there
the results were strongly affected by ligand depletion since the TGF-β concentrations were allowed to go
down over time because of internalization and degradation. We were interested how different, but constant,
stimuli would affect the response - the effect of ligand depletion can then be deduced as response to
decreasing ligand concentrations. As we varied the ligand concentration between 0.2 pM and 20 nM we
noticed that only for a very small fraction of parameter sets (less than 0.5%) the response type changed
qualitatively as the concentration varied. The parameter sets were not clustered and a further increase by
restricting parameter ranges (as in case of the cellular protein concentrations) could not be achieved. Even
though changes in the TGF-β concentration cannot switch the response type in our simulations, the
duration of the response increases with increasing TGF-β concentrations as previously observed by Zi et
al. [25]. This increase was, however, insufficient to alter the response type according to our definitions.
The ligand concentration clearly affects the maximal response in our simulations, and the transcription
factor activity increases with the ligand concentration until a plateau is reached (Fig. 6A). In case of
sustained responses (but not for transient responses) the peak value is reached more quickly at higher
ligand concentrations (data not shown). The saturation curve in Fig. 6A can be fitted with an exponential
curve, i.e. Opeak = max (Opeak )(1 − exp (−x/η)) where x refers to the TGF-β ligand concentration
(x = 0.2, 2, 6, 10, 15, 20, 50, 100, 150, 200, 1000, 20000 pM) and the parameter η indicates the concentration
range for which the response saturates. Histograms of η (Fig. 6B,C) show that the sustained response
(Fig. 6C) tends to saturate at lower TGF-β concentrations than transient responses (Fig. 6B). Moreover, in
case of sustained responses there is a biphasic distribution in the saturation concentrations with one peak
around 0.1 pM and the other one around 10pM (Fig. 6C). However, in both transient and sustained cases,
the transcription factor is able to reach similar maximal values (Additional file 2, Fig. S8). On the
contrary, the maximal output value reached by oscillating responses is much lower than in the sustained
and transient case. Our results are mostly in agreement with the conclusions drawn by Chung et al.
(2009), who showed also that transient TGF-β responses saturate. However, deviating from our results,
Chung and co-workers observed that also in transient responses the peak value is reached more rapidly as
the stimulus concentration increases.
For parameter sets that give rise to oscillatory responses, changing the input strength and shape does not
13

influence the period of oscillation but modulates the evolution of the oscillations amplitudes (data not
shown). When exposed to sustained, high TGF-β concentrations the amplitude of oscillations starts to
decay from the beginning. When the TGF-β concentration raises progressively, the amplitude of oscillation
first raises and then decays, reflecting two competing phenomena : the amplitude of oscillations tends to be
proportional to the input, but at the same time the sequestration of the receptor by the inhibitor leads to a
dampening of the amplitude.
We next investigated in how far the kinetic parameters can influence the saturation concentration
(Fig. 6B,C) and the maximal output value at saturation (Additional file 2, Fig. S8 and Additional file 2,
Fig. S9). For transient responses it is mainly the rate of ligand-receptor binding, k2, that determines the
saturation concentration (Fig. 6D and Additional file 2, Fig. S10). In case of slow binding higher
concentrations of ligand are required to saturate the receptors. The saturation concentration for sustained
responses are determined both by the receptor-ligand binding rate, k2, and by the cytoplasm-nucleus
shuttling rate, k8 (Fig. 6E and Additional file 2, Fig. S10). Fast shuttling enables more rapid deactivation
of Smads as based on observations by Hill and coworkers [3] dephosphorylation is restricted to the nucleus
in our model. As discussed above k2 and k8 have both been reported to be modulated by other processes.
The saturation concentration can therefore also be adjusted by cross-talk.
The different saturation concentrations are likely important for the TGF-β response as different genes can
be activated or repressed depending on the nuclear Smad complex concentration. While the mechanism by
which different concentrations of the nuclear transcription factor complex translate into different
transcriptional responses has not been resolved, likely mechanisms include promotor selection based on
differences in the promoter binding-site affinities, cross-repression, and the establishment of a reciprocal of
repressor gene expression [36, 37].

Proportional ”faithful” responses
When ligands of the TGF-β family act as a morphogen, as it is for example the case for Dpp in Drosophila
or Activin in Xenopus, cells must finely sense extracellular concentrations and transduce this signal inside
the cell. We therefore looked for parameter sets leading to a response proportional to the input which we
term ”faithful”. The parameter sets that gave rise to anything but sustained responses (i.e. transient,
oscillatory, non-responsive, undefined responses) to sustained ligand exposure can already be discarded.
Those parameter sets that gave rise to sustained responses to sustained ligand exposure we sought to

14

analyse further with dynamic input signals. Here we used as input a function that first linearly increased
from 0 to 720 pM for 5 hours and then linearly decreased to zero over the next 5 hours (Fig. 7A). To screen
our simulations for ”faithful” parameter sets we normalized both the input and the output with respect to
their respective highest values, and calculated the squared residuals R between input and output according
X
to R =
(inputj − outputj )2 . The 10% sets with the lowest residual were classified as ”faithful” and the
j

10% sets with the highest residual were classified as ”unfaithful” for further analysis (Additional file 2,
Fig. S11).

A response is faithful if the output is proportional to the input over time, i.e. youtput (t) = α × yinput (t),
where α is the proportionality coefficient. This requires (i) that the output adapts rapidly to changes in
the input, and (ii) that the response does not saturate, i.e. max (youtput (t)) < max(Opeak ), which is the
case if the proportionality coefficient α is low and/or the maximal response value max(Opeak ) is high.
Those requirements are reflected in the constraints on the parameter values (Fig. 7B-C) for faithful
responses, i.e. a low binding rate of TGF-β to its receptor and a low phosphorylation rate prevent early
saturation of the output, while a relative weak feedback and a low binding rate of the I-Smad to the
receptor prevent a premature termination of the response. We have previously discussed the regulation of
the binding rate of TGF-β to its receptor, k2 and thus now focus on the feedback. The different I-Smads
have been shown to vary in their effects. Thus Dad, the Drosophila I-Smad, appears to interfere mainly
with the BMP-like pathways (Tkv and Sax receptor dependent pathways) but not the Activin-like
Babo-dependent pathway [38]. Inhibition by vertebrate Smad6 and Smad7 can be achieved by
sequestration, enhanced degradation, or an impact on phosphorylation. The different processes likely have
different efficiencies and this will determine the efficiency of the negative feedback.
Our results indicate that under certain parameter restrictions the extracellular concentration is directly
reflected in the output concentration. In that case, TGF-β can act as a morphogen, conveying positional
information and determining cell-fate, subjected to the set of activated and repressed genes.

Conclusions
The duration of the signaling response is thought to be an important factor influencing the cell’s
phenotypic response to TGF-β. We have employed a very simple model of the TGF-β network to better
understand the mechanistic basis of the observed signaling plasticity. We find that the qualitative response
(transient, sustained, oscillations, proportional responses) to a constant ligand exposure can indeed be
15

changed by altering the value of a single parameter value. Since we consider a simple model each
parameter value represents a wider range of processes and our observation thus implies that both changes
in protein concentration as well as cross-talk between signaling pathways can alter the qualitative response
to a TGF-β stimulus. Many more complicated models for TGF-β signaling as well as for other signaling
networks have been proposed already. To better understand the regulatory impact of cross-talk it will be
important to connect experimentally validated models for the TGF-β network also to those for other
pathway models. While many kinetic parameters have been measured an important parameter that
remains often unmeasured is the protein concentrations. To better predict the responses in different cell
types it will be important to obtain quantitative information on protein abundance in different cell types and eventually in individual cells.

Authors contributions
DI and GF developed the model, GF and MH carried out an initial analysis of the model, GF developed
the infrastructure for the parameter screens, GC carried out the analysis of the model, MH created Fig. 1,
GC and DI wrote the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by an iPhD SystemsX grant to Georgios Fengos.

16

References
1. Blobe GC, Schiemann WP, Lodish HF: Role of transforming growth factor beta in human disease. N
Engl J Med 2000, 342(18):1350–8.
2. Shi Y, Massague J: Mechanisms of TGF-beta signaling from cell membrane to the nucleus. Cell
2003, 113(6):685–700.
3. Schmierer B, Tournier AL, Bates PA, Hill CS: Mathematical modeling identifies Smad
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling as a dynamic signal-interpreting system. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008,
105(18):6608–13.
4. Pierreux CE, Nicolas FJ, Hill CS: Transforming growth factor beta-independent shuttling of Smad4
between the cytoplasm and nucleus. Mol Cell Biol 2000, 20(23):9041–54.
5. Kang Y, Chen CR, Massague J: A self-enabling TGFbeta response coupled to stress signaling: Smad
engages stress response factor ATF3 for Id1 repression in epithelial cells. Mol Cell 2003,
11(4):915–26.
6. Kavsak P, Rasmussen RK, Causing CG, Bonni S, Zhu H, Thomsen GH, Wrana JL: Smad7 binds to Smurf2
to form an E3 ubiquitin ligase that targets the TGF beta receptor for degradation. Mol Cell 2000,
6(6):1365–75.
7. Ebisawa T, Fukuchi M, Murakami G, Chiba T, Tanaka K, Imamura T, Miyazono K: Smurf1 interacts with
transforming growth factor-beta type I receptor through Smad7 and induces receptor
degradation. J Biol Chem 2001, 276(16):12477–80.
8. Randall RA, Germain S, Inman GJ, Bates PA, Hill CS: Different Smad2 partners bind a common
hydrophobic pocket in Smad2 via a defined proline-rich motif. EMBO J 2002, 21(1-2):145–56.
9. Hayashi H, Abdollah S, Qiu Y, Cai J, Xu YY, Grinnell BW, Richardson MA, Topper JN, Gimbrone J M A,
Wrana JL, Falb D: The MAD-related protein Smad7 associates with the TGFbeta receptor and
functions as an antagonist of TGFbeta signaling. Cell 1997, 89(7):1165–73.
10. Massague J, Chen YG: Controlling TGF-beta signaling. Genes Dev 2000, 14(6):627–44.
11. Esparza-Lopez J, Montiel JL, Vilchis-Landeros MM, Okadome T, Miyazono K, Lopez-Casillas F: Ligand
binding and functional properties of betaglycan, a co-receptor of the transforming growth
factor-beta superfamily. Specialized binding regions for transforming growth factor-beta and
inhibin A. J Biol Chem 2001, 276(18):14588–96.
12. Di Guglielmo GM, Le Roy C, Goodfellow AF, Wrana JL: Distinct endocytic pathways regulate
TGF-beta receptor signalling and turnover. Nat Cell Biol 2003, 5(5):410–21.
13. Pyrowolakis G, Hartmann B, Muller B, Basler K, Affolter M: A simple molecular complex mediates
widespread BMP-induced repression during Drosophila development. Dev Cell 2004, 7(2):229–40.
14. Moustakas A, Souchelnytskyi S, Heldin CH: Smad regulation in TGF-beta signal transduction. J Cell
Sci 2001, 114(Pt 24):4359–69.
15. Kretzschmar M, Doody J, Timokhina I, Massague J: A mechanism of repression of TGFbeta/ Smad
signaling by oncogenic Ras. Genes Dev 1999, 13(7):804–16.
16. Wicks SJ, Lui S, Abdel-Wahab N, Mason RM, Chantry A: Inactivation of smad-transforming growth
factor beta signaling by Ca(2+)-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. Mol Cell Biol 2000,
20(21):8103–11.
17. Matsuura I, Denissova NG, Wang G, He D, Long J, Liu F: Cyclin-dependent kinases regulate the
antiproliferative function of Smads. Nature 2004, 430(6996):226–31.
18. Grimm OH, Gurdon JB: Nuclear exclusion of Smad2 is a mechanism leading to loss of competence.
Nat Cell Biol 2002, 4(7):519–22.
19. Clarke DC, Liu X: Decoding the quantitative nature of TGF-beta/Smad signaling. Trends Cell Biol
2008, 18(9):430–42.
20. Clarke DC, Betterton MD, Liu X: Systems theory of Smad signalling. Syst Biol (Stevenage) 2006,
153(6):412–24.

17

21. Nicolas FJ, Hill CS: Attenuation of the TGF-beta-Smad signaling pathway in pancreatic tumor
cells confers resistance to TGF-beta-induced growth arrest. Oncogene 2003, 22(24):3698–711.
22. Melke P, Jonsson H, Pardali E, ten Dijke P, Peterson C: A rate equation approach to elucidate the
kinetics and robustness of the TGF-beta pathway. Biophys J 2006, 91(12):4368–80.
23. Zi Z, Klipp E: Constraint-based modeling and kinetic analysis of the Smad dependent TGF-beta
signaling pathway. PLoS One 2007, 2(9):e936.
24. Chung SW, Miles FL, Sikes RA, Cooper CR, Farach-Carson MC, Ogunnaike BA: Quantitative modeling
and analysis of the transforming growth factor beta signaling pathway. Biophys J 2009,
96(5):1733–50.
25. Zi Z, Feng Z, Chapnick DA, Dahl M, Deng D, Klipp E, Moustakas A, Liu X: Quantitative analysis of
transient and sustained transforming growth factor-beta signaling dynamics. Mol Syst Biol 2011,
7:492.
26. Novák B, Tyson JJ: Design principles of biochemical oscillators. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2008,
9(12):981–991.
27. Shankaran H, Ippolito DL, Chrisler WB, Resat H, Bollinger N, Opresko LK, Wiley HS: Rapid and sustained
nuclear-cytoplasmic ERK oscillations induced by epidermal growth factor. Molecular systems biology
2009, 5:332.
28. Paulsen M, Legewie S, Eils R, Karaulanov E, Niehrs C: Negative feedback in the bone morphogenetic
protein 4 (BMP4) synexpression group governs its dynamic signaling range and canalizes
development. PNAS 2011.
29. Vilar JM, Jansen R, Sander C: Signal processing in the TGF-beta superfamily ligand-receptor
network. PLoS Comput Biol 2006, 2:e3.
30. Geier F, Fengos G, Iber D: A computational analysis of the dynamic roles of talin, Dok1, and PIPKI
for integrin activation. PloS One 2011, in press.
31. Ma W, Trusina A, El-Samad H, Lim Wa, Tang C: Defining network topologies that can achieve
biochemical adaptation. Cell 2009, 138(4):760–73.
32. Shankaran H, Ippolito DL, Chrisler WB, Resat H, Bollinger N, Opresko LK, Wiley HS: Rapid and sustained
nuclear-cytoplasmic ERK oscillations induced by epidermal growth factor. Mol Syst Biol 2009, 5:332.
33. Hata A, Lagna G, Massagué J, Hemmati-Brivanlou A: Smad6 inhibits BMP/Smad1 signaling by
specifically competing with the Smad4 tumor suppressor. Genes Dev 1998, 12(2):186–197.
34. Wu MY, Hill CS: Tgf-beta superfamily signaling in embryonic development and homeostasis. Dev
Cell 2009, 16(3):329–343.
35. Clarke DC, Brown ML, Erickson Ra, Shi Y, Liu X: Transforming growth factor beta depletion is the
primary determinant of Smad signaling kinetics. Molecular and cellular biology 2009, 29(9):2443–55.
36. Schmierer B, Hill CS: TGFbeta-SMAD signal transduction: molecular specificity and functional
flexibility. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007, 8(12):970–82.
37. Ashe HL, Briscoe J: The interpretation of morphogen gradients. Development 2006, 133(3):385–94.
38. Kamiya Y, Miyazono K, Miyazawa K: Specificity of the inhibitory effects of Dad on TGF-beta family
type I receptors, Thickveins, Saxophone, and Baboon in Drosophila. FEBS letters 2008,
582(17):2496–2500. [Kamiya, Yuto Miyazono, Kohei Miyazawa, Keiji Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t
Netherlands FEBS letters FEBS Lett. 2008 Jul 23;582(17):2496-500. Epub 2008 Jun 25.].

18

Figures

Figure 1: A simple model of TGF-β signaling with I-Smad mediated negative feedback. The
ligand TGF-β reversibly binds to the TGF-β receptor (reactions 1 and 2), which is then phosphorylated
to become fully active (3 and 4). The active receptor induces phosphorylation of R-Smad (denoted simply
Smad)(7), which in turn can reversibly dimerize or form a complex with Co-Smad (10 and 11). Those two
reactions can take place either in the cytoplasm or in the nucleus and the five species Smad, phosphorylated
Smad, Co-Smad, homodimers and heterodimers can shuttle from the cytoplasm to the nucleus and back (8,
9 and 12). Nuclear Smad/Co-Smadf complexes act as transcription factors and trigger the transcription of
I-Smad mRNA in the nucleus (14 and 15). The I-Smad mRNA then shuttles to the cytoplasm (16), where it
can be degraded (17) or translated into I-Smad (18). I-Smad mediates a negative feedback by sequestering
the active receptor (5 and 6) and can be degraded (19).

19

Figure 2: Criteria to define the different TGF-β signaling responses. All responses must exceed
a threshold concentration of 10 pM initially to be considered responsive. (A) Sustained responses: The
response must reach 90% of the maximal value Opeak within 2 hours and retain 90% of this maximal value
until the end of 10 hours simulation. (B) Transient responses: The response must exceed 10 pM and
subsequently return to less than 10% of the highest value Opeak within 2hours of stimulation. The final
value Oend must be lower than 1pM. (C-D) Oscillations: After the initial ≥10pM peak at least four further
peaks must exceed 1 pM in amplitude. Depending on whether the fifth amplitude is less or higher than half
the second amplitude we distinguish (C) sustained and and (D) dampened oscillations respectively.

20

Figure 3: Box plots of the parameters corresponding to the different responses types (A) Box
plots of parameter sets leading to a transient (green) or sustained (red) response. Parameters that differ
are mainly k8, k10, k11, k13 (shuttling rate from cytoplasm to nucleus, formation/dissolution of the Smad
dimers, and dephosphorylation of R-Smad), and k5, k6, k14, k15, k17, k18, k19 (all related to the strengh of
the feedback). (B) Box plots of parameter sets leading to a transient (green) or oscillatory (blue) response.
k16, k17, k19 (dynamics of the I-Smad mRNA and I-Smad protein) and k2 (binding of TGF-β to its receptor)
are key determinants of the response kind. Ranges of the uniform sampling distributions, as stated in Table
S1, are indicated by grey boxes.

21

Figure 4: Impact of kinetic parameters on the type of the TGF-β response. (A,C) A strong
negative feedback, fast nuclear shuttling of Smads and a rapid dissociation of the dimers favour a transient
(green) over a sustained response (red). (B,D) Fast production and degradation of the I-Smad mRNA and
I-Smad protein is required for oscillations to appear, and a low TGF-β receptor on-rate enhances oscillatory
(blue and magenta in the scatter plot, and black to blue in the contour plot) relative to a transient (green
in the scatter plot, and green to yellow in the contour plot) response.

22

Figure 5: A change in protein concentrations can switch the type of the TGF-β response. (A)
Percentage of parameter sets that permit a switch in the qualitative response (transient versus stustained
response) to ligand when TGF-β Receptor, R-Smad or Co-Smad concentrations are increased or decreased
by 100-fold. The parameter sets were drawn from the ranges as specified in Additional file 1, Table S1
(black), or in more (grey) and more (light grey) restricted ranges as shown in Additional file 2, Fig. S7.
(B) The minimal relative change that is required in the concentrations of TGF-β Receptor (black), R-Smad
(grey), or Co-Smad (light grey) to switch between transient and sustained responses when parameters were
drawn from the most restricted range (corresponding to the light grey column in panel A and the lightest
colour in Additional file 2, Fig. S7.

23

Figure 6: TGF-β dose-dependent response. (A) The pathway response increases with increasing
ligand concentration until a plateau is reached. The saturation curve can be described with an exponential
function, Opeak = max (Opeak )(1−exp (−x/η)) where x refers to the ligand concentration (which was sampled
at 12 concentrations between 0.2 pM and 20 nM), and the parameter η is characteristic for the saturation
concentration. (B,C) A histogram of the distribution of η, the parameter characteristic for the saturation
concentration for (B) the transient response, and (C) the sustained response. (D) For the transient set,
the parameter that determines if the saturation concentration is high (green) or low (dark green) is k2, the
binding rate of TGF-β to its receptor. (E) For the sustained set, two parameters are crucial. k2 (binding
of TGF-β) and k8 (shuttling into the nucleus) set the saturation concentration either to high (red) or low
(dark red).

24

Figure 7: Parameter Dependency of Faithful Responses. (A) To investigate the faithfulness of
the response (red curve), we re-analysed those parameter sets that had produced sustained responses to a
sustained input (red parameter sets in Additional file 2, Fig. S5) with time-varying inputs (linearly increasing
and then decreasing TGF-β input concentration, black curve). Based on the squared residuals (grey area)
between the normalized inputs (black line) and outputs (red line) we defined faithful and unfaithful responses
as those in the first and last 10-quantile respectively. (B) An inefficient activation of the TGF-β receptor
and a weak negative feedback favours faithful (light red to yellow) over unfaithful (black to salmon-pink)
responses.

25

Additional files
Additional file 1
Title : Supplementary Tables
Description : Tables of the model parameters and the equations used in the model.
Additional file 2
Title : Supplementary Figures
Description : Figures for the response classification of the parameter screen (Fig. S5), the dependance of the
damping of oscillations on k2 (Fig. S6), boxplots for the parameter sets that can lead to both transient and
sustained responses (Fig. S7), distribution of the maximal output value (Fig. S8), boxplots for parameters with high
and low saturation value (Fig. S10), and with high and low maximal value (Fig. S9), boxplots for faithful and
unfaithful parameters sets (Fig. S11), the evolution of the concentrations of all species in a representative cases
(Fig. S1, S2, S3 and S4).
Additional file 3
Title : Model in Cell Designer
Description : Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) file of the model.

26

arXiv:1111.0201v2 [q-bio.MN] 2 Nov 2011

Supplementary figures
The plasticity of TGF-β signaling
Geraldine Cellière, Georgios Fengos, Marianne Hervé and Dagmar Iber

1

Figure S1: Evolution of the concentrations of all species in a representative transient response
case. Note that different scales are chosen for each graph. The parameter set used is listed in Additional
file 1, Table S3.
2

Figure S2: Evolution of the concentrations of all species in a representative transient response
case (continued). Note that different scales are chosen for each graph. The parameter set used is listed in
Additional file 1, Table S3.
3

Figure S3: Evolution of the concentrations of all species in a representative sustained response
case. Note that different scales are chosen for each graph. The parameter set used is listed in Additional
file 1, Table S3.
4

Figure S4: Evolution of the concentrations of all species in a representative sustained response
case (continued). Note that different scales are chosen for each graph. The parameter set used is listed in
Additional file 1, Table S3.
5

Figure S5: Response classification of the Parameter screen. Based on the definitions in Fig. 2 the
parameter sets can be classified to give rise to (A) sustained (red), transient (green), or no responses (grey)
[black parameter sets are undefined according to these criteria], or to (B) dampened (blue) or sustained
(magenta) oscillations. Dampened oscillations (blue) have lower number of peaks before they completely
vanish, compared to more sustained oscillations (purple). (C) Sustained (purple) and dampened (blue)
oscillations exhibit the same range of periods, and (D) the time at which oscillation vanishes (duration) is
slightly smaller for dampened oscillations.

6

Figure S6: Damping of oscillations mainly depend on k2, the binding rate of TGF-β to its
receptor. (A) Transcription factor concentration (blue) and free T GF βR (black) evolution over time when
k2 is small. Oscillations are sustained and the pool of free receptor decreases slowly. (B) Transcription
factor concentration (blue) and free T GF βR (black) evolution over time when k2 is 10 times larger than
in A. Oscillations are dampened because quickly there is no free receptor available to bind to the ligand to
induce a new peak in the transcription factor nuclear concentration.

7

Figure S7: Parameter sets that can lead to both transient and sustained responses are constrained. Box plots of parameter sets that can lead to both transient and sustained response when (A)
T GF βR, (B) R-Smad, or (C) Co-Smad concentration is 100 fold higher or lower compared to the value of
the initial screening. From the first round (dark colors) to the third round (light colors) the screening ranges
are more and more reduced, depending on the boxplot of the previous round, in order to find parameter
ranges that maximize the number of parameter sets switching. Ranges of the uniform sampling distributions
are indicated by grey boxes.

8

Figure S8: Distribution of the maximal output value for the transient (A) and sustained (B)
ensemble. Different TGF-β concentration were applied to the system and the maximal value that the
output could reach was determined. For more details see Fig. 6.(A) The distribution of the maximal output
value for the transient ensemble is shown. For most of the sets, this value is comprised between 100 and
1000pM. (B) The distribution of the maximal output value for the sustained ensemble is shown. For most
of the sets, this value is around 100pM, a bit lower than for the transient set.

9

Figure S9: Box plots of (A) sustained and (B) transient parameter sets with high (light colors)
or low (dark colors) maximal reachable output value. Different TGF-β concentration were applied to
the system and the maximal value that the output could reach was determined. For more details see Fig. 6.
(A) For the parameter set classified as sustained in the initial screening (Additional file 2, Fig. S5), sets with
high (light red) or low (dark red) maximal output value are boxplotted. Parameters that differ are mainly
k10-k11 (formation and dissociation of the Smad/Smad and Smad/CoSmad complexes), and k8-k9 (shuttling
rate from cytoplasm into the nucleus and vice-versa). (B) For the parameter set classified as transient in
the initial screening (Additional file 2, Fig. S5), sets with high (light green) or low (dark green) maximal
output value are boxplotted. Parameters that differ are mainly k2 (binding of TGF-β to its receptor), k9
(shuttling into the cytoplasm), k10 (formation of the Smad/Smad and Smad/CoSmad complexes) and k15
(I-Smad mRNA synthesis). Ranges of the uniform sampling distributions are indicated by grey boxes.
10

Figure S10: Box plots of (A) sustained and (B) transient parameter sets with high (light colors)
or low (dark colors) TGF-β saturation concentration. Different TGF-β concentration were applied
to the system and the ligand concentration above which the output peak value cannot increase anymore
was determined. For more details see Fig. 6. (A) For the parameter set classified as sustained in the
initial screening (Additional file 2, Fig. S5), sets with high (light red) or low (dark red) TGF-β saturation
concentration are boxplotted. Parameters that differ are mainly k1-k2 (affinity of TGF-β for its receptor),
k3-k4 (phosphorylation affinity of the receptor bound to TGF-β), and k8 (shuttling rate into the nucleus).
(B) For the parameter set classified as transient in the initial screening (Additional file 2, Fig. S5), sets with
high (light green) or low (dark green) TGF-β saturation concentration are boxplotted. The only parameter
that differs significantly is k2 (the binding rate of TGF-β to the receptor). Ranges of the uniform sampling
distributions are indicated by grey boxes.
11

Figure S11: Box plots of faithful (light red) and unfaithful (dark red) parameter sets. Procedure
to classify the parameter sets into faithful or unfaithful is explained in Fig. 7A. Parameters that differ are
mainly k1-k2 (affinity of TGF-β for its receptor), k3-k4 (phosphorylation affinity of the receptor bound to
TGF-β), k5-k6 (affinity of the inhibitor for the receptor bound to TGF-β) and k15, k17, k18, k19 (all related
to the strenght of the feedback). Ranges of the uniform sampling distributions are indicated by grey boxes.

12

arXiv:1111.0201v2 [q-bio.MN] 2 Nov 2011

Supplementary tables
The plasticity of TGF-β signaling
Geraldine Cellière, Georgios Fengos, Marianne Hervé and Dagmar Iber
Table S1: Model parameters. Parameter names, units, ranges and literature values with their references.
Table S2: Reaction equations used in the model. R-Smad is denoted as Smad, T GF βR represents
the receptor, an underscore between two species indicates the complex of both species, P stands for phosphorylated proteins and N symbolize the nuclear location. When no nuclear location is specified, the name
depicts the cytoplasmic species. c = Vc /Vref and n = Vn /Vref account for the volume difference between
nucleus and cytoplasm as we work with concentrations. Here Vc and Vn refer to the cytoplasmic and nuclear
volumes while Vref is a reference volume.
Table S3 : Parameters used in Additional file 1, Fig. S8, S9, S10, and S11. A representative
transient and a representative sustained response were selected and the corresponding parameter sets were
used to plot the temporal evolution of each species in both cases.

1

Parameters

Units

Minimum

Maximum

Literature

References

c

-

2.3

2.3

2.3

[1]

n

-

1

1

1

[1]

1

4

h
k1

−1

s

10

−5

-

−2

−5

2.3 × 10

10

−3

and 5 × 10

[2, 3]

k2

pM −1 .s−1

10−7

10−3

[2, 3]

k3

s−1

10−3

1.5 × 10−4 and 1.54 × 10−4

1

-

-

k4

s−1

10−3

1

-

-

k5

pM.s−1

10−4

1

-

-

−6

1

-

-

10−7

10−5

−5

−1

4 × 10−7 and 3.5 × 10−6

k6
k7

−1

s

pM.s−1
−1

10

k8

s

10

k9

s−1

10−5

10−1

k10

pM −1 .s−1

10−8

10−4

−1

10

k12

-

10−2

k13

−1

k11

s

s

10

−4

−3

10

1

−3

[1, 3, 4]

5.6 × 10−3 and 9.4 × 10−2 and 5.8 × 10−3

[1, 3, 4]

and 8.3 × 10

[1, 3, 4]

1.8 × 10

[1, 3, 4]

−6

−4

and 7.5 × 10

4.2 × 10

10

10−2

103

k15

pM

1

k16

s−1

k17
k18

s

10

k19

s−1

T GF βR

−2

and 1.5 × 10

5.7

−1

pM.s−1

and 2.7 × 10

1.6 × 10−5 and 1.4 × 10−6 and 3.9 × 10−6

10

k14

[1, 3]
−3

2.6 × 10

−5

[1]
−4

[3]

-

-

105

-

-

10−5

10−1

-

-

s−1

10−5

10−1

-

-

−1

−5

−1

10

-

-

10−5

10−1

-

-

pM

103

103

[1, 2, 4]

Smad

pM

6 × 104

Cosmad

pM

105

6 × 104

103 , 4 × 103 and 104

TGF-β

pM

200

1.78 × 105 , 3.6 × 105 , 105 and 1.5 × 105

105

105 , 8.4 × 105 , 105 and 1.5 × 105

[1, 2, 4, 5]

80

[5]

200
Table 1: Model parameters.

2

[1, 2, 4, 5]

Differential equations

Reactions definitions

3

d[T GF βR]
= r1 − r2
dt
d[T GF β T GF βR]
= −r1 + r2 − r3 + r4 + r6
dt
d[T GF β T GF βR P ]
= r3 − r4 − r5
dt
d[I Smad T GF β T GF βR P ]
= r5 − r6
dt
d[Smad]
= −r7 − r8/c + r9/c
dt
d[Smad P ]
= r7 − r10 + r11 − r12 + r13 − r17/c + r18/c
dt
d[CoSmad]
= −r12 + r13 − r14/c + r15/c
dt
d[Smad P Smad P ]
= r10 − r11 − r16/c
dt
d[Smad P CoSmad]
= r12 − r13 − r19/c
dt
d[Smad N ]
= r8/n − r9/n + r20
dt
d[Smad P Smad P N ]
= r16/n + r21 − r22
dt
d[Smad P N ]
= r17/n − r18/n − r20 − r21 + r22 − r23 + r24
dt
d[Smad P CoSmad N ]
= r19/n + r23 − r24
dt
d[CoSmad N ]
= r14/n − r15/n − r23 + r24
dt
d[I Smad mRN A1]
= r25 − r26/n
dt
d[I Smad mRN A2]
= r26/c − r27
dt
d[I Smad]
= r28 − r29 + r6 − r5
dt

r1 = k1 × [T GF β T GF βR]

r18 = k9 × [Smad P N ]

r2 = k2 × [T GF βR] × [T GF β]

r19 = k12 × k8 × [Smad P CoSmad]

r3 = k3 × [T GF β T GF βR]

r20 = k13 × [Smad P N ]

r4 = k4 × [T GF β T GF βR P ]

r21 = k10 × [Smad P N ] × [Smad P N ]

r5 = k5 × [T GF β T GF βR P ] × [I Smad]

r22 = k11 × [Smad P Smad P N ]

r6 = k6 × [I Smad T GF β T GF βR P ]

r23 = k10 × [Smad P N ] × [CoSmad N ]

r7 = k7 × [Smad] × [T GF β T GF βR P ]

r24 = k11 × [Smad P CoSmad N ]

r8 = k8 × [Smad]

r25 = k14 ×

r9 = k9 × [Smad N ]

r26 = k16 × [I Smad mRN A1]

r10 = k10 × [Smad P ] × [Smad P ]

r27 = k17 × [I Smad mRN A2]

r11 = k11 × [Smad P Smad P ]

r28 = k18 × [I Smad mRN A2]

r12 = k10 × [Smad P ] × [CoSmad]

r29 = k19 × [I Smad]

r13 = k11 × [Smad P CoSmad]
r14 = k8 × [CoSmad]
r15 = k9 × [CoSmad N ]
r16 = k12 × k8 × [Smad P Smad P ]
r17 = k8 × [Smad P ]

Table 2: Reaction equations used in the model.

[Smad P CoSmad N ]h
[Smad P CoSmad N ]h + k15h

Parameters

Transient Response

Sustained Response

h

2.06

1.32

k1

4.46 × 10−3

4.41 × 10−5

3.24 × 10−1

3.62 × 10−2

k2
k3
k4
k5
k6
k7
k8
k9
k10
k11
k12

4.39 × 10−6
1.92 × 10−3
5.49 × 10−4
1.29 × 10−5
9.35 × 10−6
1.04 × 10−2
7.50 × 10−4
5.12 × 10−8
9.23 × 10−3
5.13 × 10−2

1.47 × 10−6
1.11 × 10−2
2.40 × 10−1
4.69 × 10−4
6.44 × 10−6
2.05 × 10−3
1.74 × 10−4
2.77 × 10−7
5.61 × 10−3
1.02

1.64 × 10−3

k14

3.80 × 10−2

2.26 × 10−3

k15

28.52

1131.8

k16

2.14 × 10−2

2.74 × 10−4

4.34 × 10−2

1.05 × 10−3

k13

k17
k18
k19

8.05 × 10−5
4.12 × 10−4

2.04 × 10−1

6.02 × 10−2
1.21 × 10−5

Table 3: Parameters used in Additional file 1, Fig. S8, S9, S10, and S11.

4

References
[1] Schmierer B, Tournier AL, Bates PA, Hill CS: Mathematical modeling identifies Smad nucleocytoplasmic
shuttling as a dynamic signal-interpreting system. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008, 105(18):6608–13.
[2] Clarke DC, Liu X: Decoding the quantitative nature of TGF-beta/Smad signaling. Trends Cell Biol
2008, 18(9):430–42.
[3] Chung SW, Miles FL, Sikes RA, Cooper CR, Farach-Carson MC, Ogunnaike BA: Quantitative modeling and
analysis of the transforming growth factor beta signaling pathway. Biophys J 2009, 96(5):1733–50.
[4] Clarke DC, Betterton MD, Liu X: Systems theory of Smad signalling. Syst Biol (Stevenage) 2006, 153(6):412–
24.
[5] Zi Z, Klipp E: Constraint-based modeling and kinetic analysis of the Smad dependent TGF-beta
signaling pathway. PLoS One 2007, 2(9):e936.

5

