arXiv:1201.1030v1 [q-bio.GN] 4 Jan 2012

DnaA and the timing of chromosome replication in Escherichia coli as a function of growth rate
Matthew AA Grant1 , Chiara Saggioro2 , Ulisse Ferrari3 , Bruno Bassetti4,5 , Bianca Sclavi2
and Marco Cosentino Lagomarsino∗6,7,4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

BSS Group, Department of Physics, University of Cambridge, JJ Thomson Avenue, Cambridge, CB3 0HE, UK
LBPA, UMR 8113 du CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieurede Cachan, 61 Avenue du Président Wilson, 94235 CACHAN, France
Dip. Fisica, Università “Sapienza”, and IPCF-CNR, UOS Roma Piazzale A. Moro 2, I-00185, Rome, Italy
Università degli Studi di Milano, Dip. Fisica. Via Celoria 16, 20133 Milano, Italy
I.N.F.N. Milano, Italy
Génophysique / Genomic Physics Group, UMR7238 CNRS "Microorganism Genomics"
University Pierre et Marie Curie, 15 rue de l’École de Médecine, 75006 Paris, France

Email: Matthew AA Grant - maag2@cam.ac.uk; Chiara Saggioro - csaggior@lbpa.ens-cachan.fr ; Ulisse Ferrari ulisse.ferrari@gmail.com; Bruno Bassetti - Bruno.Bassetti@mi.infn.it; Bianca Sclavi - sclavi@lbpa.ens-cachan.fr; Marco Cosentino
Lagomarsino∗ - marco.cosentino-lagomarsino@upmc.fr;
∗ Corresponding

author

Abstract
Background: In Escherichia coli, overlapping rounds of DNA replication allow the bacteria to double in

faster times than the time required to copy the genome. The precise timing of initiation of DNA replication
is determined by a regulatory circuit that depends on the binding of a critical number of ATP-bound DnaA
proteins at the origin of replication, resulting in the melting of the DNA and the assembly of the replication
complex. The synthesis of DnaA in the cell is controlled by a growth-rate dependent, negatively
autoregulated gene found near the origin of replication. Both the regulatory and initiation activity of DnaA
depend on its nucleotide bound state and its availability.
Results: In order to investigate the contributions of the different regulatory processes to the timing of

initiation of DNA replication at varying growth rates, we formulate a minimal quantitative model of the
initiator circuit that includes the key ingredients known to regulate the activity of the DnaA protein. This
model describes the average-cell oscillations in DnaA-ATP/DNA during the cell cycle, for varying growth
rates. We evaluate the conditions under which this ratio attains the same threshold value at the time of
initiation, independently of the growth rate.
1

Conclusions: We find that a quantitative description of replication initiation by DnaA must rely on the

dependency of the basic parameters on growth rate, in order to account for the timing of initiation of DNA
replication at different cell doubling times. We isolate two main possible scenarios for this, depending on
the roles of DnaA autoregulation and DnaA ATP-hydrolysis regulatory process. One possibility is that the
basal rate of regulatory inactivation by ATP hydrolysis must vary with growth rate. Alternatively, some
parameters defining promoter activity need to be a function of the growth rate. In either case, the basal
rate of gene expression needs to increase with the growth rate, in accordance with the known
characteristics of the dnaA promoter. Furthermore, both inactivation and autorepression reduce the
amplitude of the cell-cycle oscillations of DnaA-ATP/DNA.

Background
The coordination of DNA replication with cell division in E. coli is a classic problem of bacterial physiology [1]. It is
connected with the control of the bacterial DNA replication and cell division cycle as a function of the growth rate,
and it is an essential component for evolutionary adaptation to fast-growing conditions [2]. It is also a classic
problem for biological modeling [3–7]. The main outstanding questions have to do with the characterization of the
network of regulatory interactions by which cells determine the timing of initiation and limit it to once per cell cycle.
The theoretical foundations for understanding chromosome replication initiation in E. coli were set by Cooper and
Helmstetter [8], by showing that the time taken for a single chromosome to be replicated (C period) and the time
period between completion of chromosome replication and the following cell division (D period) were
approximately constant for a cell doubling time of less than one hour [9]. The same work also introduced the idea of
overlapping rounds of chromosome replication, where a round of replication can be initiated while an existing round
of replication is still proceeding (Figure 1). This mechanism allows E. coli to grow with a doubling time faster than
the time required to copy its genome. The question then arises of how the cell determines when to initiate DNA
replication and how this is coupled to the growth rate.
In 1968, Donachie calculated that the correct timing would be guaranteed by a constant ratio of the cell size at the
moment of initiation (termed the ‘initiation mass’) and the number of oriC in the cell [10]. Direct measurements of
this ratio or of the initiation mass from cell population are difficult. Thus, whether this ratio is effectively a constant

2

in cells with doubling times lower than one hour is to some extent an open question [11–14]. It was then proposed
and debated that the amount of an initiating factor accumulating with the cell’s mass could reach a threshold value
resulting in activation of the origin(s). The DnaA protein has been shown to possess the basic characteristics
necessary to act as such an initiator [15, 16]. Several monomers of DnaA bind cooperatively to oriC and induce DNA
melting required for assembly of the replication forks [17–19]. Its level of expression increases with the growth
rate [20] to result approximately in a constant amount of total DnaA per cell [16]. DnaA overexpression results in
earlier initiation, and when it is depleted it results in delayed initiation [21, 22].
In addition, DnaA exists under two forms, ATP or ADP bound. The first is required for activation of the origin, thus it
is usually called the active form [23]. After the replication of oriC, DnaA-ATP becomes converted to DnaA-ADP in a
process known as ‘RIDA’ (Regulatory Inactivation of DnaA). RIDA is mediated by the Hda protein and the beta
clamp subunit of the replisome and requires active replication forks [24, 25]. The hydrolysis of the ATP in a
DNA-replication dependent manner decreases the activity of the protein after initiation has taken place, thus reducing
the probability that a new initiation event will occur within the same cell cycle [24, 25]. At the same time the
synthesis of new DNA creates new DnaA binding sites that can titrate DnaA from the origin [5, 26, 27].
Other processes can contribute to prevent reinitiation within the same cell cycle, such as the binding of the SeqA
protein to the newly replicated, hemimethylated DNA [24, 28, 29]. It is believed that an “eclipse” period where
reinitiation is not possible allows a buffer time for the other processes such as RIDA to take effect and thus for the
levels of DnaA-ATP to decrease below the critical level for initiation. Several GATC sites are also found at the dnaA
promoter but their effect on the timing of initiation remains to be established [30, 31]. Finally, a set of proteins have
been shown to either inhibit or enhance the activity of DnaA at the origin. These are for the most part abundant
nucleoid proteins such as FIS, HU and IHF, that may play a regulatory role as a function of changes in the growth
phase [32].
DnaA-ATP binding to the origin must determine the timing of initiation for a range of growth rates and thus in the
presence of increasing genome amounts (providing non-specific binding sites). Thus, the amount of DnaA-ATP per
cell needs to increase with the decrease in doubling time. The dnaA gene is found next to the origin on the
chromosome, resulting in the gene copy-number increasing with the number of origins. In addition, the expression of
the dnaA gene is growth rate-dependent [16, 20, 33]. The dnaA promoter region contains multiple binding sites for
DnaA with differential affinity and specificity for the ATP- and ADP-bound forms of the protein and has been shown
to be autorepressed by DnaA-ATP but not DnaA-ADP [18]. Consistent with this negative autoregulation, the artificial
addition of DnaA boxes in the cell results in an increase in gene expression [27, 34–36] and inhibition of the RIDA
process or the presence of a mutant form of DnaA insensitive to RIDA (DnaAcos) results in a decrease in the level of
3

DnaA protein in the cell [37, 38]. Finally, DnaA is a transcription factor for a set of genes involved in regulation of
DNA replication [19] and it could thus act as a reporter of the DNA replication state of the cell in order to maintain
the correct stoichiometry of the DNA replication regulatory factors at varying growth rates and in response to
perturbation to the movement of the replication forks [39].
It has previously been proposed that the presence of both autoregulation and RIDA contributes to increased
robustness of the initiation regulatory network upon perturbations [24, 37]. In this work, we aim to determine the
relative roles of of these two regulatory processes in the control of the timing of initiation with changing growth rate.
We begin from the elements provided by the Cooper and Helmstetter model in order to estimate the initiation time at
different growth rates. The two main assumptions are that initiation of DNA replication is determined by a critical
amount of DnaA-ATP per non-specific site on the genome and that this threshold value remains constant as a
function of growth rate. On the other hand, the cellular and metabolic parameters can change with growth rate and
have an impact on the DnaA circuit. In order to understand this, we use information from systematic studies of
cellular changes with growth rate [40, 41]. Finally, the volume of the cell is assumed to be a less relevant background
as a reservoir of DnaA-ATP than the number of non-specific binding sites on the DNA [42].
The resulting equations describe, via a continuous change in parameter values with growth rate, the oscillations in
DnaA-ATP per non-specific site and the attainment of a constant threshold as a function of growth rate. This shows
that the circuit performing the timing of replication initiation must encode subtle information on the bacterial
physiological state through the growth rate dependence of the parameters. This analysis also allows us to define a few
scenarios consistent with the available experimental knowledge and to make testable predictions on the relative roles
of DnaA autorepression and of the RIDA process at different growth rates. We use this model to elucidate the
reciprocal roles of the known factors affecting DnaA activity in E. coli, namely that DnaA expression is dependent on
transcriptional autoregulation, and that its ATP-ase activity is coupled with the activity of the advancing replication
forks (RIDA). The results show that a working system can still be produced in the absence of RIDA or DnaA
autoregulation. Moreover, both RIDA and autorepression contribute to a decrease in the amplitude of the cell-cycle
oscillations in DnaA-ATP. RIDA has a larger effect at the faster growth rates while negative regulation has a larger
effect at slower growth.

Methods
Assumptions of the model. The model consists of a set of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) describing
DnaA-ATP production by the expression of the dnaA gene. It is built on two basic assumptions. The first is based on
the evidence that a specific number of DnaA-ATP molecules need to bind on oriC in order to create a replication
4

bubble. Following the standard thermodynamic model of protein-DNA binding [42–44], the probability of this event
is dependent on the number of DnaA-ATP molecules that are bound to the non-specific sites along the chromosome.
These are low-affinity sites compared to titration sites, but the affinity is high enough so that the protein spends most
of its time bound to the genome. These sequence-independent interactions are typical of DNA-binding proteins. As a
consequence, the simplifying assumption is usually made [42] that the key molecular players (RNAP and TFs) are
bound to the DNA either specifically or non-specifically. Simply stated, this is just an implementation of the known
fact that DNA-binding proteins, besides binding tightly to their target sequences, are generally “sticky” for DNA, in a
sequence-independent manner. This implies that the timing of DNA replication initiation in the cell is determined by
the ratio DnaA-ATP to non-specific binding sites on DNA (which in turn must be proportional to the total DNA
length of the chromosome(s) in the cell and effectively results in the computation of the amount of DNA per cell).
Note that in this case the volume of the cell is not taken into consideration since it is not the change in concentration
of DnaA or of DNA that determines the initiation time. The same will apply to the binding of DnaA and RNA
polymerase to the dnaA promoter (see below). The second assumption is that at the time of initiation this ratio will be
the same, independently of the growth rate and thus the number of origins.
We ask how the parameters of this model must vary in order for this assumption to hold in the range of doubling
times between 20 and 60 minutes. In the absence of autoregulation, the only factor that contributes to a decrease in
the ratio of DnaA-ATP to non-specific binding sites is the increase in DNA after DNA replication has begun. The
complete model also includes the autoregulation of DnaA expression by DnaA binding to its own promoter [18] and
DnaA-ATP transformation into DnaA-ADP through the RIDA process [37, 45]. It is assumed that this ODE
description is applicable to a single average-cell on time scales shorter than the length of the cell cycle. This
hypothesis could be challenged for the shortest observable doubling times, but the formulation of the model is
dictated by maximizing simplicity. The values of the parameters (attributed to a specific value of the growth rate) are
all taken or estimated from the available experimental measurements. They are shown in Table 1, together with the
sources.

Formulation of the model
Timing of replication. We take into consideration the situation where the cell cycle repeats itself identically i.e.

balanced, exponential growth. Following Cooper and Helmstetter, at a time C + D after the initiation time, the cell
divides, i.e. that time must be an integer multiple of the doubling time. Thus, if τ is the doubling time of the cell and
X is the initiation time, then we must have
X + C + D = (n + 1)τ ,
5

(1)

where n is the integer number of times that τ divides C + D. n can be viewed as the number of overlapping rounds
of replication, and 2n is the number of origins. Thus, this equation reflects the phenomenon of overlapping
replication rounds. Figure 1 shows how X varies with the doubling time (τ ) of the cell. Defining Y as the time at
which the chromosome completes replication, we have

Y =τ −D.

(2)

Promoter term. The activity of the dnaA promoter is the source term for DnaA-ATP. We describe it by the standard

thermodynamic model first used by Shea and Ackers [42–44]. We denote the promoter term (the number of
DnaA-ATP synthesised per unit time) as Q, the number of non-specific binding sites on the chromosome as NN S and
the number of RNA polymerase (RNAP) molecules as P . Furthermore, we denote the number of DnaA-ATP
molecules as A− . We then use the assumption that the number of non-specific binding sites is proportional to the
length of DNA in the cell (which we write as Λ), i.e. Λ = κNN S .
Thus the expression for the rate of transcription at the dnaA promoter can be written as (see Additional File
1, Section 2)
Q=

kA Θ
1 + c1 PΛ + c2 AP−

(3)

where kA is the basal rate of transcription of the dnaA promoter, Θ(t, τ ) is the number of dnaA promoters (and genes)
in a given cell at a given time, and the remaining factor is the probability of RNAP binding to the promoter. The
parameters c1 and c2 depend on the binding energies ∆pd and ∆ad of RNAP and A− respectively to their promoter
binding sites. The binding energies are determined from the ratio of specific vs non-specific binding affinities.

c1 =

e∆pd /kB T
κ

c2 = e(∆pd −∆ad )/kB T .

(4)

where the exponential terms are Boltzmann weights. c2 = 0 if the promoter is not autorepressed. A version of the
promoter where DnaA binding to its sites is cooperative is described in Additional File 1.
RIDA term. This term reflects the number of DnaA-ATP molecules that are converted to DnaA-ADP molecules per

unit time by the RIDA process. As discussed in the introduction, RIDA is a process that takes place at the replication
forks during DNA synthesis. We assume that the rate of conversion kR takes the same value at each replication fork.
The number of pairs of replication forks at a given time, F(t), depends on which of X and Y is larger.

6

For X < Y :

and for X > Y :




2n − 1 if 0 < t < X
2 · 2n − 1 if X < t < Y
F(t) =

2(2n − 1) if Y < t < τ

(5)




2n − 1 if 0 < t < Y
2n − 2 if Y < t < X
F(t) =

2(2n − 1) if X < t < τ

(6)

(note that this equation is intrinsically discrete since it relates to the physical number of replication forks) and so the
conversion from DnaA-ATP to DnaA-ADP takes place at a rate

kR F(t).

(7)

This leads to the following differential equations for DnaA-ATP (denoted A− ) and DnaA-ADP (denoted A+ )

kA Θ
∂A−
=
− kR F
∂t
1 + c1 PΛ + c2 AP−
∂A+
= kR F.
∂t

(8)
(9)

Term for the growth of the chromosome. The growth of the chromosome is controlled by the replication forks.

Defining the rate of DNA synthesis of each pair of replication forks as kΛ , we can write
∂Λ
= kΛ F.
∂t

(10)

Assuming that kΛ is constant, and normalizing so that Λ = 1 is the length of one full chromosome, we have
kΛ = 1/C.
Main equation. Figure 2 summarizes the ingredients of the model. Defining r =

A−
Λ

and combining (8) and (10) we

obtain the equation
1
∂r
=
∂t
Λ

ΘkA
− (kR + rkΛ )F
1 + c1 PΛ + c2 PΛ r

This equation describes the dynamics of the variable r =

A−
Λ

!
.

(11)

which we suggest is a suitable candidate for the

initiation potential since a specific number of DnaA-ATP molecules is needed to be available to bind to the origin in
order to induce DNA melting, as described above. Note that usually such dynamic equations are written in terms of
volume, thinking of averages over cell populations on time-scales longer than a cell cycle. We assume that the
(time-varying) background of genomic binding sites is the relevant variable in a Shea-Ackers type model, extending
to a single cell cycle the approach normally used for longer time scales [42–44]. We also assume that the volume can
7

be treated as a weak perturbation, which we neglect here. In other words, the various molecules of interest (RNA
Polymerase, DnaA) are partitioned between the specific and non-specific binding sites on the chromosome.
Furthermore, the most important factor that determines the probability of binding to a given promoter is the absolute
number of protein molecules relative to the absolute number of these binding sites, rather than the amount of protein
per cell volume, which in comparison does not change significantly, and it can thus be neglected to a good
approximation. Thus, this assumption means that one need not track the volume of the cell, only the number of
non-specific binding sites in the cell at a given time. This idea is discussed further in Additional File 1, Section 2.
Here we assume that the initiation potential, r, always reaches the same value at t = X independently of the growth
rate and we ask how the parameters of this model must vary in order for this assumption to hold in the range of
doubling times between 20 and 60 minutes. In the following, we will first establish that such a constant threshold
cannot be obtained by a model with fixed parameters and then study the possible scenarios where different subsets of
parameters are allowed to vary.
Main Assumptions. The model relies on the following further assumptions [24]: (i) All newly synthesised DnaA is

immediately bound to ATP, due to the relative abundance of ATP in the cell compared to ADP and the high affinity of
DnaA for ATP. (ii) DnaA-ADP is only created by conversion from DnaA-ATP by the RIDA process, when it is
present. (iii) The probability of DnaA being bound to its sites at the origin or on the promoter, in the case of the
presence of autorepression, is given by its thermodynamic equilibrium value. The same assumption holds for the
binding of RNA polymerase to a particular promoter. This means that we assume that the rate for transcription
initiation is much slower than the rates for RNAP binding and unbinding from the promoter. (iv) The rate of dnaA
gene expression is proportional to the equilibrium probability that RNAP is bound to the dnaA promoter. (v) We do
not consider translation directly and thus there is no time delay from transcription to protein production since the
addition of this feature did not affect the result of the model (see Results). (vi) The number of non-specific binding
sites on the DNA in each cell for both RNAP and DnaA is proportional to the total length of DNA in the cell [46].
(vii) The number of RNAP molecules in the cell, P , grows exponentially from cell birth to cell division,
corresponding to the hypothesis of constant concentration and exponentially growing cell size [47]. A linear growth
can also be used, however the dynamics of the model do not differ significantly between these two cases.
Numerical integration. The non-linearity of the main equation (11) necessitates the use of a numerical method of

integration. We used a custom C++ implementation of the fourth-order Runge-Kutta method. The equation was
integrated for values of the cell doubling time, τ , in the range 21mins ≤ τ ≤ 60mins.
In order to test for the constant threshold condition, a transformation was performed by integrating the equation for

8

τ = 21 mins and using the value of r at initiation t = X as the imposed threshold for the other values of the doubling
time. Thus it was important to estimate, to a good degree of accuracy, values for the parameters at a doubling time of
21 mins. These values appear in Table 1. The parameter values are either taken to be constant (independent of cell
doubling time) or are allowed to change and obtained as a consequence of the transformation (see Table 2 for whether
a parameter is constant or allowed to vary in a given situation).

Results
A fixed set of parameters gives a varying initiation threshold with increasing growth rate.
We first describe the behaviour of the model with a fixed parameter set. The ratio r =

A−
Λ

increases from the time of

birth of the new cell. This can be interpreted as the accumulation of the ‘initiation potential’. At initiation (t = X), r
peaks (at the ‘initiation potential’ threshold) and then falls again due to the increase in the number of non-specific
binding sites. When including the RIDA process, the total RIDA rate also increases following initiation, due to the
higher number of active replication forks, contributing to the decrease in the initiation potential. However, the value
of r at t = X varies for the different values of the doubling time τ (Figure 3A). Thus, it appears that this model, with
fixed parameters, cannot give a constant threshold that is reached at initiation in the range of growth rates considered
here.
This fact naturally leads to us consider a model in which the parameters are able to vary with growth rate.
Biologically, this is a natural requirement, as one may well expect from previous observations of the change in
cellular components as a function of growth rate [40, 41, 48, 49].

A constant threshold condition implies alternative scenarios of growth-rate dependency in the
circuit architecture
The condition of a constant DnaA-ATP/DNA threshold at the time of initiation can be imposed by performing a
mathematical transformation on the model and verifying the implications of this for the values of the parameters. The
mathematical details of this transformation can be found in Additional File 1, Section 3. The transformation yields a
fixed threshold in r that is reached at initiation. This can be seen upon comparing the plots in Figure 3A and B. In the
latter, the value of r(X) is now the same at initiation for every cell doubling time. We estimate all initial values of the
parameters from the literature (Table 1) and then we allow some of the parameters to change during the
transformation. Thus, the transformation procedure imposes a decision on which parameters to fix and which to
allow to change. This determines different scenarios, as illustrated in Figures 4 and 5 and also summarised in Table 2
(see also Additional File 1, Section 3 and Additional File 1, Figure A1). These plots explicitly show the required
parameter changes at varying growth rates.
9

1. In the first scenario, the RIDA rate (per replication fork), kR , is chosen to remain independent of growth rate,
and the other parameters are allowed to change. The transformation fixes the scaling of kA with growth rate,
and provides an equation that c1 and P must satisfy. Since the constraints reduce to one equation with two
unknowns, there is a set of possible solutions for c1 and P , and the scenario is underconstrained (see
Additional File 1, Section 3). One possibility is to fix one of the parameters to a particular trend, in turn
determining the second parameter, determining different subscenarios (Additional File 1, Figure A1).
(a) In the first of these sub-scenarios, 1a, the variation in the number of non-specifically bound RNAP in the
cell, P , with growth rate is fixed a priori by imposing the trend of a previous study [41], which partitions
RNAP into different classes, the RNAP bound on promoters and non-specifically bound, and determines
the dependence of this partition with growth rate, (see Figure 4A). Imposing this trend determines the
values for the binding affinity of RNAP to the promoter, which must vary with growth rate (Additional
File 1, Section 3).
(b) In sub-scenario 1b, the binding affinity of RNAP to the dnaA promoter is chosen to remain independent
of growth rate. Fixing this parameter constrains the remaining equation, thereby imposing a particular
dependence on growth rate of the number of non-specifically bound RNAP, P , which turns out to be
compatible with ref. [41] (see Additional File 1, Section 3 and Figure 4A).
2. In scenario 2, the binding affinity of both RNAP to the dnaA promoter and of DnaA-ATP to its repression sites
are chosen to remain independent of growth rate (in simulations, at the values shown in Table 1), while the
basal rate of transcription from the dnaA promoter, kA , the levels of free RNAP, P , and the RIDA rate (per
replication fork), kR are all permitted to vary from their original values (see Figures 4A and 5B). This scenario
is also feasible in absence of autorepression.
In brief, two possible scenarios can result in a constant initiation threshold for the model. In the first, the binding
affinity of DnaA-ATP to its repressor sites decreases with increasing cell doubling time and in the second the RIDA
rate increases with cell doubling time. In both scenarios kA (the basal transcription rate) must decrease with
increasing cell doubling time. It is important to note that kA , the basal dnaA transcription rate, needs to vary in all
scenarios with growth rate. This term (and hence its variation) is independent from RNAP availability (our P term)
and binding (our c1 and c2 terms). It describes how quickly RNAP moves through a gene when transcribing. The
variation of this characteristic time with growth rate can be associated with variations in DNA supercoling (see
Discussion).

10

In absence of RIDA (kR = 0) or autorepression (c2 = 0), the transformation can still be performed. However, it
implies that the ratio c1 /P should remain constant with growth rate. Since P varies [41], this means that c1 (which,
for example, could also vary through changes in supercoiling) would have to compensate exactly for the changes in
P in order to keep a constant threshold. We have considered these further scenarios to be less probable, because they
may result in a less robust control due to an unlikely fine-tuning of two parameters.

The resulting scenarios are compatible with available knowledge on RNAP availability and total
DnaA expression
Given these scenarios, we have asked whether the predicted parameter variation with growth rate and the observables
quantities produced by the model were compatible with the measurements and observations available in the literature.
Starting from the dependency of available RNAP with growth rate, this is predicted and matched with available
experimental data in ref. [41]. Scenario 1a assumes this dependency, and therefore automatically accounts for this
observation. Figure 4A demonstrates how also scenarios 1b and 2 are broadly compatible with the results of Klumpp
and Hwa [41] since the average levels of non-specifically bound RNA polymerase decrease with increasing doubling
time in all cases.
We now turn to the changes in measured expression of DnaA (averaged over a population) with growth rate. This can
be measured by a reporter gene technique. Figure 4B shows how the model predicts that the average expression of
the dnaA gene should change with growth rate in all scenarios. This appears to be independent of the scenario
chosen and is compatible with previous findings [20]. We have also performed our own measurements, using a GFP
reporter of the dnaA promoter encoded on a plasmid (and normalizing the result for plasmid and gene copy number
(Chiara Saggioro, Anne Olliver, Bianca Sclavi: Multiple levels of regulation in the growth rate dependence of DnaA
expression, submitted), see also Additional File 1, Section 7), confirming this agreement (Figure 4B).
Finally, at fixed growth rate, in order to determine whether this model reflects the main features of the regulatory
network in the cell, we reproduced some of the experimental perturbations described in the literature. One of these
experiments changed the rate of RIDA by changing the level of expression of the gene encoding for the Hda
protein [37], while others controlled the expression of DnaA independently of the dnaA promoter. We found that a
constant threshold can be obtained upon a 10 fold change in the RIDA rate (Additional File 1, Figure A4). In order to
determine how RIDA rate and autorepression strength influence the activity of DnaA-ATP within a cell cycle in the
model, we have monitored the amplitude of the oscillations of the ratio DnaA-ATP:total genome length. The results
show that increased autorepression contributes to a smaller amplitude of DnaA-ATP within the cell cycle (Additional
File 1, Figure A2). A decrease in RIDA has the opposite effect, and is compensated for by an increase in

11

autorepression. In either case the inclusion of these additional control factors appears to result in smaller amplitude in
the oscillation of DnaA-ATP and a smaller variation in the average amount of DnaA-ATP per cell as the growth rate
is varied. This may be advantageous for the use of DnaA as a transcription factor whose activity is responsive to
changes in the replication status of the cell, via the RIDA and titration effects.
Finally, once we obtained a set of parameters that satisfies the constant threshold constraint, we modified the RIDA
rate while leaving the other parameters unchanged (Additional File 1, Figure A7), attempting to reproduce the effect
of under or over expressing the Hda protein, as in the experiments by Riber et al. [37]. In our model, this results in a
change of the threshold value as a function of growth rate, and more significantly at slow growth. At faster RIDA
rate, the threshold value is higher at slow growth, while the opposite is observed when RIDA rate is decreased.
These compatibility tests give positive results, but do not allow us to distinguish between the two scenarios. We have
explored the literature for tests of dependency of the RIDA rate with growth rate, and have found no evidence of this,
which lead us to consider scenario 1, where the RIDA rate is constant as the main one.

Model Variants
In order to gain confidence that the conclusion (that the parameters need to vary with growth rate) is not a
consequence of the restricted set of biological ingredients included in this model, we considered some additional
model variants, including some of the known factors that may influence the timing of replication initiation.
1. Delay in the synthesis of DnaA-ATP. We introduced a delay, representing the time necessary to obtain an
active DnaA molecule from the binding of the RNA polymerase to the dnaA promoter to the end of translation.
This delay, however, does not produce a significant effect in imposing a DnaA-ATP threshold at initiation,
suggesting that translation delay might not have a predominant role in controlling the timing of initiation (see
Additional File 1, Figure A6B).
2. Cooperativity of autorepression. Cooperativity of autorepression affects the growth rate dependence of gene
expression [41]. Additional File 1, Figure A6C shows by simulation that the presence of cooperativity alone
cannot explain a constant threshold. Thus it is still necessary to impose a constant threshold on the model using
a transformation such as that described in Additional File 1, Section 3. However, in general one cannot make a
translation and scaling and keep the promoter in the same form (see also Additional File 1, Section 5), and the
transformation itself poses complex constraints on the possible regulations. Thus, we decided to concentrate on
the simpler non-cooperative model. Biologically, of the two high-affinity DnaA sites found at the dnaA
promoter, one matches exactly the consensus sequence, and has a higher affinity than the other [18], suggesting

12

that at lower DnaA concentrations only one monomer could be bound. We have verified that the transformation
is possible with a promoter that would fit this profile, i.e. of the form
Q=
1+

c1 PΛ

k Θ
A r

2

1+ k + kr kω
1
1 2
1+ kr

,

1

where the parameter ω represents the cooperativity, and where k1 and k2 are the binding affinities of the two
DnaA binding sites, multiplied by the proportionality constant between Λ and NN S . This description
introduces two new parameters - the cooperativity and the binding affinity of the second binding site. Since
these parameters appear in the equations describing the transformation that keeps the constant threshold, the
scenarios become more underconstrained in a non-essential way. Thus, while a more realistic promoter model
could be useful for future descriptions, we decided not to pursue it here.
3. The datA locus and specific DnaA binding sites. We considered the effect that the presence of the datA locus
has on the model by introducing a site on the chromosome that binds up to 300 DnaA-ATP molecules
immediately after initiation has taken place (since datA is close to the origin on the chromosome, it is copied
soon after initiation). We included one datA site for each origin in the cell. The results indicate that the datA
locus might indeed prevent further initiations in a given cell cycle, since it titrates large numbers of DnaA-ATP
molecules, effectively preventing them from binding at the origin (see Additional File 1, Figure A6A).
However, this variant of the model fails to achieve a constant DnaA-ATP threshold at initiation at different
growth rates if all parameters are kept constant. One can speculate that the large increase in datA sites at faster
growth rates would require a proportional increase in the rate of DnaA synthesis that cannot be solely provided
by the increase in gene copy number. It must be also noted that the datA locus appears to be unnecessary to
prevent reinitiation and limit initiation of to once per cell cycle [50]. Additionally, we considered the effect of
the reported ≈ 300 binding sites distributed around the chromosome [51]. These high-affinity sites would
sequester DnaA in a similar way as the datA locus, but proportionally to the genome amount, and thus
effectively decrease its concentration. This is again insufficient to guarantee a constant initiation threshold and
is equivalent to rescaling the RIDA rate (see Additional File 1, Section 6.2).
4. The eclipse. No constraint for the eclipse period [24, 28–31] was included in this model. This proved not to be
necessary, probably because there is no delay between the attainment of the threshold and the initiation of
DNA replication, thus avoiding the possibility that there is an ‘overshoot’ of initiation potential before both
RIDA and the increase of non-specific DNA can begin. On the other hand, the gene copy number immediately
doubles upon initiation of DNA replication which results in a sudden increase in the number of DnaA-ATP
13

synthesized per unit time. However, this does not result in an increase in the initiation potential due to the
corresponding increase in the number of replication forks and thus on the RIDA rate and the number of
non-specific titrating sites.

5. DnaA-ATP Recycling regions. Genomic recycling regions catalyzing the reconversion of DnaA-ADP into
DnaA-ATP [52] have been recently discovered. The quantitative contribution of this process is not clear, but
within our framework it makes sense to ask how this would affect the initiation threshold, as this process is,
roughly, a correction to RIDA. Precisely, assuming DnaA-ADP is not limiting, this would change the model by
the substitution of kR with kR − ρΛ/F where ρ is a fixed recycling rate. We verified that in the model this
recycling term cannot by itself impose a constant threshold, while it can contribute to correcting quantitatively
the effective RIDA rate (Additional File 1, Section 6.1).
Since none of these model variants qualitatively changes the behaviour of the model with respect to attaining a
constant initiation threshold, they were not included in the minimal model formulation, in order to avoid confusion
and proliferation of parameters. However, as shown by the variants explored above, the qualitative behaviour that the
parameters of the model must vary with growth rate does not hold strictly for the minimal model only, but might be
more general.

Discussion
Standard models of bacterial regulatory circuits were adapted to situations where the growth rate is fixed [42, 53].
The notion that these quantitative descriptions must account for bacterial physiology through the growth-rate
dependent basic partitioning of the cell physico-chemical components is now entering the field of systems biology
through a combination of new work [41, 48, 49, 54] and reconsideration of the classics [8, 40, 55].
The dependency of the basic parameters on growth rate can produce notable effects on a genetic circuit, and
complicates the standard descriptions [56]. In our case, the task is more difficult, as the circuit under examination is
active in determining some features of the bacterial physiology and not only affected by them. Furthermore, on the
technical level, one must produce a time-dependent description the expression of DnaA over cell-cycles of a range of
durations. Perhaps also for this reason, despite the fact that the regulation of DNA replication has been a subject of
intense study for over 50 years [24, 57], many questions remain open. Given these obstacles, we have shown that,
under a series of simplifying hypotheses, a consistent mean-field description for the DnaA / replication initation
circuit is possible with varying growth rate.
14

Our description includes the processes that are believed to be most important for initiation of replication [24]. In
these respects, it is broadly compatible with previous modelling approaches [4–7]. Its originality lies in the
minimality and in the attention given to growth-rate dependency. We focused on the minimal ingredients necessary in
order for the basic tenet that the ratio DnaA-ATP/DNA attains a constant threshold at initiation to hold [58, 59]. The
validity of this tenet is confirmed by the recent observations that initiation time is not affected by adding an extra
origin on the chromosome [58] and on the compensatory mutations emerging in Hda mutants [59].
We have defined the DNA replication initiation potential, determining the (synchronous) timing of DNA replication,
as the DnaA-ATP to DNA ratio, r. Molecular titration has been shown to result in ultrasensitive “all or none”
responses [60], which further justifies using r as the threshold and could explain the synchrony of initiation in cells
containing oriC minichromosomes [61]. We assume that its value at the time of initiation, r(X), is independent of
the specific growth rate. The amount of DnaA-ATP at the time of initiation thus needs to increase as a function of
growth rate in order for r(X) to remain constant as a function of doubling time, and we found that consequently,
some of the model’s parameter values must be allowed to vary. This assumption has not been verified directly. On the
other hand, we feel that our point of view would still be useful in case of a growth-rate dependent r(X), as it is
unlikely that this dependence would automatically match the dependence of all the other parameters.
We have defined two main scenarios in which different subsets of the parameters are allowed to change. In Scenario
1 the RIDA rate (per replication fork), kR , is held constant as a function of growth rate, but the binding affinities of
RNAP and DnaA-ATP to the DNA need to vary with growth rate (note that in addition, there are two technical
sub-scenarios to Scenario 1 due to the possibility of either fixing the growth rate dependence of P , the number of
available RNA polymerase molecules a priori to the trend of ref. [41](Scenario 1a) or allowing it to be free (Scenario
1b)). In Scenario 2 the binding constants (c.f. c1 and c2 ) are independent of growth rate but the RIDA rate, kR , must
vary. We have verified that both scenarios are consistent with the eperimentally tested predictions of RNAP
availability with growth rate [41] and with previous measurements [20] and our own experimental evaluation of total
DnaA expression (Chiara Saggioro, Anne Olliver, Bianca Sclavi: Multiple levels of regulation in the growth rate
dependence of DnaA expression, submitted), and also with a number of “in silico mutations” inspired by the
available literature [24, 37]. Thus, the scenarios appear as possibilities that are testable, but for the moment remain
open. Note that the property that the initiation threshold holds constant with respect to growth rate changes is not
related to the specific set of parameters we used, or any set of parameters. Our analysis shows that in general, for any
fixed parameter set at a given growth rate, a transformation is necessary in order to keep the threshold constant while
moving to another growth rate. In order to provide specific examples, we have produced plots in the style of those in
Figure 5, with different curves corresponding to choosing different values of the initial input parameters. These
15

demonstrate that the qualitative behaviour of the transformation is independent of these parameters (Additional File
1, Figures A8, A9 and A10). This exercise is also important to show that the parameter changes with growth rate are
not numerically negligible for empirically plausible parameters, so that the question of keeping the initiation
threshold constant is not purely academic.
It is then interesting to ask which of these scenarios is more reasonable considering the known biological processes.
We speculate that scenario 2 is less likely, since until now there is no evidence pointing to a possible change in the
intrinsic RIDA rate as a function of growth rate. The DnaA-related protein Hda (Homologous to DnaA) mediates this
process [57]. Experiments with mutants over- and underexpressing Hda [37], with corresponding increases and
decreases in the RIDA rate, suggest a possible mechanism by which the kR term in the equations could vary by a
growth rate-dependent expression of the Hda gene. There may also be other, as yet unknown, factors that affect the
growth rate dependence of the RIDA rate. Alternatively, we can speculate that the decrease in the rate of RIDA with
growth rate could be caused effectively by the action of the reverse process of DnaA-ATP recycling by the recently
discovered recycling regions [52]. Figure 5b shows that the RIDA rate should increase with cell cycle time and thus
decrease with growth rate. This growth rate increase causes overlapping replication rounds, and thus higher
chromosome copy number. Since more recycling regions are present there is more recycling, i.e. a decrease in the
effective RIDA rate, compatibility with the requirement imposed by our results. However, considering explicitly this
model variant, we find that the balancing recycling cannot by itself impose a constant threshold.
Conversely in scenario 1, the RIDA rate per replication fork is constant, and one has to rationalize the variation of the
binding affinities. It seems possible that the binding affinities could change with growth rate through changes in
supercoiling, in similar ways to those seen in Figure 5 and Additional File 1, Figure A5 [62, 63]. The levels of
average negative supercoiling are known to increase as the growth rate increases [64]. However, it makes sense to
challenge the validity of the basic assumption that the ratio of DnaA-ATP to DNA at the time of initiation is constant.
This model assumes that the affinity for DnaA-ATP binding to its own promoter can change with growth rate but its
affinity for the origin does not. The first assumption mainly allows the model to change the magnitude of negative
autoregulation as a function of growth rate, and it may indeed be explained by the changes in global cellular
parameters such as negative supercoiling. We have considered how the activation threshold in the model (estimated
in Additional File 1, Figure A11 and corresponding caption) would be affected if the binding affinity for DnaA to the
origin would vary in the same way as its value at the dnaA promoter, required by Scenario 1, for a set of realistic
parameters. We found that these changes in r(X) are less than 10% over a wide range of growth rates, suggesting
that this scenario might be robust. Indeed, the observed threshold is certainly approximately constant when compared
to the untransformed case i.e. the different values of the ratio at t = X shown in Figure 3A. More generally, the
16

initiation of DNA replication has been significantly simplified in this model; all it requires is a specific amount of
available DnaA-ATP molecules. However we know that other factors, such as the binding of nucleoid proteins FIS,
IHF, H-NS and HU, may contribute to the formation of an open complex at the origin. On the other hand, other
recent results have shown that at slower growth (slower than the range considered here) the cell contains a greater
average amount of DnaA-ATP per origin that results in initiation events that are independent of the novel synthesis of
DnaA-ATP [65]. These results suggest that the regulation of the initiation process at the origin might indeed be
dependent on the growth rate and that these changes still remain to be characterized quantitatively before they can be
included in a theoretical model.
Interestingly, the basal rate of transcription of the dnaA gene, kA must vary in both scenarios. Figure 5 shows that kA
decreases as the cells grow more slowly. This is what is expected from a promoter like the one of the dnaA gene that
closely resembles ribosomal RNA promoters. This family of promoters have a GC-rich sequence at the transcription
initiation site called a discriminator region. This region renders the activity of the promoter sensitive to the degree of
negative supercoiling, which activates transcription by enhancing DNA melting, and leads to its inhibition by the
accumulation of ppGpp at slower growth rates [66].

Conclusions
All things considered, we can say that perhaps our main result is that the determination of the timing of initiation by
DnaA, besides relying on the known “architecture” comprising autorepression, RIDA and a number of other
“dedicated” processes, can be understood only in its complex interplay with bacterial physiology (comprising DNA
supercoiling, ppGpp, growth-rate dependent partitioning of molecular machinery, etc.)
Nevertheless, it makes sense to ask whether this model allows us to elucidate some features of the reciprocal role of
RIDA and DnaA autorepression, its two main ingredients. Biologically, RIDA renders the control of DnaA-ATP
dependent upon ongoing DNA replication, and thus results in an increase in DnaA-ATP when replication forks are
blocked. Autorepression however probably plays a larger role in the absence of RIDA at slow growth, or in bacteria
that do not have RIDA at all (such as B. subtilis, where DnaA titration at the replication fork seems to play an
important role) [57]. The Hda protein and thus the RIDA process seems to be quite specific to the fast-growing E.
coli bacterium and its close relatives in the Enterobacteriaceae (UniProtKB), suggesting that in other bacterial
species this level of regulation may not be required and is replaced instead by protein degradation, e.g. in
Caulobacter [67, 68], or a high intrinsic ATPase activity of the protein, as in Mycobacterium tuberculosis [69]. We
have verified that the model can work in the absence of autorepression or RIDA, but the tuning of the parameters to
achieve a constant threshold is more “difficult”, in the sense that it requires more fine-tuning of the parameters, since
17

the ratio c1 /P should remain constant with growth rate. meaning that it is possible that a smaller range of growth
rates would be accessible in these conditions. Moreover, in the model, increasing autorepression or RIDA rate results
in a smaller amplitude of the oscillations of the ratio DnaA-ATP/DNA during the cell cycle, and in a smaller variation
in the average amount of DnaA-ATP per cell as the growth rate is varied. This may be advantageous for the use of
DnaA as a transcription factor which has to sense perturbations in the replication status of the cell at all growth rates.

Competing Interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors Contributions
MCL, BS, and BB designed research. MG, BB, MCL, UF, and CS performed research. MG, BS and MCL wrote the
paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Matteo Osella, Rosalind Allen, Pietro Cicuta, Antonio Celani, Andrea Sportiello, Kunihiko
Kaneko and Massimo Vergassola for useful discussions and feedback. The authors acknowledge support from the
Human Frontier Science Program Organization (Grant RGY0069/2009-C) and from EPSRC.

References
1. Meselson M, Stahl FW: The replication of DNA in Escherichia coli. PNAS 1968, 44:671–682.
2. Rocha EPC: The replication-related organization of bacterial genomes. Microbiology 2004, 150(Pt 6):1609–1627.
3. Sompayrac L, Maaloe O: Autorepressor model for control of DNA replication. Nat New Biol 1973, 241(109):133–135.
4. Margalit H, Rosenberger RF, Grover NB: Initiation of DNA replication in bacteria: analysis of an autorepressor control
model. J Theor Biol 1984, 111:183–199.
5. Hansen FG, Christensen BB, Atlung T: The initiator titration model: computer simulation of chromosome and
minichromosome control. Research in Microbiology 1991, 142:161–167.
6. Browning S, Castellanos M, Shuler M: Robust control of initiation of prokaryotic chromsome replication: essential
consideration for a minimal cell. Biotechnology and Bioengineering 2004, 88:575–584.
7. Nilsson K, Ehrenberg M: A novel mechanism for activator-controlled initiation of DNA replication that resolves the
auto-regulation sequestration paradox. In Aspects of Physical Biology, Volume 752 of Lecture Notes in Physics. Edited by
G Franzese & M Rubi, Berlin Springer Verlag 2008:189–213.
8. Cooper S, Helmstetter C: Chromosome replication and the division cycle of Escherichia coli B/r. Journal of Molecular
Biology 1968, 31:519–540.
9. Michelsen O, Teixeira de Mattos MJ, Jensen PR, Hansen FG: Precise determinations of C and D periods by flow
cytometry in Escherichia coli K-12 and B/r. Microbiology 2003, 149(4):1001–1010.
10. Donachie W: Relationships between cell size and time of initiation of DNA replication. Nature 1968, 219:1077–1079.
11. Wold S, Skarstad K, Steen HB, Stokke T, Boye E: The initiation mass for DNA replication in Escherichia coli K-12 is
dependent on growth rate. The EMBO Journal 1994, 13:2097–2102.

18

12. Cooper S: Does the initiation mass for DNA replication in Escherichia coli vary with growth rate?
MicroCorrespondence 1997, 26:1138–1141.
13. Boye E, Nordstrøm K: Coupling the cell cycle to cell growth. EMBO Rep 2003, 4(8):757–760.
14. Bates D, Kleckner N: Chromosome and replisome dynamics in E. coli: loss of sister cohesion triggers global
chromosome movement and mediates chromosome segregation. Cell 2005, 121(6):899–911.
15. Løbner-Olesen A, Skarstad K, Hansen FG, von Meyenburg K, Boye E: The DnaA protein determines the initiation mass of
Escherichia coli K-12. Cell 1989, 57(5):881–889.
16. Hansen F, Atlung T, Braun R, Wright A, Hughes P, Kohiyama M: Initiator (DnaA) protein concentration as a function of
growth rate in Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium. Journal of Bacteriology 1991, 173(16):5194–5199.
17. Kornberg A, Baker TA: DNA replication - Second edition. University Science Books 2005.
18. Speck C, Messer W: Mechanism of origin unwinding: sequential binding of DnaA to double- and single-stranded DNA.
The EMBO Journal 2001, 20:1469–1476.
19. Messer W: The bacterial replication initiator DnaA. DnaA and oriC, the bacterial mode to initiate DNA replication.
FEMS Microbiology Reviews 2002, 26:355–374.
20. Chiaramello AE, Zyskind JW: Expression of Escherichia coli dnaA and mioC genes as a function of growth rate. Journal
of Bacteriology 1989, 171:4272–4280.
21. Atlung TA, Løbner-Olesen A, Hansen FG: Over-production of DnaA protein stimulates initiation of chromosome and
minichromosome replication in E. coli. Molecular Genomics and Genetics 1987, 206:51–59.
22. Bremer H, Churchward G: Initiation of chromosome replication in Escherichia coli after induction of dnaA gene
expression from a lac promoter. J Bacteriol 1985, 164(2):922–924.
23. Sekimizu K, Bramhill D, Kornberg A: Sequential early stages in the in vitro initiation of replication at the origin of the
Escherichia coli chromosome. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 1988, 263:7124–7130.
24. Donachie W, Blakely G: Coupling the initiation of chromosome replication to cell size in Escherichia coli. Current
Opinion in Microbiology 2003, 6:146–150.
25. Kurokawa K, Nishida S, Emoto A, Sekimizu K, Katayama T: Replication cycle-coordinated change of the adenine
nucleotide-bound forms of DnaA protein in Escherichia coli. The EMBO Journal 1999, 18:6642–6652.
26. Ogawa T, Yamada Y, Kuroda T, Kishi T, Moriya S: The datA locus predominantly contributes to the initiator titration
mechanism in the control of replication initiation in Escherichia coli. Molecular Microbiology 2002, 44(5):1367–1375.
27. Morigen, Boye E, Skarstad K, Løbner-Olesen A: Regulation of chromosomal replication by DnaA protein availability in
Escherichia coli: effects of the datA region. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 2001, 1521:73–80.
28. von Freiesleben U, Krekling MA, Hansen FG, Løbner-Olesen A: The eclipse period of Escherichia coli. The EMBO Journal
2000, 19:6240–6248.
29. Boye E, Stokke T, Kleckner N, Skarstad K: Coordinating DNA replication initiation with cell growth: differential roles
for DnaA and SeqA proteins. PNAS 1996, 93:12206–12211.
30. Zaritsky A RA Vischer N: Changes of initiation mass and cell dimensions by the ‘eclipse’. Molecular microbiology 2007,
63:15–21.
31. Kedar GC, Ozcan F, Guzmán EC, Smith DW, Newman VG, Zyskind JW: Role of DNA methylation at GATC sites in the
dnaA promoter, dnaAp2. Journal of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology 2000, 2:301–310.
32. Polaczek P, Kwan K, Liberies DA, Campbell JL: Role of architectural elements in combinatorial regulation of initiation
of DNA replication in Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 1997, 26(2):261–275.
33. Polaczek P, Wright A: Regulation of expression of the dnaA gene in Escherichia coli: role of the two promoters and the
DnaA box. New Biol 1990, 2(6):574–582.
34. Hansen FG, Koefoed S, Sorensen L, Atlung T: Titration of DnaA protein by oriC DnaA-boxes increases dnaA gene
expression in Escherichia coli. The EMBO Journal 1987, 6:255–258.
35. Christensen BB, Atlung T, Hansen FG: DnaA boxes are important elements in setting the initiation mass of Escherichia
coli. Journal of Bacteriology 1999, 181:2683–2688.
36. Kitagawa R, Mitsuki H, Okazaki T, Ogawa T: A novel DnaA protein-binding site at 94.7 min on the Escherichia coli
chromosome. Molecular Microbiology 1996, 19:1137–1147.

19

37. Riber L, Olsson JA, Jensen RB, Skovgaard O, Dasgupta S, Marinus MG, Løbner-Olesen A: Hda-mediated inactivation of
the DnaA protein and dnaA gene autoregulation act in concert to ensure homeostatic maintenance of the Escherichia
coli chromosome. Genes and Development 2006, 20:2121–2134.
38. Katayama T, Kornberg A: Hyperactive initiation of chromosomal replication in vivo and in vitro by a mutant initiator
protein, DnaAcos, of Escherichia coli. J Biol Chem 1994, 269(17):12698–12703.
39. Olliver A, Saggioro C, Herrick J, Sclavi B: DnaA-ATP acts as a molecular switch to control levels of ribonucleotide
reductase expression in Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 2010, 76(6):1555–1571.
40. Bremer H, Dennis P: Modulation of chemical composition and other parameters of the cell by growth rate. In
Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium: Cellular and Molecular Biology. Edited by Neidhardt F, Washington, DC:
American Society for Microbiology 1996:1553–1569.
41. Klumpp S, Hwa T: Growth-rate-dependent partitioning of RNA polymerases in bacteria. PNAS 2008, 105:20245–20250.
42. Bintu L, Buchler N, Garcia H, Gerland U, Hwa T, Kondev J, Phillips R: Transcriptional regulation by the numbers:
models. Current Opinion in Genetics and Development 2005, 15:116–124.
43. Shea MA, Ackers GK: The OR control system of bacteriophage lambda, a physical-chemical model for gene regulation.
Journal of Molecular Biology 1985, 181:211–230.
44. Ackers GK, Johnson AD, Shea MA: Quantative model for gene regulation by λ phage repressor. PNAS 1982,
79:1129–1133.
45. Camara JE, Breier AM, Brendler T, Austin S, Cozzarelli NR, Crooke E: Hda inactivation of DnaA is the predominant
mechanism preventing hyperinitiation of Escherichia coli DNA replication . EMBO Reports 2005, 6:736–741.
46. von Hippel PH, Berg OG: On the specificity of DNA-protein interactions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1986,
83(6):1608–1612.
47. Godin M, Delgado FF, Son S, Grover WH, Bryan AK, Tzur A, Jorgensen P, Payer K, Grossman AD, Kirschner MW, Manalis
SR: Using buoyant mass to measure the growth of single cells. Nat Methods 2010, 7(5):387–390.
48. Scott M, Hwa T: Bacterial growth laws and their applications. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2011.
49. Scott M, Gunderson CW, Mateescu EM, Zhang Z, Hwa T: Interdependence of cell growth and gene expression: origins
and consequences. Science 2010, 330(6007):1099–1102.
50. Morigen, Molina F, Skarstad K: Deletion of the datA site does not affect once-per-cell-cycle timing but induces
rifampin-resistant replication. J Bacteriol 2005, 187(12):3913–3920.
51. Roth A, Messer W: High-affinity binding sites for the initiator protein DnaA on the chromosome of Escherichia coli.
Mol Microbiol 1998, 28(2):395–401.
52. Fujimitsu K, Senriuchi T, Katayama T: Specific genomic sequences of E. coli promote replicational initiation by directly
reactivating ADP-DnaA. Genes Dev 2009, 23(10):1221–1233.
53. Alon U: An Introduction to Systems Biology: Design Principles of Biological Circuits. Chapman & Hall/CRC 2006.
54. Zaslaver A, Kaplan S, Bren A, Jinich A, Mayo A, Dekel E, Alon U, Itzkovitz S: Invariant distribution of promoter
activities in Escherichia coli. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5(10):e1000545.
55. Schaechter M, Maaloe O, Kjeldgaard NO: Dependency on medium and temperature of cell size and chemical
composition during balanced growth of Salmonella typhimurium. Journal of General Microbiology 1958, 19(3):592–606.
56. Klumpp S, Zhang Z, Hwa T: Growth rate-dependent global effects on gene expression in bacteria. Cell 2009,
139(7):1366–1375.
57. Katayama T, Ozaki S, Keyamura K, Fujimitsu K: Regulation of the replication cycle: conserved and diverse regulatory
systems for DnaA and oriC. Nat Rev Microbiol 2010, 8(3):163–170.
58. Wang X, Lesterlin C, Reyes-Lamothe R, Ball G, Sherratt DJ: Replication and segregation of an Escherichia coli
chromosome with two replication origins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011, 108(26):E243–E250.
59. Charbon G, Riber L, Cohen M, Skovgaard O, Fujimitsu K, Katayama T, Løbner-Olesen A: Suppressors of DnaA(ATP)
imposed overinitiation in Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 2011, 79(4):914–928.
60. Buchler NE, Louis M: Molecular titration and ultrasensitivity in regulatory networks. J Mol Biol 2008,
384(5):1106–1119.

20

61. Løbner-Olesen A: Distribution of minichromosomes in individual Escherichia coli cells: implications for replication
control. EMBO J 1999, 18(6):1712–1721.
62. Travers AA: DNA conformation and protein binding. Annual Reviews of Biochemistry 1989, 58:427–452.
63. Wang JC, Lynch AS: Transcription and DNA supercoiling. Current Opinion in Genetics and Development 1993,
3:764–768.
64. Balke VL, Gralla JD: Changes in the linking number of supercoiled DNA accompany growth transitions in Escherichia
coli. J. Bacteriol. 1987, 169(10):4499–4506.
65. Flåtten I, Morigen, Skarstad K: DnaA protein interacts with RNA polymerase and partially protects it from the effect of
rifampicin. Molecular microbiology 2009, 71(4):1018–30.
66. Travers A, Muskhelishvili G: DNA supercoiling - a global transcriptional regulator for enterobacterial growth? Nat Rev
Microbiol 2005, 3(2):157–169.
67. Gorbatyuk B, Marczynski GT: Regulated degradation of chromosome replication proteins DnaA and CtrA in
Caulobacter crescentus. Mol Microbiol 2005, 55(4):1233–1245.
68. Collier J, Shapiro L: Feedback control of DnaA-mediated replication initiation by replisome-associated HdaA protein in
Caulobacter. J Bacteriol 2009, 191(18):5706–5716.
69. Madiraju MVVS, Moomey M, Neuenschwander PF, Muniruzzaman S, Yamamoto K, Grimwade JE, Rajagopalan M: The
intrinsic ATPase activity of Mycobacterium tuberculosis DnaA promotes rapid oligomerization of DnaA on oriC. Mol
Microbiol 2006, 59(6):1876–1890.
70. Klumpp S, Hwa T: Stochasticity and traffic jams in the transcription of ribosomal RNA: Intriguing role of termination
and antitermination. PNAS 2008, 105:18159–18164.
71. Oeschger MP, Berlyn MKB, Mar N: Regulation of RNA polymerase synthesis in Escherichia coli: A mutant unable to
synthesize the enzyme at 43 degrees. Sciences-New York 1974, 72(3):911–915.
72. Speck C, Weigel C, Messer W: ATP- and ADP-DnaA protein, a molecular switch in gene regulation. The EMBO Journal
1999, 18:6169–6176.

21

Figures
n=1

t=0

t=0

t=Y

t=X

t=X

t=X

t=Y

t=Y

B.

n=0
t=0

REPLICATION

80

X min

60

(t=τ)
Out of realistic regime

70

End of
cell cycle

20

Replication
end time

2

20

30

2

0

3
10

(t=Y)

1

6

0

Generation III

(t=X)

10
0

Generation II

D≈20min

40

50

60

70

Number of
active
processes

τ mins

τ mins

τ mins

DIVISION

30

Generation I

C≈40 min

DIVISION

40

Initiation
time

0

DIVISION

Time (mins)

50

TERMINATION

n=2

INITIATION

∞←n

DIVISION

A.

80

Cell doubling time, τ (mins)

Figure 1: Timing of DNA replication initiation as a function of the length of the cell cycle according to the
Cooper and Helmstetter model. A: Plots of the values of X, Y and number of active processes (termed F in the
main text) in each region of the graph, for different values of the cell doubling time. The purple shading reflects the
number of active processes in each region, with lighter shades denoting a greater number of active processes. Towards
τ = 80 mins, the lines t = X and t = Y are shown curving off, showing that this is outside the regime 20 mins
≤ τ ≤ 60 mins where the C and D periods can be considered constant. Above the graph in panel A are diagrams of
the state of the chromosome for critical time values, for each of the values of n (the number of overlapping replication
rounds). B: Illustration of overlapping replication rounds, in the case of a complete replication round of n = 2
overlapping rounds, and 3 generations.

22

A. Ingredients of the model
RNA polymerase

DnaA-ATP

B. Main Equations
∂A−
ΘkA
− kR F
=
∂t
1 + c1 Λ + c2 A−
P
P

dnaA

1) PROMOTER
2) REPLICATION

DnaA-ATP
DnaA-ADP

∂Λ
= kΛ F
∂t
∂ A+
= kR F
∂t

3) RIDA

Figure 2: Ingredients of the model. A: illustration of 1) the autorepression of the dnaA gene 2) the growth of the
chromosome by the DNA replication process 3) RIDA taking place at the replication forks. B: The key equations of
the model, with the terms colour coded to match the ingredients shown in panel A. The parameters in the model are:
A− (number of DnaA-ATP molecules), A+ (number of DnaA-ADP molecules), Λ (total genome length), P (number
of RNA polymerase molecules), Θ (number of dnaA genes), kA (basal transcription rate of one dnaA gene), c1 , c2
(binding constants), F (number of pairs of replication forks), kR (RIDA rate per replication fork), kΛ (growth rate of
the chromosome per replication fork). The first equation represents the change in the number of DnaA-ATP molecules,
with a source term due to the dnaA promoter (as all newly synthesised DnaA is assumed to bind to ATP due to the
relative abundance of ATP in the cell), and a sink term due to the conversion of DnaA-ATP to DnaA-ADP in RIDA.
The second equation represents the growth of the genome in the cell. The third equation represents the change in the
number of DnaA-ADP molecules. The only source term is the same as the sink term in the DnaA-ATP equation since
it is assumed DnaA-ADP is only created from DnaA-ATP during RIDA.

23

C.

1200
1000
800
600
400
-1
0
1
Dimensionless time from
initiation, (t-X)/τ (Cell cycles)

Possible Scenarios:
nar

Sce

Sce

nar

io 1

io 2

Binding affinity of
DnaA-ATP to its self
repressor sites varies
with doubling time

Ratio DnaA-ATP:genome length
(molecules/genome equivalents)

B.
Ratio DnaA-ATP:genome length
(molecules/genome equivalents)

A.

260
Doubling Time (mins):
25
35
45
55

240
220
200
180
-1
0
1
Dimensionless time from
initiation, (t-X)/τ (Cell cycles)

RNA polymerase

DnaA-ATP
dnaA

Doubling time

DnaA-ATP
(binding affinity decreases)
dnaA

increasing

RIDA rate per
replication fork varies
with doubling time

DnaA-ATP
DnaA-ADP

RIDA

RIDA
(rate increases)

Figure 3: The model imposes a specific DnaA-ATP threshold at the moment of initiation (t = X). A: The model
with fixed parameters cannot explain an ‘initiation threshold’ since a different value of the ratio DnaA-ATP:genome
length (r) is obtained at initiation (t = X) for each value of the cell doubling time, τ . B: We perform a mathematical
transformation upon the model to impose a threshold for the ratio DnaA-ATP:genome length (r) at the moment of
initiation (t = X) (in this specific example the threshold has been imposed by allowing the binding affinity of DnaAATP to its self repressor site to vary). In both panels A and B, the x-axis has been translated and normalized to
denote fractions of cell cycles with the initiation time given by t−X
= 0. C: In the case in which both autorepression
τ
and RIDA are included in the model there are two scenarios in which an ‘initiation threshold’ can be imposed upon
the model. The first of these requires the binding affinity of DnaA-ATP to its self repressor sites to decrease with
increasing cell doubling time. The second scenario requires that the RIDA rate increases with increasing cell doubling
time. In all scenarios the value of kA increases with increasing growth rate.

24

Average RNAP (molecules/cell)

A.

8000
6000
4000
2000
20

30

40

50

60

Cell doubling time, τ (mins)

Average gene expression
rate (molecules/min)

B.

80
60
40
20
20

30

40

50

60

Cell doubling time, τ (mins)
Scenario 1a
Scenario 1b
Scenario 2
Klumpp and Hwa - PNAS 2008
Experimental data (Saggioro et al.)
Figure 4: All scenarios of the model are compatible with previous measurements and predictions. A: Variation
in the average number of RNAP molecules per cell with doubling time. Simulations from the three scenarios (connected triangles, squares and crosses) are compared to the (validated) predictions of ref. [41]. Scenarios 1b and 2
are compatible with the results (which are assumed in scenario 1a). B: Variation in the average expression rate per
cell of the dnaA gene with growth rate in the three scenarios (connected triangles, squares and crosses) agrees with
our direct measurements (Chiara Saggioro, Anne Olliver, Bianca Sclavi: Multiple levels of regulation in the growth
rate dependence of DnaA expression, submitted). The measurements (pentagons) are obtained with GFP reporters on
a plasmid, normalized by plasmid number and gene copy-number with varying growth rate. The experiment details
are available in Additional File 1, Section 7. This prediction is also compatible with the results of Chiaramello and
Zyskind [20].
25

Consequences of the Scenarios:

ar

io

2

80

9.6e-05

60

9.2e-05

40

8.8e-05

20

20 30 40 50 60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)
80
11.4
11

60

10.6

40

10.2
20

kA (Transcription Rate)
(molecules/min)

B.

RIDA rate (per pair of
replication forks) (molecules/min)

Sc
en

io

0.0001

kA (Transcription Rate)
(molecules/min)

e

Sc

r
na

1

Dimensionless binding affinity
of DnaA-ATP

A.

20 30 40 50 60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)

Figure 5: Predictions of the model can distinguish between different scenarios. Two possible scenarios can result
in a constant initiation threshold for the model. In the first the binding affinity of DnaA-ATP to its repressor sites
decreases with increasing cell doubling time, and in the second the RIDA rate increases with cell doubling time. In
both scenarios kA (the basal transcription rate) must decrease with increasing cell doubling time.

26

Tables
Table 1: Initial values for the parameters in the model.
Parameter
Basal transcription rate kA
RNAP binding e∆pd /kB T
Dna-ATP binding e∆ad /kB T
RNAP amount P0
RIDA rate kR
Replication rate kΛ
non-specific binding sites NN S

Untransformed Value
(at τ = 21 mins)

Units

Reference

75
12/10000
1/10000
5050
10
1/40
5 × 106

molecules/min
Dimensionless
Dimensionless
molecules
molecules/min
genome equivalents/min
(genome equivalent)−1

[70]
[42]
[18], †
[41]
[24]
[8]
[42]

The parameters are fixed with the values in the table for τ = 21 mins and then are able to vary for the other values
of τ in order to fix the ratio of DnaA-ATP:chromosome length at the moment of initiation (t = X). †: Chiara Saggioro, Anne Olliver, Bianca Sclavi: Multiple levels of regulation in the growth rate dependence of DnaA expression,
submitted.

Table 2: The dependence of the parameters in the different scenarios.

Scenario

Floating Parameters

Fixed parameters

1a
1b
2

kA , c1 , c2
kA , c2 , P
kR , kA , P

P , kR
c 1 , kR
c2 , c1

In all the scenarios, kA varies with growth rate. In scenario 1a, P changes as a function of growth rate with the values
obtained from ref. [41]. The dependence of the other parameters on growth rate is scenario specific (see Additional
File 1, Figure A1).

27

Additional Files
Additional file 1 — Additional Text and Figures
Single pdf file containing the additional text and figures mentioned in the main text.

28

Additional Text and Figures
Section 1

Considerations on the initiation mass

The initiation mass of E. coli, a concept put forward by Donachie in 1968 [10], is an idea that, while independent of
the work presented in this paper, has been at the centre of the research into initiation of chromosome replication since
its inception. This section presents some thoughts on the implications of our model on the initiation mass argument.
As explained in the main text, steady exponential growth of the cell mass is assumed. The volume of the cell at a time
t, denoted Ω(t), is thus

Ω(t) = Ω0 eαt ,

(12)

where α is the growth rate such that

α=

log(2)
τ

(13)

If it is assumed that the initial mass of the cell is an exponential function of the growth rate [55], it is possible, for
example, to write

Ω0 = Ω0 (α) =

eα(C+D) Ω∗
,
2

(14)

where Ω∗ is a constant.
With (12) and (13), this implies that
Ω(X)
= constant = Ω∗ ,
2n

(15)

where 2n is the number of oriC in the cell. This gives a constant ratio of oriC to mass at initiation and so is in
agreement with what was shown by Donachie [10].
Donachie’s observations of a constant initiation mass are based on the observation by Schaechter et al. [55] of the
initial mass of a cell growing exponentially with growth rate. As discussed, for the ratio of the mass to number of
origins to be constant at initiation, a very specific initial cell mass is required, namely

Ω(0) =

Ω∗ α(C+D)
e
,
2

1

(16)

if the Cooper-Helmstetter model is assumed. However, this particular trend of initial mass with growth rate is not
claimed to hold by Schaechter and coworkers: it is simply an exponential relationship that is claimed to hold. Thus, if
the relationship was slightly different, say, for example, Ω(0) =

Ω∗ α(C+D+1)
2 e

then one would have

Ω(X)
= Ω∗ eα ,
2n

(17)

i.e. the initiation mass would also be an exponential function of the growth rate. So, under the assumption of an
initial cell mass varying exponentially with growth rate, it is not necessary to have an initiation mass that is constant;
an initiation mass that is a continuous function of growth rate is possible. This study is concerned with determining
whether DnaA can fulfill a threshold condition at t = X; this question is independent of whether the origin to mass
ratio is constant or not at t = X.

Section 2

Thermodynamic model for the promoter

This study describes promoter activity using the thermodynamic model first introduced by Shea and Ackers [43, 44].
This section introduces the mathematics of the derivation of this term. Note that the term derived here is for the
simple autorepressor, which is the form used in the equation (11).
The Shea-Ackers model calculates the probability (assuming equilibrium binding) that RNAP is bound to a given
promoter [42]. The validity of the equilibrium binding assumption relies on the rate of binding and unbinding of
RNAP to and from the promoter being much faster than the rate of open complex formation. The same is true for the
relevant transcription factors (such as DnaA-ATP in this case). Under these assumptions, the probability that RNAP is
bound to a particular promoter (in the absence of transcription factors) is given by the ratio of the statistical weight of
the state in which RNAP is bound to that promoter, divided by the sum of the statistical weights of all possible states.
To formalize this, the number of non-specific binding sites on the chromosome is denoted as NN S and the number of
RNAP molecules as P . The number of ways of arranging all the RNAP molecules in the non-specific sites is:
NN S !
,
P !(NN S − P )!

(18)

and the statistical weight of this state is thus

Z(P ) =

S
NN S !
−P εN
pd /kB T
×
.
|e
{z
}
P !(NN S − P )!
|
{z
} Boltzmann weight (binding energy)

number of arrangements

And so, the probability of having RNAP bound to a given promoter is given by

2

(19)

S

P(RNAP bound) =

Z(P − 1)e−εpd /kB T
,
Ztot (P )

(20)

where Ztot (P ) represents the sum of the possible statistical weights, namely

Ztot (P ) =

S

Z(P )
| {z }

promoter unoccupied

+ Z(P − 1)e−εpd /kB T .
{z
}
|

(21)

RNAP bound to promoter

What can be seen is that this form of the derivation for the probability of the RNAP being bound to a given promoter
does not require the volume to be considered explicitly. The spatial distribution of RNAP within the cell is not
considered as it is assumed to provide only a weak perturbation to the probability, given the large number of RNAP
molecules in the cell [42].
Now consider the probability for the promoter in the both more relevant and complex case where a repressing
transcription factor is involved (namely DnaA-ATP).
The notation used is as follows: Q is the promoter term; A is the number of DnaA-ATP molecules as (where the
subscript used in the main text has been dropped for ease of notation); NN S is the number of non-specific binding
sites on the chromosome; P is the number of RNAP molecules.
The number of ways of arranging the RNAP molecules and the DnaA-ATP molecules in the non-specific binding
sites is
NN S !
P !A!(NN S − P − A)!

(22)

which is effectively the number of arrangements where the appropriate promoter is unoccupied. The statistical
weight for this can be written

Z(P, A) =

NN S !
P !A!(NN S − P − A)!
|
{z
}
Number of arrangements
NS

/kB T
e|−P εpd
{z
}

×

weight of each RNAP state
NS

×

/kB T
e|−Aεad
{z
}

,

(23)

weight of each DnaA-ATP state

where the exponential terms are the Boltzmann weights.
Thus, under the assumption that DnaA-ATP acts as an autorepressor, the total statistical weight of all the scenarios is
given by
3

Ztot (P, A) = Z(P, A)
| {z }
empty sites

S

+ Z(P − 1, A)e−εpd /kB T
|
{z
}
RNAP on promoter
S

+ Z(P, A − 1)e−εad /kB T .
{z
}
|

(24)

DnaA-ATP on specific site

The probability that RNAP is bound at the dnaA promoter is
S

Z(P − 1, A)e−εpd /kB T
P(RNAP bound) =
Ztot (P, A)
1
=
,
A (∆εpd −∆εad )/kB T
1 + NPN S e∆εpd /kB T + P
e

(25)

where it has been assumed that NN S  P and A.
The basal rate of transcription of the dnaA promoter is then defined as kA and the copy-number of dnaA promoters in
a given cell at one time (which can be computed from the Cooper-Helmstetter model) as Θ(t, τ ).
The same kind of argument can be used in order to justify the fact that one expects a constant initiation threshold for
DnaA. Consider the fact that 20 DnaA molecules must bind to the origin for initiation to occur. It can be assumed
that this state is binary, i.e. that either 20 molecules are bound, or 20 molecules are not bound. The probability of
having 20 molecules bound is thus:

P(Origin Bound) =

Z(A − 20)e−20εao /kB T ω
,
Z(A − 20)e−20εao /kB T ω + Z(A)

where
Z(A) =

NN S !
.
A!(NN S − A)!

Dividing through, and under the assumptions above, gives that

P(Origin Bound) =
Thus, there is a value of r, determined by

e20∆εao /kB T
ωκ20

1
1+

e20∆εao /kB T
ω(κr)20

.

(26)

at which the probability rapidly approaches unity. This can be

seen as the value of r where initiation takes place. Note that this estimate is rather robust to the addition of other
possible states, such as states in which DnaA-ATP can be bound to other sites, assuming that the number of these
extra specific sites is small in comparison to the total pool of DnaA-ATP molecules.

4

Section 2.1

Considerations on the increase in RNAP levels

A further factor to consider is the way in which RNAP levels vary during the cell cycle. As with other elements of the
cell, the number of RNAP molecules must double during each cell cycle when the bacteria are in exponential growth.
The assumption made here is that the RNAP levels grow exponentially during the cell cycle, to reach double their
initial value at the end of the cell cycle. Combined with the assumption that the volume of the cells grows
exponentially, this means that the concentration of RNAP stays constant through the cell cycle, in agreement with the
results of Oeschger et al. [71]. Moreover, even if the levels of RNAP grow linearly, this is only a weak perturbation
from the exponential growth. Consequently, the expectation is that this will not significantly affect the model
dynamics.

Section 3

Parameter transformation enforcing a constant threshold

This section discusses the parameter transformation of equation (11), providing the key to probing how the
parameters of the model must vary with growth rate. As discussed in the main text, equation (11) is transformed to
fix the value of r at the moment of initiation (t = X) to be the same for every value of τ in the range 20 < τ < 60.
This is enforced by a translation and scaling on r such that

r0 (X, τ ) = λ(τ )r(X, τ ) − a(τ ) ,

(27)

where r0 is the translated version of r.
The wish is to see what must happen to the coefficients in the equation for the fixed threshold condition to hold, when
the structure of (11) is preserved in the transformation. The same transformation can be applied in numerical
simulations, but its analytical form is more instructive with respect to classifying the possible parameter
transformations.
Equation (11) can be rewritten in the desired form, with translated variables, as
∂r0
1
=
∂t
Λ

0
ΘkA
0
− (kR
+ r0 kΛ )F
Λ
0
1 + c1 P 0 + c02 PΛ0 r0

!
.

Note that kΛ cannot change, as this rate is externally imposed by the Cooper-Helmstetter model.
The substitution of r from (27) into equation (11) gives

5

(28)

∂r0
∂r
λ
=λ
=
∂t
∂t
Λ

ΘkA
− (kR +
0
1 + c1 PΛ + c2 PΛ ( r λ+a )



r0 + a
λ

!


kΛ )F

.

(29)

Comparison of the coefficients of r0 and Λ in equation (29) with equation (28), yields the conditions

0
kA
= λkA ,

(30)

0
λkR + akΛ = kR
,

(31)

c0
c2
= 20 ,
Pλ
P

(32)

c0
a
1 
c1 + c2
= 10 ,
P
λ
P

(33)

and the condition that defines the transformation, namely

r0 (X) = λr(X) − a = constant.

(34)

At this point we note the assumption that the concentration of RNAP is constant throughout the cell cycle. Thus
P = P0 eαt

(35)

P 0 = P00 eαt

(36)

and

Thus, since equations (32) and (33) have eαt as a common factor, it is possible to divide through by it. From hereafter
in this section, P and P 0 actually refer to P0 and P00 but the subscripts are dropped for ease of notation.
Furthermore, equations (32) and (33) can combine to give

a=

c01
c1
−λ
c02
c2

(37)

Examination of equation (4), reveals that
b0
κ
b0
c2 =
b1

c1 =

6

(38)

where b0 and b1 are given by equation (4). Thus, writing c01 =

b00
κ

and c02 =

b00
b01

one sees that equation (37) can be

rewritten

a=

1 0
(b − λb1 )
κ 1

(39)

where b1 = e∆εad /kB T .
Now, mathematically, two things can be chosen to be fixed to satisfy these equations
0
1. The RIDA rate can be fixed: kR = kR
. It then follows from (31) that

kR
(1 − λ),
kΛ

(40)

κkR
(1 − λ) + λb1 .
kΛ

(41)

a=
which, when combined with equation (39) gives

b01 =

Equation (40), when taken with (34), gives the value that λ must take, namely

λ=

r0 (X) +
r(X) +

kR
kΛ
kR
kΛ

.

(42)

Either c1 (i.e. b0 ) or P can then be fixed.
(a) Since it is possible to choose c01 , it is logical to set c01 = c1 . This gives that, c02 =

P0 = 

b1 P λ
κ kkRΛ (1

− λ) + λb1

b0
b01

and so

.

(43)

Note that any trend for b0 could have been chosen. The decision to set b00 = b0 here, was due to it being
the simplest logical choice. This equation, taken with equations (30), (41) and (42) determines the
transformation.
(b) It is possible to fix P 0 to a known trend e.g. the one given in ref. [41]. This will then have implications for
how c1 (and hence b0 ) must vary. Given that P 0 is now a known quantity, this gives that

b00 =



b0 P 0 κ kkRΛ (1 − λ) + λb1
b1 P λ

.

This equation, taken with equations (30), (41) and (42) determines the transformation.
7

(44)

2. It is possible to set c1 = c01 and c2 = c02 . From this it follows that

c1
(1 − λ)
c2

a=

(45)

and

P 0 = λP.

(46)

Furthermore,

0
kR
=

kR −

c1
c2 (1

− λ)kλ

λ

.

(47)

Thus, equations (45), (46) and (47), along with
λ=

r0 (X) +
r(X) +

c1
c2
c1
c2

(48)

and (30), determine the transformation, when c1 and c2 are fixed.

Section 4

Average over cell population

This section discusses how to compute average levels of RNA polymerase and average gene expression, used for
example in Figure 4. These average levels are quantities that can be in principle measured directly.
Consider, for example, the expression level of the dnaA promoter (i.e. Q) (presented in Figure 4B). Denote the
average colony expression level as:

Average colony expression level = hQ(α)i

(49)

where steady exponential growth is assumed and α is the growth rate. In order to evaluate this average, the
probability of finding a cell at a time t ∈ (0, τ ) of the cell cycle is required.
Given the exponentially growing colony with growth rate α, let N (t) denote the number of bacteria in the colony at
time t. If the interval (0, τ ) is split into τ /δt equal size segments each of infinitesimal size δt, then the number of
bacteria born in the infinitesimal time inverval (t, t + δt) is

δN (t) =

8

dN
δt ,
dt

(50)

i.e.

δN (t) = αN dt = αN0 eαt δt.

(51)

Within a population of bacteria at time t0 , the probability of finding a bacterium born in the time interval (tb , tb + δt)
(with tb < t0 ) is given by
0
δN (tb )
αN0 eαtb
=
δt = αeα(tb −t ) δt.
0
0
N (t )
N (t )

(52)

This is equivalent to finding a bacterium with an age in the range (t, t + δt) where t = t0 − tb , and so it can be written
that the probability of finding a bacterium with an age in the range (t, t + δt) is

P(t, α) = αe−αt δt.

(53)

Moreover, since bacteria divide after a time τ , the probability of finding a bacterium at a stage in the range (t, t + δt)
of the cell cycle is given by

P(t, α) =

∞
X

P(nτ + t)

n=0

= αe−αt

∞
X

e−αnτ δt

0




1
= αe
δt
1 − e−ατ


1
δt
= αe−αt
1 − 12
−αt

= 2αe−αt δt
= φ(t, α)δt

(54)

Note that the individual bacteria are assumed to grow exponentially with growth rate α in the same way as the colony
itself. Thus,

τ /δt

hQ(α)i =

X

Q(mδt, α)P(mδt, α)

m=0
τ /δt

=

X

Q(mδt, α)φ(mδt, α)δt

m=0
Z τ

=

in the limit as δt → 0

Q(t, α)φ(t, α) dt
0

9

(55)

This argument gives the average value of any observable quantity. For example to get the average of P , as in
Figure 4A, one would take
Z
hP (α)i =

τ

P (t, α)φ(t, α) dt.

(56)

0

Section 5

Considerations on other forms of the promoter

This section deals with thermodynamic models for promoters that incorporate some further experimental findings on
the behaviour of the dnaA gene [24]. Data from footprint experiments has provided an insight into the cooperativity
of the DnaA boxes on the dnaA gene, which has been proposed to be important for the correct timing of DNA
replication in Escherichia coli, as well as potential autoactivation of the gene [72]. The models considered are (i) a
promoter with no autorepression, (ii) a model with cooperativity of DnaA binding to the repression sites at the dnaA
promoter, (iii) a promoter with both cooperativity and autoactivation. The reasons for not choosing these model
variants as the main model formulation are then discussed.

Section 5.1

Promoter with no autorepression

This section considers a simpler model for the promoter than the one used in the main text, namely one that has no
autorepression. The form for this type of promoter was derived in Section 2 and its implications are discussed more
fully here. When the results from Section 2 are used, the main equation takes the form
∂r
1
=
∂t
Λ

ΘkA
− (kR + rkΛ )F
1 + c1 PΛ

!
.

(57)

This is integrated, with fixed parameters kA , c1 , kR and kΛ assumed, to give r(t, τ ), for a given τ . The parameter c1
is then varied (for a fixed value of τ ) to probe the effect that autorepression has (see Figure A2). What can be see in
Figure A2 is that autorepression causes the range of values for r(t, τ ) (the oscillation size), to be much narrower than
for the non-autorepressed case. This might be an important role that autorepression plays in fine tuning the timing of
replication initiation, since it ensures that, even before any other parameters are considered to be variable, the
differences in the ratio DnaA-ATP:DNA length is reduced across different τ . For this reason, autorepression was
chosen to be included in the main model formulation.

Section 5.2

Promoter with cooperativity of DnaA binding

This section discusses a model for a promoter in which there are two binding sites for DnaA. First, it deals with a
form for a simple case of cooperativity, and then it introduces a more complex form including differential action of
10

DnaA-ATP and DnaA-ADP.

Section 5.2.1

Simple cooperativity

In the model considered here, there are two binding sites for DnaA, both of which have a repression effect when
bound, and which bind highly cooperatively. The sites are considered to have a low affinity for DnaA so only a
probability to the situation in which both sites are bound is allocated . As in Section 2, the number of DnaA-ATP
molecules is denoted as A, the number of non-specific binding sites as NN S and the number of RNA polymerase
molecules as P . Furthermore, the binding energy between a molecule x and a (non-)specific site on the DNA is
(N )S

defined as εxd

and the difference is denoted as
S
∆εxd = εSxd − εN
xd .

(58)

In addition, the cooperativity of binding between two DnaA-ATP molecules is written as ω.
Thus, the sum of all the statistical weights is
S

S

Ztot = Z(P, A) + Z(P − 1, A)e−εpd + Z(P, A − 2)e−2εad ω .
| {z } |
{z
} |
{z
}
Empty sites

RNAP bound

(59)

DnaA-ATP bound cooperatively

This form allocates zero probability that DnaA-ATP can bind by itself. This leads directly to the probability of RNAP
being bound to the promoter, namely
S

Z(P − 1, A)e−εpd
P(RNAP bound) =
,
Ztot

(60)

i.e.

P(RNAP bound) =

1
1+

S
e∆εpd PNFNreg

,

(61)

where

−1
Freg

=1+e

−2∆εad


ω

A
NN S

2
.

(62)

Figure A6C shows that the presence of cooperativity alone cannot produce a constant threshold. Thus, it is necessary
to try and impose a constant threshold on the model using a transformation such as that described in Section 3. Now,
if it is written that rκ =

A
NN S

(see main text for definition of κ), an attempt to perform the same transformation as

in Section 3, i.e.
r0 = λr − a ,
11

(63)

shows that the (rκ)2 term produces a linear term in r0 that is not present in the original form of Freg and so the
transformation will fail as it will not generally be possible to retain the original form of the model.

Section 5.2.2

A more sophisticated model for cooperativity

We consider here the more realistic situation where the two binding sites differ. One is a high-affinity site, which
does not contribute towards autorepression, and the other is a low-affinity site to which DnaA binds cooperatively
and such that, when bound, DnaA has a repression effect on the dnaA gene [18]. The number of ways of distributing
P RNA polymerase molecules and A DnaA-ATP molecules in NN S binding sites is thus

Z(P, A) =

NN S
NS
NN S !
× e−P εpd e−Aεad .
P !A!(NN S − P − A)

(64)

There are five different possible states of the system, described in the sum of the statistical weights:

Ztot = Z(P, A)
| {z }
Empty sites

S

+ Z(P − 1, A)e−εpd
|
{z
}
RNAP bound

S

H

+ Z(P − 1, A − 1)e−(εpd +εad )
{z
}
|
RNAP bound and high affinity site bound

+

H

Z(P, A − 1)e−εad
|
{z
}

High affinity site bound and RNAP not bound
H

L

+ Z(P, A − 2)e−(εad +εad ) ω .
|
{z
}

(65)

DnaA-ATP bound cooperatively

This model allocates zero probability that DnaA-ATP can bind to the low-affinity site alone. For it to bind to this site
it must do so cooperatively once the high affinity site is bound.
This leads to the probability of RNAP being bound to the promoter, namely:
S

S

H

Z(P − 1, A)e−εpd + Z(P − 1, A − 1)e−(εpd +εad )
P(RNAP bound) =
,
Ztot

(66)

i.e.

P(RNAP bound) =
where

12

1
S
1 + e∆εpd PNFNreg

(67)

−1
Freg

Now, writing rκ =

A
NN S

1+
=

A
−∆εH
ad
NN S e

+ω

1+



A
NN S

2

H

L

e−(∆εad +∆εad )

A
−∆εH
ad
NN S e

.

(68)

(see main text for definition of κ), the same transformation as for the main equation can be

performed, following the steps in Section 3, i.e. writing

r0 = λr − a

(69)

and collecting and comparing terms in r0 .

Section 5.3

Promoter with both cooperativity and autoactivation

This section considers an even more realistic form for the promoter which incorporates both autoactivation and
cooperativity of DnaA binding of both forms of bound DnaA. The main conclusion is that this representation
introduces too many new parameters in the model, which cannot be estimated from experiments, and therefore adds
uncontrolled uncertainty. Hence, priority was given to the simpler and more controlled model presented in the main
text.
First, consider the dnaA gene itself, which has in fact two promoters, dnaAp1 and dnaAp2. Since the expression of
the dnaA gene is controlled mostly by the dnaAp2 promoter, only this promoter is considered. There are 5 DnaA
boxes on the dnaA gene, two high affinity boxes (1 and 2) which bind both DnaA-ATP and DnaA-ADP and three
low affinity boxes (a, b and c) which bind only DnaA-ATP. Since box a appears to only affect the dnaAp1 promoter,
it is ignored for this derivation. DnaA boxes b and c appear to cause autorepression when bound by DnaA-ATP.
Boxes 1 and 2 appear to cause autoactivation when bound by either DnaA-ATP or DnaA-ADP in situations when
DnaA boxes b and c are unbound. Moreover, it is assumed that, due to cooperativity, there must be pairwise binding
between boxes 1 and 2 and boxes b and c i.e. if box 1 is bound by DnaA-ATP then box 2 must also be bound by
DnaA-ATP [72].
In a similar manner to the previous section, the number of DnaA-ATP molecules is denoted as A− , the number of
DnaA-ADP molecules as A+ , the number of non-specific binding sites as NN S and the number of RNA polymerase
molecules as P . Furthermore, the binding energy between a molecule x and a (non-)specific site, i, on the DNA is
(N )Si

defined as εxd

and the difference as

S
∆εxd = εSxdi − εN
xd .

13

(70)

In addition to this, the binding energy (cooperativity) between two molecules a and b is written as εab . So, the
statistical weight of distributing P RNA polymerase molecules, A− DnaA-ATP molecules and A+ DnaA-ADP
molecules among NN S non-specific binding sites is

Z(P, A− , A+ ) =

N S −A εN S
NN S !
−A εN S
× e−P εP d e − A− d e + A+ d .
P !A− !A+ !(NN S − P − A− − A+ )

(71)

The sum of all the statistical weights is

S

Ztot = Z(P, A− , A+ ) + Z(P − 1, A− , A+ )e−εP d
S

−
−
+ Z(P, A− − 2, A+ )kb,c + Z(P − 1, A− − 2, A+ )e−εP d k1,2
ω0,1
−
+
+ Z(P, A− − 2, A+ )k1,2
+ Z(P, A− , A+ − 2)k1,2
S

−
−
+
+
+ Z(P, A− − 4, A+ )kb,c k1,2
ωb,1
+ Z(P − 1, A− , A+ − 2)e−εP d k1,2
ω0,1
+
+
+ Z(P, A− − 2, A+ − 2)kb,c k1,2
ωb,1
,

(72)

where

S

−2εAb,cd

kb,c = e

−

S

−2εA1,2d

−
k1,2
=e

−

S

−2εA1,2d

+
k1,2
=e

+

−
ω0,1
= e−εA− P
+
ω0,1
= e−εA+ P
+
ωb,1
=e
−
ωb,1
=e

−εb,1
A

− A+

−εb,1
A

− A−

.

(73)

Thus, the probability of RNA polymerase being bound to the dnaA promoter is

P(RNAP bound) =

S
S
1 
−
−
Z(P − 1, A− , A+ )e−εP d + Z(P − 1, A− − 2, A+ )e−εP d k1,2
ω0,1
Ztot

S
+
+
+Z(P − 1, A− , A+ − 2)e−εP d k1,2
ω0,1
,

i.e.
14

(74)

P(RNAP bound) =

1
,
S
1 + e∆εP d PNFNreg

(75)

where

−1
Freg
=

1 + ∆kb,c



A−
NN S

2

−
+ ∆k1,2



2
4
2
2
A+
A−
+
−
−
+ A− A+
+ ∆k1,2
+
∆k
∆k
ω
+ ∆kb,c ∆k1,2
4
b,c
1,2
b,1 NN S
NN S
NN
S
,
2
2


A−
A+
−
+
−
+
1 + ∆k1,2
+
∆k
ω0,1
ω
1,2 0,1 NN S
NN S
(76)



A−
NN S

2

(+/−)

where it has been assumed that NN S  P , A− and A+ . In this equation, ∆ki,j
Now, if the substitution rκ =

A−
NN S

(+/−)

= ki,j

×e

S
2(εN
A

+/− d

)

.

is used (see main text for definition of κ), then when a transformation such as that

in Section 3, namely

r0 = λr − a,

(77)

is attempted, it can be seen that the (rκ)2 and (rκ)4 terms will create terms that are linear, and cubic, in r0 . Thus, it is
not possible in general to make a scaling and translation on r in this way and keep the Freg in the same form. This
information shows that this model of the promoter, with fixed parameters, cannot explain a constant threshold for the
ratio r at initiation, and suggests that analyzing this promoter poses a different problem altogether as it cannot be
done by applying the techniques used in this work for the more simple promoter. Moreover, equation (73) introduces
many new parameters in the model, which generally cannot be directly estimated from experiments, and therefore
adds an element of uncertainty into the model. For this reason it is believed that, while the promoter model is
satisfactory with respect to existing footprinting data [72] , in absence of more precise knowledge, a simple
controlled model such as the one presented in the main text is to be preferred.

Section 6

Considerations on other model ingredients

Section 6.1

DnaA-ATP recycling regions

As explained in the main text, the DnaA recycling sequences, known to convert the ADP-bound form of DnaA into
its ATP-bound form were considered in a model variant. Here we discuss the mathematics of including a term in the
equation to represent this reactivation. We show how it counters RIDA, with a rate that is proportional to the genome
amount rather than genome replication rate, and analyze its effects under variations of the growth rate.
The number of the DnaA recycling sites is assumed to be proportional to the total length of the genome in the cell.
Furthermore, regeneration is assumed to be replication fork independent, and it is assumed that the rate limiting

15

parameter is the recycling rate per recycling site, rather than the amount of DNA-ADP in the cell. Thus the new,
effective, RIDA term becomes:
Λ
k˜R = kR − ρ ,
F

(78)

where ρ is the recycling rate per length of chromosome (i.e. ρ is (the recycling rate per site)×(the number of
recycling sites per genome equivalent). Performing the same transformation as in equation (27) gives

0
kR
= λkR + akΛ

(79)

ρ0 = λρ

(80)

and

i.e. unless λ = 1, the recycling rate per site must also vary with growth rate. This indicates that the effect of DARS
recycling is not able by itself to impose a constant threshold with varying growth rate.
Note that one now has
0
k̃R
= λk̃R + akΛ ,

(81)

which is equivalent to equation (31) with k̃R in place of kR . Thus this new, effective RIDA rate behaves similarly as
the previous RIDA rate does in the main equation, scaling and translating as a function of cell doubling time.

Section 6.2

Specific binding sites for DnaA

This section considers a model variant including specific sites along the chromosome, at which DnaA-ATP can bind,
providing a titrating effect reducing the reservoir of free DnaA-ATP that can be bound non-specifically on the
chromosome. We show that the inclusion of a term of this form is equivalent to a reduction of the RIDA rate.
Let β denote the number of specific binding sites per genome equivalent. We further assume that once these specific
binding sites are created, they are (nearly) always bound by a DnaA-ATP molecule. Thus

∂Λ
∂A−
= Q − kR F − β
∂t
∂t
= Q − (kR + βkΛ )F,
where A− now represents the ‘free’ DnaA-ATP. Thus, equation (82) is the same as the main equation for

(82)
∂A−
∂t ,

with an effective increase of the RIDA rate due to titration, where the new, effective, RIDA rate is given by

16

but

k̃R = kR + βkΛ .
β ≈ 300 and kΛ =

1
−1
,
40 min

(83)

hence βkΛ ≈ 7.5min−1 . As shown in Additional Figure A8, the model is robust to

changes in the RIDA rate of this order of magnitude, and thus adding the role of specific binding sites does not affect
the qualitative behavior of the model.

Section 7

Experimental Methods

Escherichia coli K-12 strains BW25113 carrying the pKK-gfp plasmid, where the reporter gene gfp (green
fluorescent protein) was expressed under control of the dnaA promoter region (PdnaA), were grown at 37◦ C in four
different M9 minimal media to support different growth rates. Fluorescence and optical density were measured as a
function of time with an automated temperature-controlled plate reader Wallac Victor3. Gene expression was
calculated by taking the time derivative of the fluorescence divided by the optical density, which provides a measure
of the promoter activity as previously described [54].
To obtain data for the promoter activity as a function of growth rate during exponential phase, an exponential window
was automatically detected by taking as maximum value the inflection point of the OD curve and as minimal value
the first OD value that is two times higher than the OD background value. In this window the data was then fitted to
an exponential function and this fit was used in order to extract the values of generation time. Expression data for
different growth rates were corrected for plasmid abundance.

17

Section 8

Additional Figures

Figure A1: Flow-chart of the procedure adopted for defining the scenarios of parameter variation with growth
rate.

18

Oscillation size
(molecules/genome equivalent)

80
70
60
50
0.0001

0.0004

0.0007

0.001

Autorepression-1
(Dimensionless binding affinity)

Figure A2: Autorepression reduces the amplitude of the oscillations of the cell cycle. If one varies the dimensionless binding affinity of DnaA-ATP to its self-repression sites, one can effectively vary the amount of autorepression.
As the amount of autorepression is increased, the amplitude of the oscillations of the cell cycle decrease. The amplitude is defined as the difference between the maximum and minumum values of r in a given cell cycle. This cell cycle
length in this plot is τ = 35 mins.

19

f(r)

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

r
Figure A3: There is a critical value at which the probability of DnaA-ATP molecules binding to the origin
quickly approaches unity. In this plot, f (r) = ωe20∆ε/kB1 T r−20 +1 , which is the probability of having 20 DnaA-ATP
molecules bound to the origin, where we have taken ωe20∆ε/kB T = 0.0001 in this case.

20

B.

Ratio DnaA-ATP:genome length
(molecules/genome equivalents)
Ratio DnaA-ATP:genome length
(molecules/genome equivalents)

A.

470
450
430
410
390
-1
0
1
Dimensionless time from
initiation, (t-X)/τ (Cell cycles)

Doubling Time (mins):
25
35
45
55

100
60
20
-1
0
1
Dimensionless time from
initiation, (t-X)/τ (Cell cycles)

Figure A4: A constant threshold can still be achieved when the RIDA rate kR is varied significantly. A: The
oscillations of the cell cycle when kR = 2 molecules/minute. B: The oscillations of the cell cycle when kR = 17
molecules/minute. Despite RIDA rates being nearly 10 fold different, a constant threshold can still be achieved for
each.

21

Dimensionless binding affinity
of RNAP

0.0012
0.0011
0.001
0.0009
0.0008
0.0007

20 30 40 50 60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)

Figure A5: In scenario 1a, the binding affinity of RNAP to the DnaA promoter (e∆εpd /kB T ) varies with cell
doubling time (τ ). In particular it decreases with cell doubling time, in a similar manner to the binding affinity of
DnaA-ATP. This could be caused by supercoiling.

22

Ratio DnaA-ATP:genome length
(molecules/genome equivalents)

Ratio DnaA-ATP:genome length
(molecules/genome equivalents)
Ratio DnaA-ATP:genome length
(molecules/genome equivalents)

A.

1000
800
600
400
200
-1
0
1
Dimensionless time from
initiation, (t-X)/τ (Cell cycles)

B.
1200
1000
800
600
400
-1
0
1
Dimensionless time from
initiation, (t-X)/τ (Cell cycles)

C.
1200
Cell Doubling Time:

1000

25 mins
35 mins
45 mins
55 mins

800
600
400
-1
0
1
Dimensionless time from
initiation, (t-X)/τ (Cell cycles)

Figure A6: Model variants were considered which all fail to explain a constant initiation threshold in r. The
models include: A: The datA locus, binding up to 300 DnaA-ATP molecules soon after initiation. B: A delay in
the synthesis of DnaA-ATP, to reflect the time interval between the mRNA being transcribed and the DnaA protein
being translated. C: A more complex form for the dnaA promoter, containing two binding sites for DnaA which binds
cooperatively. None of these variants succeeds in achieving a constant initiation threshold in r, leading us to pursue a
model in which some of the parameters of the model are able to vary with growth rate.

23

B.

Ratio DnaA-ATP:genome length
(molecules/genome equivalents)
Ratio DnaA-ATP:genome length
(molecules/genome equivalents)

A.

460
440
420
400
380
-1
0
1
Dimensionless time from
initiation, (t-X)/τ (Cell cycles)
140

Doubling Time (mins):
25
35
45
55

100
60
20
-1
0
1
Dimensionless time from
initiation, (t-X)/τ (Cell cycles)

Figure A7: A mutant in which the RIDA rate is varied. Attempting to reproduce the effect of over or underexpressing the Hda protein or sequestering DnaA from specific titration sites uniformly distributed along the genome,
we modified the RIDA rate leaving the other parameters fixed to their values when kR = 10 molecules/minute. A:
The RIDA rate is reduced to kR = 2 molecules/minute, resulting in a lower value of r at t = X at slower growth rates,
and thus later initiation time. B: The RIDA rate is increased to kR = 17 molecules/minute, resulting in a higher value
of r at t = X at slower growth rates, and thus earlier initiation time.

24

B. 0.000102

80
70
60
50
40
30

Dimensionless binding affinity
of DnaA-ATP

kA (Transcription Rate)
(molecules/min)

A.

0.0001
9.8e-005
9.6e-005
9.4e-005
9.2e-005
9e-005

20

11.6

D.
kA (Transcription Rate)
(molecules/min)

RIDA rate (per pair of
replication forks) (molecules/min)

C.

20
30
40
50
60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)

8.8e-005

11.2

10.8

10.4

10

20
30
40
50
60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)

80
70
60
50
40
30

20
30
40
50
60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)

20
30
40
50
60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)

Figure A8: The model is robust to changes in the input parameters. In order to show that the qualitative trends,
observed from transforming the main equation, were independent of the choice of parameters, the values of the input
parameters were varied and the trends replotted. A: The trend of kA as the value of the RIDA rate, kR , is varied, with
kR ∈ {5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15}, denoted by the symbols,
, , , , ,
respectively. B: The trend of the dimensionless binding affinity of DnaA-ATP to its self-repression sites as kA is varied, with kA ∈ {50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100},
denoted by the symbols, , , , , ,
respectively. C: The trend of the RIDA rate, kR as the dimensionless
binding affinity of RNAP to the DnaA promoter is varied, with e∆pd /kB T ∈ 10−4 × {5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15}, denoted by
the symbols, , , , , , respectively. D: The trend of kA as the dimensionless binding affinity of RNAP to
the DnaA promoter is varied, with e∆pd /kB T ∈ 10−4 × {5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15}, using the same symbols as in C. In all
the plots, the qualitative trend is the same for all the parameter values.

+UQPS

+UQPS
+UQPS

25

80

B.

60

40

20

0

Dimensionless binding affinity
of RNAP

0.0012

60

40

20

0

D.
Dimensionless binding affinity
of RNAP

C.

20
30
40
50
60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)

80

kA (Transcription Rate)
(molecules/min)

kA (Transcription Rate)
(molecules/min)

A.

0.001
0.0008
0.0006
0.0004
0.0002

20
30
40
50
60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)
0.0012
0.001
0.0008
0.0006
0.0004
0.0002

20
30
40
50
60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)

20
30
40
50
60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)

Figure A9: The model with no autorepression but with RIDA is robust to changes in the input parameters. A:
The trend of kA as the dimensionless binding affinity of RNAP to the DnaA promoter is varied. B: The trend of kA
as the RIDA rate, kR is varied. C: The trend of the dimensionless binding affinity of RNAP to the DnaA promoter as
kA is varied. D: The trend of the dimensionless binding affinity of RNAP to the DnaA promoter as the RIDA rate, kR
is varied. In each case, the set different values taken by the varied parameter, and the corresponding symbols in the
plots, are the same as those given in the caption of Additional Figure A8.

26

A. 100

B.
kA (Transcription Rate)
(molecules/min)

kA (Transcription Rate)
(molecules/min)

80
60
40
20
0

Dimensionless binding affinity
of RNAP

0.0012

60

40

20

0

D.
Dimensionless binding affinity
of RNAP

C.

20
30
40
50
60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)

80

0.001
0.0008
0.0006
0.0004
0.0002

20
30
40
50
60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)
0.0016

0.0012

0.0008

0.0004

0

20
30
40
50
60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)

20
30
40
50
60
Cell doubling time, τ (minutes)

Figure A10: The model with no autorepression and no RIDA is robust to changes in the input parameters. A:
The trend of kA as the input value of kA is varied. B: The trend of kA as the dimensionless binding affinity of RNAP
to the DnaA promoter is varied. C: The trend of the dimensionless binding affinity of RNAP to the DnaA promoter
as kA is varied. D: The trend of the dimensionless binding affinity of RNAP to the DnaA promoter is varied. In each
case, the set different values taken by the varied parameter, and the corresponding symbols, are the same as those
given in the caption of Figure A8. Note that the spread seen in A and D is due to the fact that these plots are relative
to parameters whose initial values (at τ = 21mins) are themselves changed. The observation that the transformation
makes the initial spread at τ = 60mins narrower for larger τ is further evidence of robustness.

27

Probability origin bound
by DnaA-ATP

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0
200
400
600
800
Ratio DnaA-ATP:genome length
(molecules/genome equivalents)

Figure A11: Varying the binding affinity of DnaA-ATP to the sites at the origin has only a minor effect on the
initiation threshold. The probability of twenty DnaA-ATP molecules binding to the promoter, and hence starting initiation (as given in equation (26)) was plotted for different values of the binding affinity e∆εao /kB T , to examine whether
this had a large effect on the initiation threshold. The values chosen for the binding affinity were e∆εao /kB T = 0.0001
(solid red curve), and e∆εao /kB T = 0.000088 (dashed blue curve), which are the extreme values that the binding
affinity of DnaA-ATP to its self repression sites attains in Scenario 1a (see Figure 4). The initiation threshold is given
by the inflection point of the curve. Thus, the difference between the initiation thresholds is ≈ 40 (molecules/genome
equivalents) ≈ 10% change. This is approximately constant, particularly when compared with the differences in r(X)
attained in the untransformed model (Figure 3A), suggesting that this scenario might be robust.

28

