Autonomous Motility of Active Filaments due to Spontaneous Flow-Symmetry
Breaking
Gayathri Jayaraman,1 Sanoop Ramachandran,2 Somdeb Ghose,1 Abhrajit
Laskar,1 M. Saad Bhamla,2 P. B. Sunil Kumar,2 and R. Adhikari1
1

arXiv:1204.1416v4 [cond-mat.soft] 10 Oct 2012

2

The Institute of Mathematical Sciences, CIT Campus, Chennai 600113, India
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600036, India
(Dated: October 11, 2012)

We simulate the nonlocal Stokesian hydrodynamics of an elastic filament which is active due to a
permanent distribution of stresslets along its contour. A bending instability of an initially straight
filament spontaneously breaks flow symmetry and leads to autonomous filament motion which,
depending on conformational symmetry can be translational or rotational. At high ratios of activity
to elasticity, the linear instability develops into nonlinear fluctuating states with large amplitude
deformations. The dynamics of these states can be qualitatively understood as a superposition
of translational and rotational motion associated with filament conformational modes of opposite
symmetry. Our results can be tested in molecular-motor filament mixtures, synthetic chains of
autocatalytic particles or other linearly connected systems where chemical energy is converted to
mechanical energy in a fluid environment.
PACS numbers: 82.20.Wt, 87.16.A-, 47.63.M-

Components which convert chemical energy to mechanical energy internally are ubiquitous in biology.
Common examples where this conversion leads to autonomous propulsion are molecular motors (at the subcellular level) and bacteria (at the cellular level) [1]. Recently, biomimetic elements which convert chemical energy into translational [2] or rotational [3] motion have
been realized in the laboratory. While the detailed mechanisms leading to autonomous propulsion in these biological and soft matter systems show a wonderful variety [4],
their collective behavior tends to be universal and can be
understood by appealing to symmetries and conservation
laws [5]. This realization has led to many studies of the
collective properties of suspensions of hydrodynamically
interacting autonomously motile particles [6].
There are ample instances in biology, however, where
the conversion of chemical to mechanical energy is not
confined to a particle-like element but is, instead, distributed over a line-like element. Such a situation arises,
for example, in a microtubule with a row of molecular motors converting energy while walking on it. The mechanical energy thus obtained not only produces motion of the
motors but also generates reaction forces on the microtubule, which can deform elastically in response. Hydrodynamic interactions between the motors and between
segments of the microtubule must be taken into account
since both are surrounded by a fluid. This combination
of elasticity, autonomous motility through energy conversion and hydrodynamics is found in biomimetic contexts as well. A recent example is provided by mixtures
of motors which crosslink and walk on polymer bundles.
A remarkable cilia-like beating phenomenon is observed
in these systems [7]. A polymer in which the monomeric
units are autocatalytic nanorods provides a nonbiological
example of energy conversion on linear elastic elements.

Though such elements are yet to be realized in the laboratory, active elements coupled to passive components
through covalent bonds have been synthesized [2] and
may lead to new kinds of nanomachines [3].
Motivated by these biological and biomimetic examples, we study, in this Letter, a semiflexible elastic filament immersed in a viscous fluid with energy converting “active” elements distributed along its length. We
present an equation of motion for the filament that incorporates the effects of nonlinear elastic deformation, active
processes and nonlocal Stokesian hydrodynamic interactions. We use the lattice Boltzmann (LB) method to
numerically solve the active filament equation of motion.
Our simulations show that a straight active filament is
linearly unstable to transverse perturbations. Depending
on the symmetry of the perturbation, the hydrodynamic
flows produce translational or rotational motion of the
filament. Conformational symmetry provides a qualitative way of understanding the dynamics of the nonlinear
fluctuating states that develop at high ratios of activity
to elasticity. We describe these results and our model in
detail below.
Model: Our model for the active filament consists of
N beads, with coordinates rn , interacting through a potential given by
U (r1 , . . . , rN ) =

N
−1
X
m=1

+

US (bm ) +

N
−2
X

UB (bm , bm+1 )

m=1

N
1 X
ULJ (rn − rm ).
2 m,n=1

(1)

The two-body harmonic spring potential US (bm ) =
1
2
2 k(bm − b0 ) penalizes departures of bm , the modulus
of the bond vector bm = |rm − rm+1 |, from its equilibrium value of b0 . The three-body bending potential

2
UB (bm , bm+1 ) = κ̄(1 − cos φm ) penalizes departures of
the angle φm between consecutive bond vectors from its
equilibrium value of zero. The rigidity parameter κ̄ is
related to the bending rigidity as κ = b0 κ̄. The repulsive Lennard-Jones potential ULJ vanishes if the distance
between beads rmn = |rm − rn | exceeds σLJ . The n-th
bead experiences a force fn = −∂U/∂rn when the filament stretches or bends from its equilibrium position.
With the above choice of potential the connected beads
approximate an inextensible, semiflexible, self-avoiding
filament.
Active nonequilibrium processes, such as those that
convert chemical energy to mechanical energy, are internal to the fluid and hence cannot add net momentum
to it. Then, the integral of the force density on a surface enclosing the active element must vanish. This is
ensured if the active force density is the divergence of
a stress. Since the active processes cannot add angular
momentum to the fluid, the stress must be symmetric
[8]. The most dominant Stokesian singularity with these
properties is the stresslet [9]. There is a remaining freedom of the sign of the stresslet and its angle relative to
the filament. Motivated by the tangential stresses exerted by motors walking on microtubules [7], we choose
the stresslet to be extensile and oriented along the instantaneous tangent t̂n to the filament,
σn = σ0 (t̂n t̂n − I/d)

(a)

(2)

where d is the spatial dimension and σ0 > 0 sets the scale
of the activity. The results of other choices of sign and
orientation will be presented elsewhere.
Elastic forces and active stresses produce velocities
in the fluid. In the Stokesian regime, the velocity in
a three-dimensional unbounded fluid at location r produced by a force f at the origin is vα (r) = Oαβ (r)fβ
where Oαβ (r) = (δαβ + r̂α r̂β )/8πηr is the Oseen tensor, Cartesian directions are indicated by Greek indices,
η is the fluid shear viscosity and r̂α = rα /r. Similarly, the velocity at location r produced by a stresslet
σ at the origin is vα (r) = Dαβγ (r)σβγ where Dαβγ (r) =
(−r̂α δβγ + 3r̂α r̂β r̂γ )/8πηr2 [10]. In the presence of rigid
or periodic boundaries the tensors O and D must be
replaced by the appropriate Green’s functions of Stokes
flow that vanish at the boundaries or have the periodicity
of the domain [10]. Similarly, two-dimensional Green’s
functions must be used when studying the motion of filaments in planar flows [9]. The velocity of the n-th bead
is obtained by summing the force and activity contributions from all beads, including itself, to the fluid velocity
at its location. An isolated spherical bead with a force f
acquires a velocity µ f where µ is its mobility. By symmetry, an isolated spherical bead with a stresslet σ cannot
acquire a velocity. This gives the following equation of

(b)

FIG. 1. (Color online) Spontaneous symmetry breaking due
to a linear instability. (a) A straight filament produces a flow
symmetric about both its axis and its midpoint. This flow
can only produce an extensile motion of the filament. (b)
The straight conformation, however, is linearly unstable to
transverse perturbations. Here the perturbation is symmetric
about an axis passing through the filament midpoint. This
leads to a flow which is no longer symmetric about the initial axis. It enhances the instability and can produce center
of mass motion of the filament. Bead positions are shown
as yellow filled circles, while the fluid velocity is shown as
streamlines with the background color indicating its magnitude.

motion for the active filament:
ṙn =

N
X

[O(rn − rm ) · fm + D(rn − rm ) · σm ]

(3)

m=1

where, for m = n, Oαβ = µδαβ and Dαβγ = 0. Equations (1), (2) and (3) represent our model for the nonlocal

3
1
150

0.9

100

0.8

1
250

0.9
0.8

200

t = 2898

0.7

0.7
50

t=1

t = 6254

0.6

0.6

150

t = 5093

0

0.5

0.5
t = 1203

0.4

0.4

−50

t = 12001

100

t = 8765

0.3

0.3
−100

0

50

100

150

0.2

0.2

t = 12972

t = 9747

−150

50

t=1

0.1

0.1
200

250

300

0

350

0

50

100

(a)
−4

0

250

−4

x 10

x 10
1
x−components

x−components

200

(b)

1

0
Ṙx
Kx

−1
4000

6000

8000

10000
Time

12000

0
Ṙx

14000

4000

−4

6000

8000

10000
Time

12000

14000

8000

10000
Time

12000

14000

−4

x 10
1
y−components

Ṙy
Ky

0

−1
4000

Kx

−1

x 10
1
y−components

150

Ṙy
Ky

0

−1
6000

8000

10000
Time

12000

14000

(c)

4000

6000

(d)

FIG. 2. (Color) Filament motion for high activity. (a) For an even initial conformation with A = 250.7, the motion is
predominantly translational. (b) For an identical initial conformation with A = 150.4, the motion is translational as well as
rotational due to the spontaneous appearance of conformations with odd symmetry. In both (a) and (b) the color of the trace
corresponds to the center of mass speed |Ṙ| normalized by its maximum value. (c) and (d) Time traces of the x (top) and
y components (bottom) of Ṙ (olive dashed line) and K = − (σ0 /4πηb0 ) hκb
ni (black solid line), where hκb
ni is the average
curvature, corresponding to simulations in (a) and (b) respectively. The velocity and the curvature remain strongly correlated
for various filament conformational modes and activity numbers. Times are in 103 LB steps.

Stokesian hydrodynamics of an active elastic filament. In
the absence of bending rigidity and activity, our model
reduces to Zimm dynamics of a polymer in a good solvent
[11].
The ratio of the stresslet and Stokeslet terms in the
equation of motion is a dimensionless measure of activity.
Estimating the curvature elastic force as κ/L2 , where
L = (N − 1)b0 is the length of the filament, yields the
“activity number” A = Lσ0 /κ. The rates of active and
elastic relaxation are Γσ = σ0 /ηLd and Γκ = κ/ηLd+1
respectively. Since A = Γσ /Γκ , the activity number also
measures the ratio of time scales associated with active
and elastic relaxation. As A → 0 the active time scale
diverges and conformational changes occur only due to
elastic forces. As A → ∞ conformational changes due to
activity are much more rapid than those due to elasticity.

Method: We use the lattice Boltzmann method [12]
to obtain the incident flow in Eq. (3), corresponding to
terms with m 6= n, and then integrate the equations using
the forward Euler method. The method of obtaining the
incident flow is described in detail in [13] and in [14],
and is related to methods used in [15]. The subtleties in
using the lattice Boltzmann method to solve Eq. (3) are
described in detail in [14]. We use lattice units in which
both spatial and temporal discretization scales are unity.
We choose b0 = 2 and k such that there is less than 1%
variation in contour length. We choose κ̄ in the range 0.0
to 0.5, σ0 in the range 0 to 0.05, and N in the range 16 to
96. The initial filament conformation is a superposition
of small amplitude transverse sinusoidal deformations of
wavelengths a few integer multiples of L. The integration
is carried out for several million time steps. Our results,

4
unless otherwise stated, are for periodic planar lattices
of size 128.
Results: We summarize our results in Figs. (1) and
(2) and the movies in [14]. Our simulations find a
linear instability of an initially straight filament. On
dimensional grounds, this instability occurs only when
L > lA ∼ κ/σ0 , where numerical prefactors can be obtained from a linear stability analysis of Eq. (3). In
contrast, the elastic Euler instability p
of a filament unκ/F . A linear
der force F occurs when L > lE ∼
instability of passive filaments in an active medium without nonlocal hydrodynamics was reported in [16], while
bow-shaped conformation for filaments driven by external forces were reported in [17].
We show the nature of the linear instability, as A → ∞
and k → 0, in Fig. (1) and its accompanying movie [14].
The flow produced by a straight filament is symmetric
about the filament center and the filament axis, as shown
in Fig. 1(a). It can only produce an extensile motion in
the filament which is transient, since it is balanced by the
stretching elasticity. A spontaneous transverse perturbation breaks the flow symmetry about the initial axis, enhancing the perturbation, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The flow
now develops an uncompensated directional component
in which the filament can translate. Since the hydrodynamic drag on the filament is greater at its ends [18],
a balance between elastic deformation, active propulsion
and drag ensues and the filament propels steadily in a
deformed bow-shaped conformation [14].
In Fig. (1), the initial perturbation is symmetric about
the filament midpoint. We call this an even mode. Initial
perturbations which are antisymmetric about the midpoint are also linearly unstable. However, these odd
modes produce flows of a completely different nature
than the even modes. Instead of an uncompensated linear component, the flow develops a vorticity centered on
the filament midpoint which results in pure rotational
motion [14]. A generic initial perturbation is a superposition of both even and odd modes and, thus, both
rotates and translates. At low A, there is little coupling between the conformational modes, due to which
the filament has steady motion. However, with increasing A greater elastic deformations are needed to balance
the activity, due to which the filament develops nonlinear fluctuating states with large-amplitude deformations,
as shown in Fig. (2) and the accompanying movies [14].
Conformational modes are now coupled, and modes absent from the initial perturbation can spontaneously appear. With a predominance of even modes, the motion
is primarily translational as seen in Fig. 2(a), but when
a spontaneously generated odd mode appears the motion
is both translational and rotational as seen in Fig. 2(b).
In cubic flows, we see similar linear instabilities and nonlinear fluctuating states [14]. It is surprising that such
complex “animate” behavior can be generated by Eq. (3).
Remarkably, its qualitative aspects can be understood

from basic symmetry arguments relating conformations
to the flows they produce. The role of symmetry in the
motility of active droplets has been studied recently in
[19].
In the free-draining approximation, it is possible to relate the center of mass velocity Ṙ to the mean curvature
of the filament [14],
Ṙ = −

σ0
hκb
ni
4πηb0

(4)

b is the local unit norwhere κ is the local curvature and n
mal vector. In Figs. 2(c) and 2(d) we plot components of
this equation corresponding to simulations in Figs. 2(a)
and 2(b) respectively. The agreement is good in both
cases. Thus local hydrodynamics provides a good approximation for the translational velocity but non-local
hydrodynamics is required to fully explain the conformational fluctuations. The interplay between nonlocal
hydrodynamics and semiflexibility is necessary for the rotational motion of the filament, as has been noted earlier
in a different context [17].
For a microtubule of size L ∼ 30µm, κ ∼ 50pN µm2
with about 200 motors per micron exerting approximately 6pN of force, we obtain A ∼ 60. These parameters provide a translational speed of ∼ 1mms−1 for a
semicircular shape in water. The activity can be manipulated in motor-polymer bundle systems or in polymers
of autonomously motile nanorods over a large range of
A. These systems would be the best candidates for a
verification of our results.
Discussion and conclusion: Our model has several important variations. We argued that active processes cannot add linear or angular momentum to the fluid and,
so, must be represented by Stokesian singularities with
those properties. This ruled out the Stokeslet and the
rotlet but allowed for higher singularities, of which the
stresslet, being the most dominant, was retained. The
stresslet, with a C∞ axis, is not forbidden by symmetry as a representation of a polar active element. If it
is forbidden for non-symmetry reasons, we must use the
potential dipole d [10], the leading singularity with polar symmetry, whose velocity field is vα (r) = Gαβ (r)dβ ,
Gαβ = (−δαβ + 3r̂α r̂β )/8πηr3 , in Eq. (3). The axis of the
stresslet or the potential dipole can be oriented normally
or obliquely to the local tangent of the filament and the
stresslet can also be contractile, σ0 < 0. The precise nature of the nonlinear steady states obtained from these
various combination will be reported in future work. A
generic equation of motion encompassing these specific
cases is provided in [14].
Semiflexibility is crucially important in obtaining the
results above. A rigid rod (κ = ∞, A = 0) is immune
to the active instability. Since the uniaxial axes of the
stresslets and the rod are aligned, it cannot, by symmetry, acquire any translational or rotational motion. It
is only by the breaking of this symmetry, possible when

5
A 6= 0, that the filament is able to acquire motion.
We have presented a model for an autonomously motile
semiflexible filament which takes into account nonlocal
hydrodynamic interactions. Our model opens up the possibility of studying the nonequilibrium dynamics of active
filaments, for example the cilia-like beating of motorpolymer bundles [7] as well as the collective properties
of networks of active filaments, such as the cytoskeleton.
Financial support from PRISM, Department of Atomic
Energy, Government of India (AL, SG and RA) and computing resources through HPCE, IIT Madras and Annapurna, IMSc are gratefully acknowledged. The authors
thank M.E. Cates, D. Frenkel and I. Pagonabarraga for
useful suggestions. RA thanks the Cambridge-Hamied
Visiting Lecture Scheme for supporting a visit to Cambridge University where part of this work was conceptualized.
Supplemental material:
Symmetries and flows : Spontaneous symmetry breaking of the active filament generates net flows in which
the filament can translate and/or rotate autonomously.
In the absence of symmetry breaking, as seen in Fig.
S3(a), the net flow on the filament cancels and no motion is produced. Symmetry broken conformations can
be distinguished as even or odd if they are symmetric
or anti-symmetric, respectively, about an axis passing
through the filament midpoint. In Fig. S3(b), an even
conformation produces a net translatory flow, with no
rotational components. In Fig. S3(c), an odd conformation produces a net rotatory flow, with no translational
components. The most general symmetry-broken conformation of the filament is a linear combination of even
and odd conformations, allowing it to translate as well as
rotate.
Lattice Boltzmann method of solution : The lattice
Boltzmann method (LBM) is an efficient way of solving the Navier-Stokes equations. Here, we use it to solve
for the flow produced by the distribution of forces and
stresses produced by the active filament in a periodic geometry. The advantage of this is that it avoids the complicated Ewald summation of the hydrodynamic Green’s
functions. In particular, the LBM is easily extended
to more complicated geometries, where closed form expressions of the hydrodynamic Green’s functions are not
available. Specifically, we solve
∂t fi + ci · ∇fi + [F · ∇c f ]i = −Lij (fj − fj0 )

(5)

where fi (x, t) is the one-particle distribution function in
phase space of coordinates x and velocities ci , Lij is the
collision matrix linearized about the local equilibrium fi0
and the repeated index j is summed over. The force
density F is a sum of all the contributions fn obtained
from the potential energy of filament deformation and
the stresslets on each monomer, modelled here as a pair

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 3. FIG. S1. Effect of the spontaneous breaking of symmetry on fluid flows, which for the motile (b) even and (c)
odd symmetry broken conformations can be clearly distinguished from that of (a), where symmetry is preserved and
no autonomous motion is possible. Bead positions are shown
as yellow filled circles, while the fluid velocity is shown as
streamlines with the background color indicating its magnitude.

6
of point forces separated by a distance d. This methodology is explained in detail in [13]. The flow field at the
location of the n-th bead, v(rn ), is computed by interpolation from the LBM grid points after “self” contributions from the monopole and dipole singularities have
been subtracted. The bead is then moved forward by the
equation of motion
fn
+ v(rn )
ṙn =
6πηa

(6)

In this regard, our method is related to those of Dünweg
and co-workers [15] and Fyta et al [15], where the LBM
is used to solve for the fluid flow around a polymer. The
main distinction is that those authors retain inertia for
the beads while we work in the overdamped limit.
To ensure that the LBM produces the Stokesian limit
and that the velocity obtained above is identical to that
produced by a direct summation of singularities, as in
Eq. (3) of the main text, several conditions need to be
ensured. First, the Reynolds number at the scale of the
filament must be small, so that the nonlinear advection
term in the Navier-Stokes equations is negligible. In our
simulations, this is typically kept to about 10−2 . Second, momentum diffusion across the filament must be
rapid compared to the time scale of filament motion, so
that there are no hydrodynamic retardation effects. In
other words, the momentum diffusion time L2 /η must be
shorter than times of elastic and active relaxation. In our
simulations, these ratios vary from 10−1 to 10−3 . We always ensure that the LBM operates in the hydrodynamic
limit of small Knudsen number by choosing LBM relaxation times (related to the shear and bulk viscosities) to
be sufficiently below unity.
Free-draining approximation of filament velocity :
Consider the space curve, r = r(s). Taylor expanding
about a point s gives,
1
r(s′ ) = r(s) + ∆s∂s r + ∆s2 ∂s2 r + O(∆s3 )
2

(7)

Using the Frenet-Serret relations between the tangent
t = ∂s r and the normal n we can recast the above expansion as
1
r(s′ ) − r(s) = ∆st + ∆s2 κn + O(∆s3 )
2

(8)

where the curvature κ and torsion τ are evaluated at s.
If the curve is discretised by N points, each separated
by a distance b0 , and inextensibility is enforced so that s
remains a material parameter, we can write for the pairs
of points rn−1 , rn and rn , rn+1
1
rn − rn−1 = b0 tn − b20 κnn
2
1
rn − rn+1 = −b0 tn − b20 κnn
2

(9)
(10)

The flows induced at rn by stresslets at rn−1 and rn+1 ,
oriented along the local tangents, are (σ0 /4πηb30 )(rn −
rn−1 ) and (σ0 /4πηb30 )(rn − rn+1 ) respectively. Utilising
the above relations, the total flow at rn due to neighbouring stresslets is

ṙn = −

σ0
κnn
4πηb0

(11)

In the nearest-neighbour approximation, the active velocity is proportional only to the curvature and is normal to the curve.In the free-draining approximation, the
equation of motion for an active filament then is

ṙn =

fn
σ0
−
κnn
6πηb0
4πηb0

(12)

This can be thought of as the “Rouse” limit of Eq. (3)
of the main text. The center of mass velocity can be obtained by summing all the bead velocities, while recalling
that the sum of all forces is zero, to get

Ṙ = −

σ0
hκni
4πηb0

(13)

Generic model for autonomously motile elastic filaments : We present a generic model for autonomously
motile elastic filaments which encompasses all the variations of Eq. (3), discussed in the main text. We include
the potential dipole as a possible singularity that is polar. This is subdominant to the stresslet, but is the most
important singularity if the stresslet vanishes due to nonsymmetry reasons. In addition, we include an externally
imposed shear flow characterized by the shear rate tensor E. We allow for any orientation of the stresslet axis
p̂n and the potential dipole axis d̂n relative to the local
tangent of the filament t̂n . Thus, we have two new parameters in the model, θσ = p̂n · t̂n and θd = d̂n · t̂n , the
preferred angle that the stresslet and the potential dipole
make with respect to the tangent. These angles can be
made to vary along the filament, or may fluctuate in response to thermal noise. Finally, we include an external
force gn which may be due to externally imposed fields
like gravity or electricity. Such fields are required when
studying the driven motion, for example sedimentation
under gravity, of active filaments. The generic equation
of motion then, is

7

ṙn =

N
X

[O(rn − rm ) · fm + D(rn − rm ) · σm + G(rn − rm ) · dm ] + E · rn

(14)

m=1

fn = −

Oαβ (r) =

∂U
+ gn ,
∂rn

σn = σ0 (p̂n p̂n − I/d),

dn = d0 d̂n .

1
1
1
(−r̂α δβγ + 3r̂α r̂β r̂γ ), Gαβ =
(−δαβ + 3r̂α r̂β )
(δαβ + r̂α r̂β ), Dαβγ (r) =
8πηr
8πηr2
8πηr3

For an unbounded two-dimensional fluid, the tensors can
be obtained from their corresponding three-dimensional
expressions through the replacements 1/r → log r,
1/rn+1 → 1/rn for n = 1, 2 and 8π → 4π [9]. For periodic flows, the forms given by Hasimoto must be used
[20]. If required, the hydrodynamic interactions can be
evaluated to higher orders in a multipole expansion [21]
or can be formulated within the more rigorous framework
of slender body theory [18].
The relaxation rates associated with elasticity, stresslet
activity and potential dipole activity are Γκ = κ/ηLd+1 ,
Γσ = σ0 /ηLd and Γd = d0 /ηLd+1 . The shear rate tensor
introduces at least one additional independent relaxation
rate ΓE = γ̇. The ratio of uniaxial and polar activities is
Lσ0 /d0 , indicating that uniaxial activity dominates for
long filaments. This motivates why Eq. (3) in the main
text retains only uniaxial activity. These equations form
the basis by which we can explore the nonequilibrium
dynamics of active filaments under external fields or externally imposed velocity gradients.

[1] F. J. Nédélec, T. Surrey, A. C. Maggs, and S. Leibler,
Nature 389, 305 (1997); S. Camazine, J. L. Deneubourg,
N. R. Franks, J. Sneyd, G. Theraulaz, and E. Bonabeau,
Self-organization in Biological Systems (Princeton University Press, New York, 2003).
[2] W. F. Paxton, K. C. Kistler, C. C. Olmeda,
A. Sen, S. K. S. Angelo, Y. Cao, T. E. Mallouk, P. E. Lammert,
and V. H. Crespi,
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126, 13424 (2004);
J. Vicario,
R. Eelkema, W. R. Browne, A. Meetsma, R. M. La Crois,
and B. L. Feringa, Chem. Commun. 31, 3936 (2005).
[3] G. A. Ozin, I. Manners, S. Fournier-Bidoz, and A. Arsenault, Adv. Mater. 17, 3011 (2005); J. M. Catchmark,
S. Subramanian, and A. Sen, Small 1, 202 (2005).
[4] J.
G.
Gibbs
and
Y.
P.
Zhao,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 94, 163104 (2009).
[5] R.
A.
Simha
and
S.
Ramaswamy,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 058101 (2002).

(15)

(16)

[6] L. H. Cisneros,
R. Cortez,
C. Dombrowski,
R.
E.
Goldstein,
and
J.
O.
Kessler,
Exp. Fluids 43, 737 (2007); D. Saintillan and M. J.
Shelley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 178103 (2008).
[7] T. Sanchez, D. Welch, D. Nicastro, and Z. Dogic,
Science 333, 456 (2011).
[8] J.-F. Joanny, private communication.
[9] A.
T.
Chwang
and
T.
Y.
Wu,
J. Fluid Mech. 67, 787 (1975).
[10] C. Pozrikidis, Boundary Integral and Singularity Methods for Linearized Viscous Flow (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1992).
[11] M.
Doi
and
S.
F.
Edwards,
The Theory of Polymer Dynamics (Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1988).
[12] R. Benzi,
S. Succi,
and M. Vergassola,
Physics Reports 222, 145 (1992);
S. Succi, The lattice Boltzmann equation for Fluid Dynamics and Beyond
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2001); C. K. Aidun and J. R.
Clausen, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 42, 439 (2010).
[13] R. W. Nash, R. Adhikari,
and M. E. Cates,
Phys. Rev. E 77, 026709 (2008);
R. W. Nash,
R. Adhikari, J. Tailleur,
and M. E. Cates,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 258101 (2010).
[14] “See supplemental material at [url will be inserted by
publisher] for further discussion of key results and for
movies of filament motion at different activity strengths
for periodic planar and cubic geometries.”.
[15] P.
Ahlrichs
and
B.
Dünweg,
J. Chem. Phys. 111, 8225 (1999);
M.
Fyta,
S. Melchionna, S. Succi,
and E. Kaxiras,
Phys. Rev. E 78, 036704 (2008);
T.
Pham,
U. Schiller,
J. Prakash,
and B. Dünweg,
J. Chem. Phys. 131, 164114 (2009).
[16] N. Kikuchi, A. Ehrlicher, D. Koch, J. A.
Käs,
S.
Ramaswamy,
and
M.
Rao,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106, 19776 (2009).
[17] X. Xu and A. Nadim, Phys. Fluids 6, 2889 (1994); M. C.
Lagomarsino, I. Pagonabarraga,
and C. P. Lowe,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 148104 (2005).
[18] J.
B.
Keller
and
S.
I.
Rubinow,
J. Fluid Mech. 75, 705 (1976).
[19] E. Tjhung, D. Marenduzzo,
and M. Cates,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109, 12381 (2012), .
[20] H. Hasimoto, J. Fluid Mech. 5, 317 (1959).
[21] R. Kutteh, J. Chem. Phys. 119, 9280 (2003).

