arXiv:1205.5762v1 [physics.bio-ph] 25 May 2012

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize
growth of cyanobacterial filaments
Aidan I Brown and Andrew D Rutenberg
Department of Physics and Atmospheric Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada B3H 1Z9
E-mail: aidan@dal.ca, andrew.rutenberg@dal.ca
Abstract. Under conditions of limited fixed-nitrogen, some filamentous cyanobacteria develop a regular pattern of heterocyst cells that fix nitrogen for the remaining
vegetative cells. We examine three different heterocyst placement strategies by quantitatively modelling filament growth while varying both external fixed-nitrogen and leakage from the filament. We find that there is an optimum heterocyst frequency which
maximizes the growth rate of the filament; the optimum frequency decreases as the external fixed-nitrogen concentration increases but increases as the leakage increases. In
the presence of leakage, filaments implementing a local heterocyst placement strategy
grow significantly faster than filaments implementing random heterocyst placement
strategies. With no extracellular fixed-nitrogen, consistent with recent experimental
studies of Anabaena sp. PCC 7120, the modelled heterocyst spacing distribution using our local heterocyst placement strategy is qualitatively similar to experimentally
observed patterns. As external fixed-nitrogen is increased, the spacing distribution for
our local placement strategy retains the same shape while the average spacing between
heterocysts continuously increases.

PACS numbers: 87.17.Aa, 87.17.Ee, 87.18.Fx, 87.18.Tt

Keywords: Cyanobacteria, Heterocysts, Simulation, Pattern Formation

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

2

1. Introduction
Cyanobacteria are prokaryotes able to grow photoautotrophically using oxygenic
photosynthesis. They preferentially use ammonium or nitrate as sources of fixednitrogen [1]. However, in conditions of low exogenous fixed-nitrogen, cyanobacteria can
fix atmospheric nitrogen. Heterocystous filamentous cyanobacteria form unbranched
clonal filaments of cells, and fix nitrogen within dedicated and terminally differentiated
heterocyst cells [2, 3]. Heterocysts are separated by clusters of photosynthetic vegetative
cells that cannot themselves produce fixed-nitrogen (fN). Significant progress has
been made in characterizing the genetic network underlying the observed heterocyst
pattern [2, 4] that is developed in response to the absence of external fixed-nitrogen.
Nevertheless, little attention has been paid to the functional role of the heterocyst
pattern itself in these model developmental organisms.
As we shall show, a filament with too few (or inactive) heterocysts will starve
of fixed-nitrogen and grow slowly without external fixed-nitrogen [5] while too many
heterocysts, which do not grow and divide, will also inhibit growth [6]. Balancing these
effects in the filament qualitatively explains the heterocyst frequency of approximately
10% observed with no external fixed-nitrogen, but does not explain the distinctive
pattern of heterocyst spacings that is seen in the model cyanobacterium Anabaena sp.
PCC 7120 [6, 7, 8, 9]. Indeed, the observation that mutant strains exhibiting a distinct
pattern of multiple-contiguous heterocysts (Mch) show reduced growth [10] indicates
that heterocyst placement is important. In this paper, we use quantitative modelling
to explore the hypotheses that simple heterocyst placement strategies can affect
filament growth, and that observed heterocyst patterns reflect placement strategies that
maximize growth.
Previous models of cyanobacterial spacings have directly compared model and
experimental distributions. Meeks and Elhai [11] compared the expected heterocyst
spacing for randomly spaced heterocysts to the experimentally measured distribution
and found clear disagreement. Wolk and Quine [12] examined a diffusible inhibitor
mechanism in which a radius of inhibition around existing heterocysts depends on
diffusion and degradation of the inhibitor, and obtained qualitative agreement with
early observed spacing distributions for Anabaena sp. PCC 7120 (hereafter simply PCC
7120). These models identify lateral inhibition as a plausible mechanism behind the
observed heterocyst patterns but could not examine why (or if) the observed pattern is
optimal, or how the pattern may change under different experimental conditions.
We hypothesize that leakage of fN from the cyanobacterial filament may distinguish
between heterocyst patterns, in terms of growth rates. Evidence for leakage was
first reported by Fogg et al [13, 14], who found fN products outside the filament.
Supporting this, Paerl [15] observed bacteria clustering around cyanobacterial filaments,
particularly at junctions between heterocysts and vegetative cells, and indicated a
possible symbiosis based on enhanced nitrogen fixation and leaked fixation products.
Thiel [16] found protein proteolysis byproducts in the extracellular medium after fixed-

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

3

nitrogen starvation. Significant leakage is also consistent with the observation of reduced
diazotrophic growth in strains with impaired amino acid uptake transporters [17, 18].
Nevertheless, we are not aware of any quantitative measurements of the rate of leakage.
Qualitatively, a regular pattern of heterocysts would minimize the distance traveled by
fN products so as to minimize leakage from vegetative cells, leaving more fN available
for growth.
In this paper, we examine heterocyst frequencies that maximize filament growth
within the context of a quantitative transport model [19] that incorporates fixed-nitrogen
transport, vegetative cell growth, and fixed-nitrogen production at heterocysts. We
explore the impact on growth of different heterocyst placement strategies, including
random placement, and find that they are almost indistinguishable in the absence of
leakage of fN from the filament, but clearly distinct with leakage. We find that the
heterocyst spacing patterns corresponding to maximal filament growth are qualitatively
similar to those seen experimentally.
The genera Anabaena, which includes heterocystous cyanobacteria, is widely
distributed geographically in freshwater lakes [20, 21] where fixed-nitrogen is one of
the major substances limiting growth [22, 23, 24]. Nitrification turns ammonia into
nitrite and then nitrate [21, 25]. Nitrate levels in lakes range from 0-10 mg/l (010×1022 m−3 ) in unpolluted freshwater, but vary both seasonally and spatially [21, 26].
Heterocystous cyanobacteria are also found in the oceans [27, 28] where nitrate levels
have been recorded to vary from approximately 0-50 µmol/kg [29] (0-3×1022 m−3 ).
It has long been known that sources of fixed-nitrogen initially present in the medium
can increase the mean spacing between heterocysts [13, 30] and that heterocysts will
differentiate at non-zero levels of external fixed-nitrogen (efN) [13]. Field studies of
heterocystous cyanobacteria also show both a range of heterocyst counts and a range
of efN concentrations, with significant positive correlations between the two (see e.g.
[31]). In addition, steady-state chemostat experiments show that Anabaena flos-aquae
can adjust nitrogen fixation to achieve constant growth, within approximately 10%, as
efN concentrations are varied [32]. While growth independence from efN seems desirable
in the face of environmental variability, it raises the question of how and how well it is
achieved in terms of heterocyst fraction and pattern.
The heterocyst pattern changes with time as it evolves towards a steady-state
distribution after efN deprivation [6, 8, 9]. Earlier models [11, 12] have focused on
the early heterocyst pattern observed 24 h after efN deprivation. While the early
pattern and the later patterns are qualitatively similar, with broad distributions of
heterocyst spacings ranging from zero to more than twenty cells between heterocysts
with a peak at about a ten cell spacing, we focus on the steady-state distribution in this
paper. We explore the hypothesis that cyanobacterial filaments use a unified heterocyst
placement strategy even at non-zero levels of efN. With all of our strategies, we find
that maximal growth is observed with heterocyst frequencies that decrease continuously
with increasing levels of efN.

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

4

2. Model
2.1. Fixed-nitrogen Transport
Our model of fixed-nitrogen (fN) transport and incorporation is adapted from Brown
and Rutenberg [19], with the addition of import from the extracellular medium. That
study found that periplasmic transport was not required to explain nanoSIMS studies
of fixed-nitrogen profiles [33], so we do not include periplasmic transport in our model.
Our model tracks the total amount of freely-diffusing fN, N(i, t), in each cell i vs. time
t:
d
N(i, t) = Φtot (i, t) + DI ρef N l(i, t) − DL N(i, t) + Gi ,
(1)
dt
where Φtot (i) ≡ ΦR (i − 1) + ΦL (i + 1) − ΦL (i) − ΦR (i) is the net diffusive flux into cell
i, equal to the sum of the incoming fluxes minus the outgoing fluxes. Each cell has
two outgoing fluxes, ΦL and ΦR to its left and right neighbours, respectively, and two
incoming fluxes from its neighbours. Following Fick’s law, each flux is the product of
the local density N(i, t)/l(i, t) and a transport coefficient DC . We use DC =1.54 µm
s−1 between two vegetative cells and DC =0.19 µm s−1 between a vegetative cell and a
heterocyst [19] — we keep these values fixed in this paper.

Figure 1. Schematic of fixed-nitrogen transport as represented by Eqn. 1. N (i) is
the amount of freely-diffusing fixed-nitrogen for cell i. DC governs transport between
cells, DI governs import from the external medium into the cell, and DL controls loss
from the cell to the external medium.

In addition to fluxes along the filament, DI is the coefficient for import from the
external medium with efN concentration ρef N to the cell of length li and DL is the
coefficient for losses from the cell to outside the filament. These transport processes are
shown schematically in Fig. 1.
To estimate DI , we use Fogg’s observations of heterocyst frequency in a medium
to which a fixed amount of efN in the form of ammonia was added [13]. Heterocyst
frequency decreased in time due to vegetative growth until the ammonia concentration
dropped to 4×10−5 M (see p. 245 of [13]). We assume that a slightly higher concentration
of efN, 5 × 10−5M (ρef N =3×1022 m−3 ), is just sufficient for maximal growth. From

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

5

Eqn. 1 the amount of fixed-nitrogen imported from the external medium in a time
T is DI ρef N lT . For a cell to double in length over a period of time T =20h it needs
approximately 1.4×1010 N atoms to be imported [19]. Using l=lmin =2.25µm, this yields
DI = 2.9 × 10−18 m3 /(µm·s).
We also include a loss term with coefficient DL in Eq. 1, following [13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18]. Loss is expected to be proportional to the cytoplasmic density, N/(Al), where
l is the length of the cell and A is the cross-sectional area, and also to the number of
transporters, which will themselves be proportional to the cell length. This results in a
loss term that is independent of length l, with a coefficient DL with units of s−1 . There
are no direct measurements of leakage rates of fN from cyanobacterial filaments that
we are aware of. We take the loss rate as small compared to the import rate, and so
use either DL =0.01DI /A (referred to as 1% loss) and DL =0.1DI /A (referred to as 10%
loss). We use a fixed A = πµm2 corresponding to a radius of 1µm.
In addition to transport terms, there is also a source/sink term Gi in Eqn. 1
that describes fN production and consumption in the heterocysts and vegetative cells,
respectively. This G term is discussed in the next section.
2.2. Cell Growth and Division
Following [19], we take PCC 7120 cells to have a minimum size of lmin = 2.25µm and
a maximum size of lmax = 2lmin [2, 3]. When a cell reaches lmax it is divided into two
cells of equal length, each of which is randomly assigned a new growth rate and half of
the fixed-nitrogen in the parent cell. We initialized lengths randomly from an analytical
steady-state distribution of cell lengths ranging between lmin and lmax [34] and used an
average doubling time TD = 20h [18, 35]. We define a minimum doubling time Tmin =
TD − ∆ and a maximum doubling time Tmax = TD + ∆. A doubling time T is randomly
and uniformly selected from this range and converted to a growth rate R=lmin /T . We
take ∆ = 4.5h [19, 36].
In Eqn. 1, for heterocysts Gi = Ghet . The heterocyst fN production rate,
Ghet = 3.15 × 106 s−1 , is chosen to supply the growth of approximately 20 vegetative
cells.
In Eqn. 1, for vegetative cells Gi = Gveg is a sink term determining the incorporation
rate of cytoplasmic fN removed to support cellular growth. Gveg depends on the actual
growth rate R of the cell (in µm/s), which in turn depends upon the locally available
cytoplasmic fN:
Gveg = −gR(Riopt , N(i, t)),

(2)

where g is the amount of fixed-nitrogen a cell needs to grow per µm; g = 1.4×1010 /lmin ≃
6.2 × 109 µm−1 [19]. We assume that cells increase their length at their maximal growth
rate Riopt as long as there is available cytoplasmic fixed-nitrogen. Otherwise, they can
only grow using the fixed-nitrogen flux into the cell from neighbouring cells:
( opt
Ri ,
if N(i, t) > 0
R=
(3)
min(Φin /g, Riopt)
if N(i, t) = 0.

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

6

Note that cells with N = 0 may still grow, but will be limited by the incoming fluxes
of fixed-nitrogen from both adjoining cells and the external medium, Gveg = Φin =
ΦR (i − 1) + ΦL (i + 1) + DI ρef N l(i).
2.3. Heterocyst Placement
While we know that experimentally observed heterocyst patterns are not due to random
placement [11], it is useful to evaluate the steady-state growth rate achievable with
random heterocyst placement. We will use random placement as a point of reference
for other heterocyst placement strategies. We consider three simple strategies: random
placement, random placement with no contiguous heterocysts, and local placement. For
all of them, once a heterocyst is placed it immediately stops growing (Riopt = 0) and
fixes nitrogen (Gi = Ghet ). Commitment to differentiation does not occur until after
approximately 8 h of efN deprivation and can take as long as 14 h [8, 37, 38]. Heterocysts
mature and begin to fix nitrogen approximately 18-24 h after efN deprivation [3, 8, 37]
(though see [36]). For random strategies, heterocyst placement corresponds to when
heterocysts begin to produce fN. For local placement, we have an explicit delay (see
below).
Our first, reference, strategy is random placement (“random”). The heterocyst
fraction f is fixed, and during filament growth a random vegetative cell is replaced with
a heterocyst whenever possible but without exceeding f .
Our second strategy (“no-Mch”) reflects the observation that contiguous
heterocysts are not observed during normal development [2, 3]. It consists of our
random strategy, but with the additional restriction that vegetative cells adjacent to
existing heterocysts are never selected for development.
Our third strategy is local heterocyst placement (“local”). Any vegetative cell that
has been continuously starving for a defined interval τ is changed into a heterocyst.
Starvation is defined as N(i) = 0, so that these cells have reduced growth R < Ropt for
a significant period of time. We vary τ within the range 1 − 20 h. Starvation occurs
due to distance from heterocysts [19], but can also reflect local clusters of fast-growing
cells.
2.4. Some numerical details
Periodic boundary conditions were used to minimize end effects. Filaments were
initiated with no heterocysts and the different strategies were followed until a steadystate was reached. For the local strategy, a “no-Mch” rule was followed for the first 24
hours of differentiation to reduce initial transients.
The growth rate constant µ was calculated every six simulated hours using the
total length of the filament L(t), where L(t) = L(t − 6h)eµ·6h . Heterocyst frequency
was sampled every six simulated hours by dividing the number of heterocysts by
the total number of cells in the filament. Heterocyst spacings were also recorded
every six simulated hours. Measurements were averaged daily, and the results of ten

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

7

independently seeded runs were used to determine an overall daily average and standard
deviation. All data shown is for the fifth day, which exhibits steady-state for the
parameters explored (in comparison with data from the fourth day).
We begin each simulation with 100 cells. Most of the phenomena we investigate
occurs in filaments with a growth rate constant greater than µ =0.02 h−1 , which
would allow the filament to grow to more than 1100 cells after five days. We use a
computational timestep ∆t =0.01s with a simpler Euler discretization of Eqn. 1; smaller
timesteps yield indistinguishable results.
For random heterocyst placement strategies, optimal heterocyst frequencies for
growth without leakage in Fig. 2(c), and the corresponding growth rates in Fig. 2(d),
were found by locally using the standard Marquardt-Levenberg fit algorithm with a
quadratic function to the left of the optimum frequency and a linear function to the
right, with the two functions meeting at the optimum frequency. Optimum heterocyst
frequencies with leakage in Figs. 4(b) and (d), and the corresponding growth rates in
Figs. 4(a) and (c), were found by a least squares quadratic fit near the maximal growth
rate.
3. Results
3.1. No Leakage
We first examined systems with randomly placed heterocysts in filaments with zero
leakage. Qualitatively there are two growth regimes: starving or excess fixed-nitrogen.
At small heterocyst fractions and small levels of efN, starved growth will be determined
by the amount of fN produced by heterocysts as well as fN imported from outside the
filament. The fN from heterocysts is proportional to their fraction f , while the fN
imported from outside the filament is proportional to ρef N :
µstarve =

DI
Ghet
f+
ρef N ,
g · lavg
g

(4)

where lavg is the length of an average cell and g is the amount of fN per unit length
needed for growth. At large heterocyst fractions or with large levels of efN, sufficient
fN is present for growth but only the vegetative cells, with fraction 1 − f , will grow:
R · ln(2)
(1 − f ),
(5)
lmin
where the ln(2) factor is needed to convert the growth rate R of a single cell to a
growth rate exponent µ. Both of these limiting behaviors µstarve and µexcess are shown
as straight black lines in Figs. 2(a) and (b).
The modelling results for filaments with different levels of efN and with zero leakage
(DL = 0), shown in Fig. 2 (a), agree well with the limiting behaviours for small or large f .
There is a clear optimal heterocyst frequency, f ∗ , at which growth is maximal. Increasing
the amount of efN shifts µstarve up, while µexcess is unaffected. As efN increases, the
optimal frequency decreases and the corresponding maximal growth rate µ∗ increases.
µexcess =

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

8

Figure 2. (a) growth rate exponent µ vs. heterocyst frequency f for systems
with zero leakage (DL = 0) and random heterocyst placement. Red circles indicate
ρef N = 0, blue squares indicate ρef N = 0.5 × 1022 m−3 , and green diamonds indicate
ρef N = 1 × 1022m−3 . Black lines indicate asymptotic behavior from Eqns. 4 and 5. (b)
highlights the data near the maximal µ in (a). The red dashed curve indicates the best
fit near the indicated optimal heterocyst fraction f ∗ . (c) optimum heterocyst frequency
f ∗ vs. ρef N using random heterocyst placement with zero leakage. Numerical data is
shown as red circles while the frequency described by the intersection of Eqns. 4 and
5 is shown as a solid black line. (d) growth rate µ vs. ρef N . Red circles with a solid
line indicate µ∗ from random heterocyst placement with zero leakage. Orange squares
with a dashed orange line indicate µ for a filament with no heterocysts, while the
black diamonds and black dashed line indicate µ for a filament maintaining a constant
heterocyst frequency that is optimal at ρef N = 0.

The modelled growth rates are somewhat below the limiting regimes near f ∗ , as
highlighted in Fig. 2(b). This growth deficit appears to be due to finite diffusivity of
fN within the filament, which limits the reach of excess fN from regions with excess
heterocysts in the face of continued expansion of vegetative regions due to ongoing
growth. Indeed, the growth deficit disappears when DC → ∞ (data not shown). The
growth deficit is also smaller when heterocysts are placed close to starving cells (see
below). We do not yet have an analytical treatment of this growth deficit, though it is

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

9

intriguing. As a result of the growth deficit, the optimal heterocyst frequency from our
quantitative model, f ∗ , is larger than given by the intersection of µstarve and µexcess, as
shown in Fig. 2(c).
The maximal growth rates, µ∗ , corresponding to the optimal heterocyst frequencies
f ∗ , are plotted with solid red lines vs. ρef N in Fig. 2(d). The dashed orange lines
show the growth rate with no heterocysts (f = 0), which exhibits sharply reduced
growth at smaller ρef N . The dashed black line shows the growth rate exhibited by the
fixed heterocyst fraction f0 that is optimal for ρef N = 0, which exhibits a constant
but reduced growth when ρef N > 0. In general, filaments that maintain an optimal
heterocyst fraction by maintaining f = f ∗ as ρef N varies will outgrow filaments with
any given fixed heterocyst fraction.
3.2. Leakage

Figure 3. Growth rate constant µ vs. heterocyst frequency f for different heterocyst
placement strategies and leakage levels with zero external fixed-nitrogen. Zero leakage
is shown in red, 1% leakage is shown in blue, and 10% leakage is shown in green. Solid
lines are random heterocyst placement, dashed lines are no-Mch heterocyst placement.
Red circles, blue squares, and green diamonds show data for local heterocyst placement
for zero, 1%, and 10% leakage respectively. The local heterocyst placement data points
show variation of the period of starvation until commitment τ from 1-20 h, with shorter
τ exhibiting larger µ.

As shown in Fig. 3, with no leakage the random (solid red line) and no-Mch (dashed
red line) heterocyst placement strategies have almost indistinguishable growth rates.
Local heterocyst placement (red circles) leads to slightly faster growth with short wait
times τ = 1 h, but shows significantly slower growth at longer wait times comparable
to heterocyst maturation times. Note that f is not independently controlled with local
placement, so that only a narrow range of f is seen as τ is varied. Faster local growth is
seen with smaller τ as starving cells are provided with fN earlier, and experience shorter
periods of restricted growth.

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

10

With non-zero leakage, the three heterocyst placement strategies produce
noticeably different growth curves. At 1% leakage (blue lines and squares), the growth
rates with no-Mch are slightly above the random placement strategy. More striking is
the dramatic improvement with local placement, which has significantly better growth
at any given heterocyst frequency, but also better maximal growth µ∗ for τ ∈ [1, 13]h.
The same trends continue when leakage is increased to 10% (green lines and green
diamonds): the growth rates of filaments with local heterocyst placement are higher
than the maximal growth rates of other strategies for τ ∈ [1, 17]h, and we also see that
the corresponding heterocyst frequencies f ∗ are much lower with local strategies than
with either random placement or no-Mch placement strategies.
Note that f ∗ and µ∗ correspond to the heterocyst frequency and growth rate
exhibited by the local placement strategy for a given delay time τ , or to the growthoptimized heterocyst frequency and corresponding growth rate exhibited by the random
or no-Mch placement strategies.
In general, leakage of fN from the cyanobacterial filament will more strongly inhibit
growth if heterocysts are not placed close to starving vegetative cells. In any case,
leakage decreases the growth rate at a given heterocyst frequency, and so leads to a
larger heterocyst frequency f ∗ and correspondingly decreased growth rate µ∗ with both
the local strategy and the growth-optimized random strategies.
3.3. Varying External Fixed-nitrogen Concentration
When the external fixed-nitrogen concentration, ρef N , is increased from zero the
differences between the heterocyst placement strategies diminish. Fig. 4(a) shows
growth, µ∗ , vs. ρef N for all three placement strategies with 1% leakage. Also shown
with the orange-dashed line is the growth expected with no heterocysts (f = 0). We see
that local heterocyst placement has a significantly higher growth rate than optimized
random or no-Mch strategies. The differences are largest at ρef N = 0, decrease as efN
increases, and vanish when all growth is supported by efN alone. Similar qualitative
behavior is seen with 10% leakage, in Fig. 4(c), though the growth rates are somewhat
lower.
Figs. 4(b) and (d) show the heterocyst frequency, f ∗ , for all three heterocyst
placement strategies for a range of efN, for 1% and 10% leakage respectively. For most
of the lower fixed-nitrogen levels, local heterocyst placement has a significantly lower
heterocyst frequency than optimized random or no-Mch heterocyst placement. When
heterocysts are placed near starving cells fewer heterocysts are necessary to satisfy the
fixed-nitrogen requirements for the growing vegetative cells. As f ∗ approaches zero, the
trend reverses. The local heterocyst placement has a higher f ∗ than either random or noMch placement because local can continue to beneficially place heterocysts near starving
cells as f increases and fewer cells starve, while random strategies cannot. The reversal of
this trend is particularly apparent with larger leakage levels (Fig. 4(d)), where placement
of heterocysts close to fast-growing vegetative cells is particularly important, and leads

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

11

Figure 4. (a) growth rate constant µ vs. external fixed-nitrogen concentration ρef N
for filaments with 1% leakage. Red circles with a solid line are random heterocyst
placement at the optimum frequency, blue squares with a solid line are no-Mch
heterocyst placement at the optimum frequency, green diamonds with a solid line are
local heterocyst placement, and the orange dotted line is filaments with no heterocysts.
(b) heterocyst frequency at which maximum growth occurs vs. external fixed-nitrogen
concentration ρef N . Red circles with solid line are random heterocyst placement, blue
squares with solid line are no-Mch heterocyst placement and green diamonds with solid
line are local heterocyst placement. (c) and (d) are similar runs labeled in the same
fashion as (a) and (b), respectively, with higher leakage of 10%.

to a noticeable non-linearity of the heterocyst frequency f ∗ with local placement at
larger ρef N .
3.4. Heterocyst Spacing
Figs. 5(a)-(c) show heterocyst spacing distributions for the different heterocyst
placement strategies with 1% leakage, all with approximately f = 0.1 for ease of
comparison. Both random placement and no-Mch favour small heterocyst spacings.
Random placement, in Fig. 5(a), peaks at adjacent heterocysts (corresponding to the
Mch phenotype) and drops off for larger separations, while no-Mch placement, in

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

12

Fig. 5(b), peaks at a spacing of 4 intercalating cells between heterocysts. Significant bias
towards even spacings, due to ongoing filament growth, is also seen. The distribution
for local placement is quite different, with a symmetric peak at approximately 12
intercalating cells and very few heterocysts separated by less than 6 cells. Fig. 5(d)
is an experimental spacing distribution after 96h of fixed-nitrogen deprivation for WT
Anabaena PCC 7120 [8]. The heterocyst spacing distribution with the local placement
strategy is qualitatively similar to the experimental distribution, even though the
strategy selection was done with respect to growth alone — without consideration of
the spacing distribution.

Figure 5. (a)-(c) are heterocyst spacing distributions from stochastic simulations
with 1% leakage and zero external fixed-nitrogen with error bars representing the
standard deviation of the mean. (a) is random heterocyst placement with 10%
heterocysts, (b) is no-Mch heterocyst placement with 10% heterocysts, and (c) is local
heterocyst placement with period of starvation until commitment of τ = 8h. (d) is the
experimental steady-state WT distribution from [8].

With non-zero ρef N we consider only the heterocyst spacing distributions for the
local heterocyst placement strategy, as illustrated in Figs. 6(a)-(c) with 1% leakage.
The peak separation increases with ρef N , consistent with the decreasing f ∗ we saw in
Fig. 4 (b). The distribution also becomes significantly wider. By scaling the heterocyst
separation by the average separation for each distribution we see in Fig. 6 (d) that

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

13

the distributions at different ρef N approximately collapse to a single scaled distribution
independent of ρef N . The inset in Fig. 6(d) is the average heterocyst separation vs.
ρef N .

Figure 6. Heterocyst spacing distributions for filaments with local heterocyst
placement, 1% leakage for various ρef N and a period of starvation until committment
of τ = 8h. (a) ρef N = 0.5 × 1022 m−3 , (b) ρef N = 1 × 1022 m−3 , and (c)
ρef N = 1.5 × 1022 m−3 . (d) shows the probability density of the distributions with
ρef N = 0 (red), 0.5 (blue), 1 (green), and 1.5 (orange) ×1022 m−3 vs. scaled heterocyst
separation. Inset in (d) is the average heterocyst separation vs. efN concentration.

4. Discussion
We have explored three heterocyst placement strategies in a cyanobacterial filament
with a quantitative model for fixed-nitrogen (fN) transport and dynamics that includes
growth of vegetative cells and production of fN by heterocysts. The three strategies
were random placement, random placement with no-Mch, and local placement. For
random strategies, we found an optimal heterocyst frequency f ∗ at which the growth
rate of the filament is maximized, µ∗ . With fewer heterocysts than f ∗ filaments are
fN limited. With more heterocysts than f ∗ the filament is hampered by an excess of
non-growing heterocysts. As the external fN, ρef N , is increased from zero, the optimal

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

14

heterocyst frequency decreases continuously until it reaches zero at a concentration ρ∗ef N
where all fN needs are met by imported extracellular fN. The local placement strategy
led to a similar decreasing heterocyst fraction f ∗ with ρef N , though without explicit
optimization of the heterocyst frequency.
Without leakage of cytoplasmic fN from the filament, via DL , the difference between
these strategies is small (see Fig. 3, red lines and circles). With leakage there are
significant growth differences between the strategies under limiting efN conditions
(with ρef N < ρ∗ef N ). Filaments using local placement of heterocysts grow faster than
filaments with no-Mch, which in turn grow faster than filaments using random heterocyst
placement. The differences between the strategies are largest when ρef N = 0, and
decrease as ρef N increases — until it vanishes above ρ∗ef N where the heterocyst frequency
f ∗ = 0 for all three strategies. We suggest that leakage of fN from growing filaments may
be important for understanding the adaptive nature of heterocyst placement strategies.
We believe that the observed growth differences are relevant. Selective sweeps occur
when a beneficial mutation ‘sweeps’ a population and becomes fixed [39]. Selective
sweeps have been observed in cultures of E. coli for mutations with a fitness parameter
as small as m = 0.006 [39], which in our system corresponds to a growth rate constant
difference of 0.0003h−1 . Fig. 4(a) shows that the growth rate difference between random
heterocyst placement strategies and local heterocyst placement is about 0.0025h−1
for 1% leakage for zero external fixed-nitrogen, and is similar for 10% leakage —
substantially larger than necessary for a selective sweep in E. coli.
Significantly, we did not pick our best strategy to match the heterocyst spacing
pattern nor did we tweak the heterocyst frequency f . Rather we implemented a
simple local strategy which itself chose f ∗ . This best, local strategy resulted in
faster growth than optimized random strategies, and in heterocyst spacings remarkably
similar to those seen experimentally. The similarity of our model heterocyst spacing
distributions with observed patterns suggests that local fN starvation may drive
heterocyst development. Indeed, we believe that the extensive genetic network of
Anabaena heterocyst development [3] effectively implements something similar to our
local strategy. This is consistent with experimental work [33] (see also [19]) showing
a dip in the fixed-nitrogen level approximately halfway between two widely separated
heterocysts.
Qualitatively our best strategy is easy to state: “quickly differentiate cells that are
locally starving of fixed-nitrogen”. Effectively implementing the strategy is not trivial.
We note two complications. The first is that our local strategy works for ongoing
differentiation of heterocysts, during steady-state growth. In that regime, long after
efN deprivation, a dedicated mechanism to avoid Mch is not needed — because nearby
cells begin to starve at different times. However, in the first burst of differentiation we
need to avoid Mch with a temporary mechanism to prevent differentiation of the entire
filament. Indeed, the initial heterocyst spacing is distinct from the steady-state pattern
[8] and cyanobacterial filaments are thought to use diffusible inhibitors derived from
PatS to suppress Mch [7]. The second is that we have simplified heterocyst commitment

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

15

[8] and subsequent delay before du novo nitrogen fixation into a single delay τ . While
we find that a smaller τ always leads to faster filament growth, heterocysts do take
significant time to both commit and to begin to fix nitrogen [3, 8, 37, 38] (though
see [36]). While we have explored a correspondingly large range of τ ∈ {1 − 20}h,
with similar results throughout, the details may be expected to change with a more
detailed model of heterocyst commitment. However our understanding of heterocyst
commitment timing with respect to local fN concentrations remains crude, and we feel
that a unified delay τ is an appropriate simplification.
We predict a plastic developmental response of heterocyst frequency to levels of
efN, where the heterocyst frequency f decreases rapidly with ρef N . This implicitly
assumes that there is no threshold extracellular fixed-nitrogen concentration above
which heterocysts will not differentiate, and more broadly that there is not a fixed
developmental pattern of heterocysts. Supporting a plastic developmental response,
early work by Fogg [13] showed a time-dependent heterocyst frequency that increased
with decreasing levels of efN, Ogawa and Carr [30] found heterocyst frequency and
nitrate concentration to be inversely related, and Horne et al [31] found the same
correlation in field studies. Fogg also observed significant heterocyst development at
40µM extracellular fixed-nitrogen (Fig. 2 of [13]), though not in steady-state conditions.
Plastic developmental responses are observed in systems ranging from plants [40] to
the brain [41]. We feel that filamentous cyanobacteria are particularly amenable to
exploring and understanding the adaptiveness of this plastic response. The time is now
ripe to undertake constant external fixed-nitrogen concentrations with single-filament
studies in the chemostat-like environment of microfluidic systems, such as filamentous
cyanobacteria within the long channels used in studies of persister cells of E. coli [42, 43].
We note that the heterocyst spacing patterns themselves are not adaptive. Rather
the patterns reflect an adaptive local strategy for placing heterocysts close to locally
starving cells. This starvation is a combination of distance from heterocysts and
fast growing cells. Local placement is particularly adaptive when fN leaks from the
cyanobacterial filament (see [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18], as discussed in the introduction).
Our heterocyst placement strategy is deliberately simple, and does not include any
diffusible inhibitors such as peptides derived from PatS or HetN [7, 44, 45]. We anticipate
that the small secondary peak that we observe at smaller separations in Figs. 6 (a)-(d)
may be suppressed in vivo by the action of such diffusible inhibitors. Since HetN appears
to act after initial heterocyst development [10], it may indeed be why the secondary peak
is not actually observed [8]. However, we note that the separation corresponding to the
secondary peak increases with the average separation, so that the secondary peak may
emerge in experimental studies at larger levels of ρef N if inhibition due to PatS and
HetN has a fixed range.
Our model and its results assume that, apart from fixed-nitrogen, there are no
nutrient or metabolite requirements that limit growth differentially along the filament.
Doubtless, there are experimental conditions where this assumption is not warranted.
Certainly, there are interesting nutrients that we have not included in our model. For

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

16

example, the supply of membrane potential and/or of carbohydrates from vegetative
cells to heterocysts [46, 47] was not considered. Nevertheless, while carbohydrate
transport would be expected to starve the interior cells of clusters of contiguous
heterocysts and reduce their capacity for nitrogen-fixation, our primary focus was on
the local heterocyst placement strategy under conditions of non-zero external fixednitrogen — where no clusters of heterocysts are observed and heterocysts are broadly
spaced. However, carbohydrate limitation would affect random placement strategies,
which might then have even more reduced growth compared to our best, local strategy.
For cyanobacterial filaments implementing a local heterocyst placement strategy we
have several experimentally testable predictions that we expect to be observed in steadystate conditions — independent of the specific parameterization of our quantitative
model. To explore them in the lab, external concentrations of fixed-nitrogen (ρef N )
would need to be controlled by microfluidic devices [42, 43] or flow cells. The first is
that heterocyst frequency f ∗ will decrease rapidly and continuously as ρef N is increased
from zero. As shown in Figs. 4 (b) and (d), the dependence is markedly non-linear with
larger leakage rates of fN from the growing filament. The second, related, prediction is
that the peak of the heterocyst spacing distribution will increase as ρef N decreases. This
is illustrated in Figs. 6 (a)-(c). We also expect that the width, or standard deviation,
of the heterocyst spacing will increase as the mean spacing increases. Indeed, for our
model, the standard deviation and mean spacing are approximately proportional.
Our results may also have implications for quantitative models of biogeochemical
cycling of fixed-nitrogen in marine and lake environments, where filamentous
cyanobacteria can play a significant role. We note that a number of existing models
[29, 48, 49] use growth rates and nitrogen-fixation rates that are independent of the
biologically available fixed-nitrogen. We find that, with a local heterocyst placement
strategy, the filament growth rate µ∗ is approximately (but not exactly) independent
of ρef N — see Fig. 4 (a) and (c), consistent with the approximately constant growth
reported for chemostat studies by Elder and Parker [32]. However we expect that du
nuovo nitrogen-fixation to be proportional to f ∗ , which in turn strongly decreases with
increasing ρef N .
Acknowledgments
We thank the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) for support,
and the Atlantic Computational Excellence Network (ACEnet) for computational
resources. AIB also thanks NSERC, ACEnet, and the Killam Trusts for fellowship
support.

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

17

References
[1] Ohmori M, Ohmori K, and Strotmann H. Inhibition of nitrate uptake by ammonia in a blue-green
alga, Anabaena cylindrica. Arch Microbiol, 114:225–229, 1977.
[2] Flores E and Herrero A. Compartmentalized function through cell differentiation in filamentous
cyanobacteria. Nat Rev Microbiol, 8:39–50, 2010.
[3] Kumar K, Mella-Herrera R A, and Golden J W. Cyanobacterial heterocysts. Cold Spring Harb
Perspect Biol, 2:a000315, 2010.
[4] Golden J W and Yoon H. Heterocyst development in Anabaena. Curr Opin Microbiol, 6:557–563,
2003.
[5] Jones K M, Buikema W J, and Haselkorn R. Heterocyst-specific expression of patB, a gene required
for nitrogen fixation in Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120. J Bacteriol, 185:2306–2314, 2003.
[6] Khudyakov I Y and Golden J W. Different functions of HetR, a master regulator of heterocyst
differentiation in Anabaena sp. PCC 7120, can be separated by mutation. Proc Natl Acad Sci,
101:16040–16045, 2004.
[7] Yoon H and Golden J W. Heterocyst pattern formation controlled by a diffusible peptide. Science,
282:935–938, 1998.
[8] Yoon H and Golden J W. PatS and products of nitrogen fixation control heterocyst pattern. J
Bacteriol, 183:2605–2613, 2001.
[9] Toyoshima M, Sasaki N V, Fujiwara M, Ehira S, Ohmori M, and Sato N. Early candidacy for
differentiation into heterocysts in the filamentous cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. PCC 7120.
Arch Microbiol, 192:23–31, 2010.
[10] Callahan S M and Buikema W J. The role of HetN in maintenance of the heterocyst pattern in
Anabaena sp. PCC 7120. Mol Micro, 40:941–950, 2001.
[11] Meeks J C and Elhai J. Regulation of cellular differentiation in filamentous cyanobacteria in
free-living and plant-associated symbiotic growth states. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev, 66:94–121,
2002.
[12] Wolk C P and Quine M P. Formation of one-dimensional patterns by stochastic processes and by
filamentous blue-green algae. Dev Biol, 46:370–382, 1975.
[13] Fogg G E. Growth and heterocyst production in Anabaena cylindrica Lemm. II. in relation to
carbon and nitrogen metabolism. Ann of Bot, 13:241–259, 1949.
[14] Walsby A E and Fogg G E. The extracellular products of Anabaena cylindrica lemm. III. excretion
and uptake of fixed nitrogen. Br Phycol J, 10:339–345, 1975.
[15] Paerl H W. Role of heterotrophic bacteria in promoting N2 fixation by Anabaena in aquatic
habitats. Microb Ecol, 4:215–231, 1978.
[16] Thiel T. Protein turnover and heterocyst differentiation in the cyanobacterium Anabaena
variabilis. J Phycol, 26:50–54, 1990.
[17] Pernil R, Picossi S, Mariscal V, Herrero A, and Flores E. ABC-type amino acid uptake transporters
Bgt and N-II of Anabaena sp strain PCC 7120 share an ATPase subunit and are expressed in
vegetative cells and heterocysts. Mol Micro, 67:1067–1080, 2008.
[18] Picossi S, Montesinos M L, Pernil R, Lichtle C, Herrero A, and Flores E. ABC-type neutral amino
acid permease N-I is required for optimal diazotrophic growth and is repressed in the heterocysts
of Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120. Mol Microbiol, 57:1582–1592, 2005.
[19] Brown A I and Rutenberg A D. Reconciling cyanobacterial fixed-nitrogen distributions and
transport experiments with quantitative modelling. Phys Biol, 9:016007, 2012.
[20] Gibson C E and Smith R V. Freshwater plankton. In Carr N G and Whitton B A, editors, The
biology of cyanobacteria, pages 492–513. University of California Press, 1982.
[21] Wetzel R G. Limnology. W. B. Saunders Company, Toronto, 1975.
[22] Lund J W G. The ecology of the freshwater phytoplankton. Biol Rev, 40:231–293, 1965.
[23] Nielsen E S. Productivity of the oceans. Annu Rev Pl Physiol, 11:341–362, 1960.
[24] Reynolds C S and Walsby A E. Water-blooms. Biol Rev, 50:437–481, 1975.

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

18

[25] Stumm W and Morgan J J. Aquatic chemistry. John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1996.
[26] Downing J A and McCauley E. The nitrogen:phosphorus relationship in lakes. Limnol Oceanogr,
37:936–945, 1992.
[27] Charpy L, Palinska K A, Casareto B, Langlade M J, Suzuki Y, Abed R M M, and Golubic S.
Dinitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria in microbial mats of two shallow coral reef ecosystems. Microb
Ecol, 59:174–186, 2010.
[28] Stacey G, Baalen C V, and Tabita F R. Isolation and characterization of a marine Anabaena sp.
capable of rapid growth on molecular nitrogen. Arch Microbiol, 114:197–201, 1977.
[29] Tyrrell T. The relative influences of nitrogen and phosphorus on oceanic primary production.
Nature, 400:525–531, 1999.
[30] Ogawa R E and Carr J F. The influence of nitrogen on heterocyst production in blue-green algae.
Limnol Oceanogr, 14:342–351, 1969.
[31] Horne A J, Sandusky J C, and Carmiggelt C J W. Nitrogen fixation in Clear Lake, California. 3.
repetitive synoptic sampling of the spring Aphanizomenon blooms. Limnol Oceanogr, 24:316–
328, 1979.
[32] Elder R G and Parker M. Growth response of a nitrogen fixer (Anabaena flos-aquae, cyanophyceae)
to low nitrate. J Phycol, 20:296–301, 1984.
[33] Popa R, Weber P K, Pett-Ridge J, Finzi J A, Fallon S J, Hutcheon I D, Nealson K H, and Capone D
G. Carbon and nitrogen fixation and metabolite exchange in and between individual cells of
Anabaena oscillarioides. ISME Journal, 1:354–360, 2007.
[34] Powell E O. Growth rate and generation time of bacteria, with special reference to continuous
culture. J Gen Microbiol, 15:492–511, 1956.
[35] Herrero A and Flores E. Transport of basic amino acids by the dinitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium
Anabaena PCC 7120. J Biol Chem, 265:3931–3935, 1990.
[36] Allard J F, Hill A L, and Rutenberg A D. Heterocyst patterns without patterning proteins in
cyanobacterial filaments. Dev Biol, 312:427–434, 2007.
[37] Ehira S, Ohmori M, and Sato N. Genome-wide expression analysis of the responses to nitrogen
deprivation in the heterocyst-forming cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120. DNA
Res, 10:97–113, 2003.
[38] Thiel T and Pratte B. Effect on heterocyst differentiation of nitrogen fixation in vegetative cells
of the cyanobacterium Anabaena variabilis ATCC 29413. J Bacteriol, 183:280–286, 2001.
[39] Imhof M and Schlotterer C. Fitness effects of advantageous mutations in evolving Escherichia coli
populations. Proc Natl Acad Sci, 98:1113–1117, 2000.
[40] Sultan S E. Phenotypic plasticity for plant development, function and life history. Trends Plant
Sci, 5:537–542, 2000.
[41] Holtmaat A and Svoboda K. Experience-dependent structural synaptic plasticity in the
mammalian brain. Nat Rev Neurosci, 10:647–658, 2009.
[42] Balaban N Q, Merrin J, Chait R, Kowalik L, and Leibler S. Bacterial persistence as a phenotypic
switch. Science, 305:1622–1625, 2004.
[43] Bennett M R and Hasty J. Microfluidic devices for measuring gene network dynamics in single
cells. Nat Rev Genet, 10:628–638, 2009.
[44] Wu X, Liu D, Lee M H, and Golden J W. patS minigenes inhibit heterocyst development of
Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120. J Bacteriol, 186:6422–6429, 2004.
[45] Risser D D and Callahan S M. Genetic and cytological evidence that heterocyst patterning is
regulated by inhibitor gradients that promote activator decay. Proc Natl Acad Sci, 106:19884–
19888, 2009.
[46] Turpin D H, Layzell D B, and Elrifi I R. Modeling the C economy of Anabaena flos-aquae. Plant
Physiol, 78:746–752, 1985.
[47] Cumino A C, Marcozzi C, Barreiro R, and Salerno G L. Carbon cycling in Anabaena sp. PCC
7120. sucrose synthesis in the heterocysts and possible role in nitrogen fixation. Plant Physiol,
143:1385–1397, 2007.

Heterocyst placement strategies to maximize growth of cyanobacterial filaments

19

[48] Bissett W P, Walsh J J, Dieterle D A, and Carder K L. Carbon cycling in the upper waters of
the Sargasso sea: I. numerical simulation of differential carbon and nitrogen fluxes. Deep-Sea
Res, 46:205–269, 1999.
[49] Neumann T. Towards a 3D-ecosystem model of the Baltic sea. J Marine Syst, 25:405–419, 2000.

