Smolen et al.

Title: Molecular Constraints on Synaptic Tagging and Maintenance of Long-Term
Potentiation: A Predictive Model

Authors: Paul Smolen, Douglas A. Baxter, and John H. Byrne

Laboratory of Origin:
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy
W. M. Keck Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory
The University of Texas Medical School at Houston
Houston, Texas 77030
United States of America

Correspondence Address:
Paul Smolen
Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy
The University of Texas-Houston Medical School
Houston, TX 77030
E-mail: Paul.D.Smolen@uth.tmc.edu
Voice: (832) 859-3826

1

Smolen et al.

ABSTRACT
Protein synthesis-dependent, late long-term potentiation (LTP) and depression (LTD) at
glutamatergic hippocampal synapses are well characterized examples of long-term synaptic plasticity.
Persistent increased activity of protein kinase M ζ (PKMζ) is thought essential for maintaining LTP.
Additional spatial and temporal features that govern LTP and LTD induction are embodied in the
synaptic tagging and capture (STC) and cross capture hypotheses. Only synapses that have been
“tagged” by a stimulus sufficient for LTP and learning can “capture” PKMζ. A model was developed to
simulate the dynamics of key molecules required for LTP and LTD. The model concisely represents
relationships between tagging, capture, LTD, and LTP maintenance. The model successfully simulated
LTP maintained by persistent synaptic PKMζ, STC, LTD, and cross capture, and makes testable
predictions concerning the dynamics of PKMζ. The maintenance of LTP, and consequently of at least
some forms of long-term memory, is predicted to require continual positive feedback in which PKMζ
enhances its own synthesis only at potentiated synapses. This feedback underlies bistability in the
activity of PKMζ. Second, cross capture requires the induction of LTD to induce dendritic PKMζ
synthesis, although this may require tagging of a nearby synapse for LTP. The model also simulates the
effects of PKMζ inhibition, and makes additional predictions for the dynamics of CaM kinases.
Experiments testing the above predictions would significantly advance the understanding of memory
maintenance.
AUTHOR SUMMARY
A fundamental problem in neurobiology is to understand how memories are maintained for up to
years. Long-term potentiation (LTP), an enduring increase in the strength of specific connections
(synapses) between neurons, is thought to comprise, at least in part, the substrate of learning and
memory. What processes transduce brief stimuli into persistent LTP? Persistent increased activity of an
enzyme denoted protein kinase M ζ (PKMζ) is thought essential for maintaining LTP. Only synapses
that have been “tagged” by a stimulus, such as stimuli needed for LTP and learning, can “capture”
PKMζ. We developed a model simulating dynamics of key molecules required for LTP and its opposite,
long-term depression (LTD). The model concisely represents relationships between tagging, capture,
LTD, and LTP maintenance. It makes testable predictions concerning the dynamics of PKMζ. The
maintenance of LTP and memory is predicted to require positive feedback in which PKMζ enhances its
own synthesis at potentiated synapses. Without synaptic capture of PKMζ, no positive feedback would
occur. LTD induction is also predicted to increase PKMζ synthesis. The model also makes predictions
about regulation of PKMζ synthesis. Experiments testing the above predictions would advance the
understanding of memory maintenance.
KEY WORDS: protein kinase M, PKM, LTP, synaptic tag, memory, feedback, stochastic, bistable

2

Smolen et al.

INTRODUCTION
Protein synthesis-dependent forms of LTP and LTD (late LTP/D, henceforth abbreviated LTP and
LTD) are the subject of intense study because they represent cellular mechanisms of long-term memory.
Some key mechanisms underlying the induction and maintenance of LTP and LTD are emerging. These
include compartmentalization, within stimulated dendritic spines, of Ca2+ signals and of kinase
activation [1,2], and synapse specificity of induction mediated by synaptic tagging and capture (STC). In
STC [3,4], one synapse (S1) receives either a weak high-frequency tetanus (WTET) or a weak lowfrequency stimulus (WLFS). Neither WTET nor WLFS induce LTP or LTD. However, such stimuli
“tag” the activated synapse for subsequent plasticity. Consequently, if activity in S1 closely precedes or
follows a strong tetanus (STET) or strong low-frequency stimulus (SLFS) at a second synapse (S2),
long-term changes occur at S1.
To establish LTP/D, dendritic translation of plasticity-related proteins (PRPs) follows the strong
S2 stimulus. The tag allows capture of PRPs at S1. The direction of plasticity at S1 is determined by the
type of tag, established by WTET (LTP) or WLFS (LTD). Therefore, PRPs generated by either STET or
SLFS are able to support either LTP or LTD, and the tag at S1 determines whether LTP or LTD occurs
[3-7]. In a cross capture (or cross tagging) protocol, LFS at one synapse is paired with tetanus at the
other synapse [3,7]. If WLFS at S1 tags S1 for LTD, then LTD occurs subsequent to STET at S2.
Conversely, WTET at S1 yields LTP when paired with SLFS at S2. The autonomously active isoform of
atypical protein kinase C ζ, termed protein kinase M ζ (PKMζ), is a PRP. PKMζ activity is necessary for
induction and maintenance of at least some forms of LTP [8-10] and for induction of PKMζ synthesis
[11]. For brevity, we henceforth denote PKMζ as simply “PKM”.
How are the above processes integrated into a synapse that can express different forms of
plasticity? To help in understanding the integrated function, we developed a computational model that
describes some of the postsynaptic molecular cascades at hippocampal CA3-CA1 synapses. In order to
simulate induction and maintenance of LTP and LTD, STC, and cross capture, several key assumptions,
each consistent with empirical data, were necessary. In the model, kinases are differentially regulated in
a dendritic compartment vs. a synaptic compartment, with the latter corresponding to a stimulated spine.
The synthesis of PKM is likewise differentially regulated, in order to simulate cross capture in which
WTET induces LTP when paired with SLFS. Either STET or SLFS stimulates synthesis of PKM in the
dendritic compartment. This synthesis is regulated by a CaM kinase, possibly CaM kinase II. PKM is
only captured by the synaptic compartment if an LTP tag is set. Maintenance of LTP is mediated by
bistability in PKM activity restricted to the synaptic compartment. Persistent PKM activation is
sustained by positive feedback in which synaptic PKM enhances its synthesis. These model assumptions
result in testable empirical predictions for the dynamics of PKM, CaM kinases, and synaptic tags.
RESULTS
Simulation of STET–induced LTP and SLFS–induced LTD
The model incorporates postsynaptic and dendritic roles for the MAP kinase isoform(s) termed
extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK), CaM kinases, and a phosphatase necessary for LTD. Synthesis
rates of PRPs are described by saturable functions of the concentrations of phosphorylated kinase
targets. These targets could represent translation factors. Setting of synaptic tags is also described by
phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of targets. LTP or LTD corresponds to increases or decreases in a
synaptic weight W. Fig. 1 schematizes the signaling cascades that lead from synaptic and dendritic
stimuli to increases or decreases in W.
3

Smolen et al.

FIGURE 1 Schematic representations of two synaptic spines (Synaptic Compartments #1 and #2) and an adjacent dendritic
shaft (Dendritic Compartment). The biochemical cascades in Synaptic Compartments #1 and #2 are identical. The two
compartments represent, respectively, the response of the model to weak vs. strong stimuli. The stimulus protocols are: i)
Strong low-frequency stimulus (SLFS); ii) Strong tetanic stimulus (STET); iii) Weak tetanic stimulus (WTET); and iv)
Weak low-frequency stimulus (WLFS). Stimuli increase levels of Ca2+ ([Ca2+]s and [Ca2+]d) and activate synaptic and
dendritic ERK cascades (denoted, respectively, Rafs/MEKs/ERKs and Rafd/MEKd/ERKd). Sizes of arrowheads reflect the
impact that each protocol has on Ca2+ levels and on ERK activation. The model includes three novel features. First,
translation of dendritic PKM, PKMd, requires activity of ERKd and an unidentified, Ca2+-dependent kinase (CKd). Second,
PKMd can only be captured by a synaptic compartment if that synapse is tagged for LTP. Third, bistability and persistent
activation of synaptic PKM, PKMs, occurs only in the synaptic compartment.

We simulated LTP induction by STET (three 1-s tetani) (Fig. 2, see Methods for model equations
and parameters). CaMKIIs remains active for ~5 min (Fig. 2A). Raf activation leads to activation of
synaptic and dendritic ERK, ERKs and ERKd. The activation lasts ~90 min (Figs. 2A-B). Substantial
amounts of PKM and PRP are synthesized due to ERKd and CKd activation. The LTP tag, TLTP, peaks in
~1 min after the third stimulus, close to its upper bound of 1. LTP nears completion in ~2 h (Fig. 2C,
time course of W). Empirically, induction of LTP with BDNF/forskolin (bypassing E-LTP) requires 1-2
h [12]. The upper state of W is stable. Five h post-tetanus, W is close to this state and is elevated 170%
above baseline. This magnitude is similar to EPSP increases observed after multiple tetani [13].
In cross capture experiments that pair a WTET with an SLFS, LTP instead of LTD is observed at
the tetanized synapse. Therefore, a tetanus does not set an LTD tag. In the model, in order to prevent
TLTD from increasing substantially in response to tetani while also simulating LTD and STC, it was
necessary to assume a tetanus activates synaptic Raf, and consequently synaptic ERK, much less than

4

Smolen et al.

dendritic Raf and ERK (compare the ERKs and ERKd time courses in Figs. 2A-B) (see Methods for
stimulus parameters). Consequently, there is little phosphorylation of the ERKs TLTD site. TLTD remains
low (note scale factor of 100 in Fig. 2A). ERKd, in conjunction with CKd, drives synthesis of PKMd.
FIGURE 2 Simulated induction of LTP by STET. A, Time
courses of CaMKIIs activity, ERKs activity, and the LTP and
LTD tags. ERKs activity is the concentration of the doubly
phosphorylated, active form of ERKs, ppERKs. To help
compare the dynamics of the variables, which differ greatly in
amplitude, the vertical scales for ERKs and TLTD are multiplied
by 100, and the scale for CaMKIIs is multiplied by 0.2. B,
Time courses of ERKd activity, PRP, PKMs, and PKMd. ERKd
is vertically scaled by a factor of 25, PRP by 0.1, and PKMd by
2. C, Time courses of N, F, and W. D, Bistable switch of
PKMs. The derivative is vertically scaled by 100. Stable
steady states are indicated by filled circles, an unstable steady
state by an open circle. The control plot (black curve) is with
the standard parameter values, and has two stable steady states,
at PKMs = 0.0096 µM and at PKMs = 1.30 µM. For KPKM ≥
0.87 µM, only the lower stable steady state is present (green
curve). For KPKM ≤ 0.25 µM, only the upper stable state is
present (red curve). The lower state is also eliminated if PKMd
and TLTD are increased (orange curve).

Figure 2B illustrates PKM dynamics. PKMd
starts at a low basal level and PKMs is even lower
due to the absence of TLTP and thus the absence of
translocation of PKM. After STET, PKMd peaks in ~
1 h. This time is consistent with the empirical time
course of PKM levels in hippocampal slice [11,14].
However, the initial rise in PKMd takes ~30 min to
develop, whereas the empirical PKM increase is
significant somewhat earlier, at 10 min [14].
Therefore, the model does not completely represent
the early dynamics of PKM synthesis.
As a consequence of PKM translocation,
PKMs increases. When this increase is comparable
to the Hill constant Kpkm in Eq. 29, positive
feedback is initiated in which PKMs activates its
own synthesis. PKMs converges to the upper state of
a bistable switch. PKMs takes ~2 h to reach peak. In
the dendrite, positive feedback does not operate, so
PKMd declines. The rate constant for PKM
degradation, kd_PKM, is 0.02 min-1, corresponding to
a half-life of 35 min. However, because synthesis of
PKMd does not terminate abruptly in Fig. 2, the
decline of PKMd takes place over a few h. The increase in PKMs drives a sustained increase in the
variable F (Fig. 2C), which represents the amount of available, phosphorylated AMPA receptors that are
functionally incorporated into postsynaptic sites. The variable N, representing the number of receptors
available for incorporation, does not change substantially (Fig. 2C), because N remains near its basal

5

Smolen et al.

value unless concurrent elevation of the LTD tag and PRP occurs. The synaptic weight W is given as the
product of F and N. W and F transit from a lower to an upper state (Fig. 2C), and remain elevated.
Figure 2D illustrates the effect on bistability of varying the strength of positive feedback. The
switch is visualized by plotting PKMs on the x-axis and its derivative on the y-axis. To represent
persistent PKM activity after the LTP tag decays, the plot is with TLTP = 0, so there is no influx of PKM
from the dendrite. The black curve is with the Hill constant of feedback, Kpkm, at its standard value, 0.75
µM. Three steady states are seen where the derivative of PKMs is zero. The left and right states (filled
circles) are stable to small perturbations of PKMs, the middle state (open circle) is unstable. At the stable
states the curve has negative slope, so that a small increase (decrease) of PKMs will yield a negative
(positive) derivative, relaxing PKMs back to the steady state. An increase in Kpkm represents a decrease
in the feedback strength, because more PKMs is required to activate its own synthesis. For Kpkm ≥ 0.87
only the lower stable state is present, with the derivative zero at a single low value of PKMs. In contrast,
as Kpkm decreases, the feedback strength increases until only the upper stable state is present. Bistability
can also be eliminated by influx of PKM from the dendrite. With PKMd, set to 0.2 µM, then for TLTP >
0.23, influx of PKM eliminates the lower steady state of PKMs. During induction of LTP, the coincident
increase of PKMd and TLTP similarly drives PKM influx and eliminates the lower state.
In vitro (and in vivo), application of a PKM inhibitor, ZIP, several h after LTP induction (or
behavioral training) irreversibly abolishes LTP (as well as several forms of long-term memory)
[8,15,16,17]. A second PKM inhibitor, chelerythrine, similarly eliminates several forms of LTM [17]. To
simulate ZIP’s effect on LTP, the effect of a strong (80%) PKM inhibition was simulated by multiplying
the activity of PKMs by 0.2. That is, in the first terms on the RHS of Eqs. 29 and 31, PKMs was
multiplied by 0.2 and its square by 0.04. Given that the physiological interactions of PKM with its
substrate(s) have not been characterized, this simple method of simulating inhibition appears reasonable.
Figure 3 illustrates that 1 h of inhibition, beginning 5 h after LTP induction, returns PKMs, F, and W to
their stable lower states. The empirical loss of LTP occurs within ~1 h of the start of PKM inhibition.
Therefore, in the model, the time constant of F (tF) was chosen to be relatively rapid (30 min) so that the
return of F and W to their lower states nears completion in 1 h. A weaker simulated inhibition of PKM
(30% for 1 h) generates only a temporary dip in PKMs and W.
FIGURE 3 Simulated block of LTP maintenance by temporary
inhibition of PKM.

Simulated inhibition of CaMKII during STET
also blocks LTP (CaMKII activity was reduced by 85%
for 10 min, starting at the beginning of STET). Also,
simulated inhibition of MEK activation during and
immediately after STET blocks LTP. This simulation
corresponds to the action of the common MEK
inhibitors U0126 and PD98059, and was implemented
by an 80% reduction in the activation rate constant kp_MEK for 10 min starting at the beginning of STET.
In the model, the maintenance of established LTP only depends on elevated PKMs (Eqs. 31-32), and is
not affected by inhibition of other kinases.
SLFS, which induces LTD, was simulated as a 15-min elevation of Raf activation and Ca2+
(details in Methods). CaMKIIs activates only slightly (Fig. 4A), because synaptic Ca2+ is lower than with
STET. This slight CaMKIIs activation yields a small elevation of TLTP at S1. CKd activates strongly due
to its lower Ca2+ threshold. CKd, together with ERKd, drives PKMd synthesis (Fig. 4B). An alternate

6

Smolen et al.

model would postulate PKM synthesis is only upregulated when SLFS is paired with a WTET in a cross
capture protocol (see Discussion).
In Fig. 4, TLTP is not significantly elevated, so little capture of PKM into the synaptic
compartment occurs (Fig. 4B shows only a small transient elevation of PKMs). As a result, PKM fails to
drive incorporation of synaptic AMPARs. F is only slightly elevated (Fig. 4C). PRP is synthesized due to
activation of ERKd. With standard parameter values, synthesis of PRP and PKMd due to the relatively
long SLFS stimulus exceeds that due to the strong but brief tetani in STET. The prolonged SLFS also
activates ERKs, increasing TLTD, which peaks at 0.16, a ~40-fold increase over basal TLTD. The variable
N, representing the number of AMPARs that are available to be incorporated at the synapse, is decreased
(Fig. 4C) due to concurrent elevation of PRP and TLTD (Eq. 30). Assessed 3 h after stimulus, LTD of
51% was simulated (W decreases by 51% from its basal value) (Fig. 4C). Empirically, LTD of ~50% is
near saturation, and conversely LTP is rarely observed to exceed 200% [13].
FIGURE 4 Simulated induction of LTD by the SLFS protocol. The
traces of ppERKs, TLTD, ppERKd, and PKMs are vertically scaled as
indicated.

Empirically, WTET and WLFS set LTP and LTD
tags respectively. In the model, WTET and WLFS
activate, respectively, CaMKIIs and ERKs. In Fig. 2A,
the time course of TLTP has three peaks due to the tetani.
The first tetanus, equivalent alone to WTET, largely
saturates TLTP, which peaks at 0.77, 3 min post-tetanus.
Synaptic WLFS stimulus parameters are the same as for
SLFS, so TLTD responds as in Fig. 4A.
Empirically, although WTET does not generate
LTP, a single theta-burst does [12]. This stimulus
consists of 10-12 bursts of four 100 Hz pulses, 200 msec
apart (total duration ~ 2.2 s). With the model, to simulate
LTP induction by this single stimulus, the dendritic Raf
activation profile was given the same shape as for a
tetanus. However, the LTP state transition only occurred
if this profile was scaled up substantially, by increasing
the maximal amplitude of kp_Raf,d to 0.08 min-1 (The Ca2+
elevation had the same amplitude as for WTET but
lasted 4 s). A previous model [18] similarly suggested
theta-bursts may be particularly effective at activating
dendritic ERK.
An important consideration for biochemical
models is the sensitivity of dynamics to the values of
parameters. This issue was examined by repeating the simulations of Figs. 2 and 4. For each of the 49
parameters, the standard value (Methods) was varied by +20% and also by -20%. For each of these 98
variations, W was assessed 3 h after STET and also 3 h after SLFS. After STET, the mean value of W
was 1.63 with a standard deviation (SD) of 0.12. After SLFS, the mean of W was 0.29 with an SD of
0.07. The magnitude of these SDs relative to the means suggests that overall, the model is not unduly
sensitive to significant parameter variations.

7

Smolen et al.

However, a relatively high sensitivity of LTD to some of the parameters in the ERK cascade was
observed. For variations of kp_MEK, kdp_MEK, and KMEK, the magnitude of W following SLFS varied by
more than 50% from the control simulation of Fig. 4. In an attempt to moderate this sensitivity, we
repeated the LTD simulations for these parameters but varied them separately for the dendritic and
synaptic ERK cascades. In 6 simulations, these 3 parameters were held constant in the synaptic
compartment but varied by +20% and -20% in the dendritic compartment, and vice versa in 6 additional
simulations. This procedure reduced sensitivity, but the maximal and minimal values of W were
respectively still 42% greater than control and 35% less than control. Thus, future examination of model
variants with reduced sensitivity of LTD to ERK cascade parameters appears warranted. For example,
the synthesis of PRP might be made dependent on phosphorylations by more than one kinase, rather than
dual ERK phosphorylations.
The effect of larger variations in the parameter Vsd, the ratio of volumes of the synaptic to
dendritic compartments, was also considered. Vsd affects PKM dynamics (Eqs. 28-29). Therefore,
variations in Vsd will alter, and potentially eliminate, bistability in PKMs and in W. However, the values
of PKMs in both stable states and the response to STET were robust to substantial variations in Vsd.
Reducing Vsd from its standard value of 0.03 to 0.01 preserved an STET response very similar to the
LTP illustrated in Fig. 2. The values of PKMs in both stable states were preserved to within 5%. The
only difference in dynamics was a substantial (~90%) transient overshoot in PKMs, and an overshoot in
W, above their upper states. If Vsd was instead increased, to 0.1, bistability was again preserved, with
similar values of PKMs in both states. However, because of the larger synaptic volume, STET no longer
drove a state transition unless another parameter was also varied to increase PKM influx into the
synapse. Increasing the rate constant ks→d 3-fold (to 0.0075 min-1) restored the transition.
Two-compartment PKM dynamics appear necessary to simulate STC
In tagging protocols, S1 receives WTET or WLFS and S2 receives STET or SLFS. PRP and PKMd
synthesis is predominantly driven by the S2 stimulus. Only after both stimuli are paired will LTD occur
at S1 (if TLTD was set by the S1 stimulus), or LTP occur (if TLTP was set). A “weak before strong” STC
experiment [6] was simulated with WTET to S1 followed 20 min later by STET to S2. Figure 5A1
illustrates time courses at S1 of TLTP and W. Strong LTP occurs (a 178% increase in W, 5 h poststimulus). The time course of PKMs is also shown. The PKM captured at S1 is mostly generated by the
STET at S2. Empirically, STET at S2 does not generate LTP at S1 unless the LTP tag at S1 is set [16],
and the elevation of PKM after LTP induction appears punctuate, possibly restricted to stimulated
spines, rather than uniform throughout a section of dendrite [19]. These data support the representation
of PKM dynamics in the model, in which a) PKM is synthesized dendritically in response to strong
stimuli, b) the tag allows capture into a synaptic compartment, and c) the biochemical switch that yields
persistent PKM activation is restricted to the synaptic compartment.
STC with an LTD protocol was also simulated [4,20] with WLFS to S1 followed, after 5 min, by
SLFS to S2. Figure 5B1 illustrates time courses of TLTD, PKMs, and W. WLFS does not elevate Ca2+
enough to activate CaMKIIs substantially, so TLTP remains low. Thus only a small, transient increase in
PKMs occurs. However, PRP is elevated due to the SLFS at S2, and is captured at S1 due to the elevated
TLTD. Therefore strong LTD occurs (a 53% decrease in W, 3 h after SLFS).

8

Smolen et al.

FIGURE 5 Simulation of STC. A1, A WTET is delivered to S1 20 min prior to the start of STET delivered to S2. Illustrated
synaptic variables are for S1. If WTET is followed by STET, LTP occurs. A2, STC for LTP occurs during a limited time
window. The x-axis represents time between the beginning of the STET and WTET. A negative ∆t indicates that STET
precedes WTET. The y-axis represents the percent change of W at S1, assessed 5 h after the WTET to S1. 5 h sufficed for
LTP to approach its steady-state value. Black curve, time window for a single synaptic compartment coupled to a dendritic
compartment. Green curve, time window for a population of 40 compartment pairs. Over the 40 pairs, the value of the rate
constant kd→s increased in uniform steps from 25% to 125% of its standard value of 0.0025 min-1. LTP peaks when STET
precedes WTET by 44 min. B1, A WLFS is delivered to S1 20 min prior to SLFS at S2. If WLFS is followed by SLFS, LTD
occurs. B2, STC for LTD occurs during a limited time window. LTD is assessed 3 h after the second of the paired stimuli.

Figures 5A2 and 5B2 show simulated timing windows for the induction of LTP and LTD. The xaxes represent the intervals by which a strong stimulus to S2 precedes (negative intervals) or follows
(positive intervals) a weak stimulus to S1. The y-axes represent the induced percent change of W at S1.
In Fig. 5A2, the black curve is the timing window for LTP with a single synaptic compartment S1. LTP
is assessed 5 h after STET to allow W to converge to the stable upper state. LTP occurs if WTET
precedes STET by 75 min or less. This maximal interval is somewhat less than reported, in that [6]
observed a minor component of LTP remaining at 2 h. LTP also occurs if WTET follows STET by 125
min or less. This maximal interval does not seem to have been empirically investigated.

9

Smolen et al.

Because of the bistable switch in PKMs, this LTP window has an abrupt rise and fall. Either LTP
is complete (PKMs and W switch to their upper states) or it does not occur at all (PKMs and W return to
the lower state after a transient). Empirically, however, the LTP window exhibits a sloped rise and fall
[6]. To simulate such a window, a population of heterogeneous synaptic compartments was modeled.
Each synaptic compartment represents a single spine, one of the population of spines that corresponds to
a stimulated empirical synapse. For this qualitative simulation, each of 40 synaptic compartments was
coupled to its own dendritic compartment, and the dendritic compartments were independent of each
other. Each compartment pair was identical to that used for the black curve in Fig. 5A2 except that a
single parameter varied between pairs. The rate constant kd→s for movement of PKM into the spine was
varied (Fig. 5A2 legend). Spines with a higher kd→s undergo LTP more easily. For these spines, PKMs
switches to the upper state for greater absolute values of the WTET – STET interval (i.e., less overlap
between TLTP and PKMd time courses). The green curve in Fig. 5A2 shows the resulting LTP window.
The average change in W over the population of spines is plotted. The window exhibits a sloped rise and
fall, with nearly all the spines undergoing LTP for WTET – STET intervals near zero.
For the LTD window, a population of spines is not required, because in the model LTD is not
based on a bistable switch. The amplitude is dependent on the degree of interaction of the variables TLTD
and PRP, and the window has a graded rise and fall. In Fig. 5B2, significant LTD (which was defined as
a decrease in W of 20% or more) occurs if WLFS precedes, or follows, SLFS by 75 min or less. This
window width appears compatible with data in which
LTD of 30 – 50% is seen when WLFS precedes
SLFS by 40 min ([4], their Fig. 2H), and LTD
between 22 – 40% when WLFS precedes SLFS by 60
min, with little LTD remaining for intervals of 2 or 3
h.
FIGURE 6 Simulated dynamics of key molecules in an STC
protocol that pairs WTET and STET. A, Time courses of
dendritic and synaptic PKM and the LTP tag, for WTET
following STET by 3 h. B, WTET follows STET by 10 min. C,
WTET precedes STET by 3 h.

Figure 6 illustrates the dynamics and overlap
of elevations in PKM levels and the LTP tag, in
WTET – STET STC. If STET to S2 precedes WTET
to S1 by 3 h (Fig. 6A) or if STET follows WTET by
3 h (Fig. 6C), little overlap occurs in the elevations of
PKMd with TLTP. The product of PKMd and TLTP
remains small, and by Eq. 29, little influx of PKMd
into the synaptic compartment occurs. Only small
transient elevations of PKMs result. However, if
WTET and STET occur closer together (Fig. 6B),
substantial overlap of PKMd with TLTP occurs,
driving influx of PKMd into S1. PKMs increases
sufficiently to initiate positive feedback.
The model also simulates late LTP and STC
induced by chemical stimuli such as forskolin or
BDNF [3,12], assuming forskolin and BDNF activate
ERK and generate relatively low elevations of
10

Smolen et al.

synaptic and dendritic Ca2+. To simulate chem-LTP, [Ca2+]s and [Ca2+]d were increased to 0.24 µM for
30 min. For kp_Raf,s and kp_Raf,d , maximal amplitudes were 0.007 min-1 Both rate constants increased
from basal to these amplitudes with a time constant of 0.5 min at the start of the 30-min stimulus, and
decayed to basal with a time constant of 4 min after the end of the stimulus. Stable LTP resulted (a 169%
increase in W 5 h post-stimulus). Subsequent inhibition of PKM by 80% for 1 hr reversed this LTP.
Simulation of cross capture predicts LTD induction leads to dendritic synthesis of PKM
Cross capture was simulated as WTET to S1 followed 20 min later by SLFS to S2. LTP of S1 resulted.
Figure 7A illustrates time courses of TLTP, PKMs, PKMd, and W. Setting the tag alone, by WTET,
induces very little PKM synthesis. Therefore, the model assumes that SLFS must be present for the
induction of dendritic PKM synthesis. Only then can PKM be captured at S1. The reverse experiment
was also simulated, with WLFS to S1 followed 5 min later by STET to S2. Figure 7B illustrates that
LTD is induced at S1. Only the LTD tag is set, capturing PRP but not PKM.
FIGURE 7 Simulation of cross capture. Vertical scaling factors
are indicated next to the appropriate variable. The ∆t for each
simulation is 20 min. A, A WTET is delivered to S1 before SLFS
is delivered to S2. Illustrated synaptic variables are for S1. The
break in the x axis, followed by the traces for PKMs and W
between 100 and 101 h, illustrates the permanent transition of
PKMs and W to an upper state. B, A WLFS is delivered to S1
followed by a STET to S2. LTD results, but begins to decay after
several h, as N and therefore W increase back towards baseline
with the slow time constant tN.

When the molecular identities of TLTD and TLTP
are better characterized, it should be possible to test the
model’s prediction that following tetanic stimuli, TLTD
remains low because activation of ERKs is insufficient
to significantly phosphorylate an ERK tag site. The
model predicts that during SLFS, TLTD increases over a
time of minutes. In contrast, TLTP is set rapidly by a
single tetanus (Fig. 2A). Because of this rapid setting, the model predicts that in a (WTET, STET) STC
protocol, maximum LTP at S1 should occur when STET precedes WTET (Fig. 5A2, green curve). STET
induces accumulation of PRPs, which are then available when WTET sets the tag.
Stochastic simulations suggest positive feedback can sustain bistability of PKM activity in a
realistic spine volume
PKMs represents PKM dynamics in a synaptic compartment corresponding to a spine or a group of
co-stimulated spines. Spines have small volumes, ~0.02 – 0.6 µm3. Within each spine, concentrations of
1 µM would correspond to molecule copy numbers ranging from < 20 to a few hundred. For such
numbers, random fluctuations in molecule numbers sometimes destabilize steady states, eliminating
bistability [e.g. 21,22,23]. To examine whether the stable states of PKMs are robust to such fluctuations,
stochastic simulations were performed (see Methods). Initially, the synaptic volume was set to 0.2 µm3.
To examine whether PKMs activity could be sustained solely by positive feedback, influx from the
dendrite was removed by setting TLTP = 0. Then PKMs dynamics are completely described by stochastic
simulation of only Eq. 29, with the term containing TLTP removed and parameters at standard values.
Figure 8A illustrates that bistability was preserved. In each of 20 simulations, both the lower and
upper steady states were stable for at least 3 days (black time course). The standard deviation (SD) of the
11

Smolen et al.

20 trajectories was not large. In the upper state, the average molecule numbers correspond to
concentrations near 1.3 µM, similar to the upper state of the deterministic model (Fig. 2D, upper steady
state of black curve). The basin of attraction for the upper state is substantial, extending well below the
average molecule number of ~150. For PKMs initialized at 70, 18 out of 20 simulations converged to the
upper state. However, for PKMs initialized at 35, 20 of 20 simulations fell to the lower state.
FIGURE 8 Stochastic simulations. A, For a volume of 0.2 µm3, both
steady states are stable for at least 3 days. The black time course is for
the average of PKMs over 20 simulations, in each of which PKMs was
re-initialized to the upper steady state after the first ~72 h (the time of
re-initialization varies somewhat between simulations because of
variable time steps in the Gillespie algorithm). For all simulations the
upper state remained stable for the next 3 days. The standard deviation
of the trajectories over the 20 simulations was not large (grey time
courses, ±1 SD from the average). B, For 0.08 µm3, the lower state
remains stable, but the stability of the upper state degrades over
several days. PKMs was re-initialized to the upper steady state after
the first ~70 h. Over the following 3 days, the standard deviation
increases as individual simulations fall back to the lower state. C,
Similar to A, except that the rate of PKMs synthesis due to positive
feedback is described by a series of elementary steps with first- or
second-order kinetics instead of by a Hill function. Both steady states
are again stable for at least 3 days.

If the volume was reduced to 0.08 µm3, the upper
state was no longer stable for days. Figure 8B illustrates
that for 20 simulations, the lower state was always stable
for at least 3 days. However, following resetting, 5 of the
simulations fell to the lower state during days 4-6. Thus
the model suggests it is plausible that persistent activation
of PKM can occur in larger spines (> 0.1 µm3, [24]).
Additional simulations were carried out to support
the existence and robustness of bistability. If the
simulation of Fig. 8A was repeated with a very large
volume (200 µm3, fstoch = 120,000), fluctuations became
very small. For both the lower and upper states, the mean
concentrations of PKMs ±1 SD remained within 2% of the
concentrations obtained in the corresponding deterministic simulation of Eq. 29. In addition, a model
variant was constructed in which synthesis of PKMs induced by positive feedback is not described by a
single Hill rate expression, but instead by a series of elementary unimolecular or bimolecular steps in
which two PKM molecules bind sequentially to a target, with PKM synthesis only occurring after the
second binding event (Methods). The off and on binding rates were chosen to yield a dissociation
constant equal to the Hill constant in Eq. 29. Simulation of the elementary-step mechanism yielded
lower and upper steady states of PKMs at molecule numbers similar to those of Figs. 8A-B. For V = 0.2
µm3 both steady states were again stable for at least 3 days (Fig. 8C).
DISCUSSION
The model simulates dynamic elements of long-term synaptic plasticity including: 1) Nonlinear
stimulus-response relationships for the activation of CaMKII and ERK. These nonlinearities generate

12

Smolen et al.

large dynamic ranges of CaMKIIs, ERKs and ERKd activities in response to brief increases in Ca2+ and
Raf activation, thereby enabling brief stimuli to be transduced into long-lasting changes in synaptic
weight, and 2) Convergence of multiple kinases to induce synthesis of PRPs (the variables PRP and
PKMd), and convergence of PRPs and synaptic tagging to induce LTP or LTD. This convergence ensures
stimulus strength must exceed a threshold to induce LTP/LTD.
In neurons, there are likely to be numerous PRPs, some of which may contribute to either LTP or
LTD depending on the identity of the synaptic tag. However, the current model illustrates that important
aspects of STC, LTP, and LTD can be simulated using only two PRPs, one (PKM) specific for LTP and
the second (PRP) specific for LTD.
Key qualitative constraints appear necessary to simulate STC and cross capture
To successfully simulate LTP/D, STC, and cross capture, specific model constraints were required,
which have not yet been experimentally tested. These constraints can be summarized as follows. 1) In
order for LTP to result from both STC and cross capture protocols, STET and SLFS must both induce
synthesis of PKM in the dendritic compartment. However, PKM is only captured if an LTP tag is set. 2)
Maintenance of LTP is mediated by bistability in PKM activity, with persistent PKM activation
sustained by positive feedback restricted to the synaptic compartment, in which PKM enhances its
synthesis. 3) A tetanus activates synaptic Raf and ERK, much less than dendritic Raf and ERK. This
assumption prevents a tetanus from setting the synaptic LTD tag and inducing LTD. 4) A dendritic CaM
kinase is required to induce PKM synthesis and is activated by moderate elevations of Ca2+, such as are
induced by SLFS. 5) A population of heterogeneous LTP compartments is required to simulate a graded
LTP window (Fig. 5A2). This summary of constraints can serve as a reference for empirical
investigations to test and delineate molecular mechanisms underlying STC.
Data appear consistent with the assumptions regarding PKM dynamics. Empirically, pairing
WTET with SLFS induces LTP, but WTET alone does not induce LTP [4,5], suggesting PKM is
synthesized in dendrites in response to either SLFS or STET, but is only captured at synapses tagged for
LTP. Because of molecular turnover, a positive feedback loop appears necessary to create a bistable
switch to sustain persistent PKM activity that maintains LTP. Restriction of bistability to the synaptic
compartment is motivated by two considerations: 1) Empirically, PKM appears to accumulate in puncta
at spines following LTP induction [19], rather than evenly in a dendrite, and 2) Dendritic bistability, with
consequent persistently high dendritic PKM, would eliminate specificity in LTP expression, because all
spines on a dendritic region would eventually undergo LTP in response to weak stimuli that set LTP tags.
Persistently increased, punctate PKMs would require protein synthesis to occur in spines. Indeed,
polyribosomes are found in spines [25] and their numbers increase after LTP induction [26]. In
simulations including fluctuations in molecule numbers (Fig. 8), persistent activation of PKMs was
maintained for at least several days in volumes typical of large spines on pyramidal neurons.
Limitations of previous models of STC have been delineated [3]. Our model appears to
overcome some of these. First, tag setting and initial expression of LTP are separate and dissociable. If
weak stimuli set tags but fail to synthesize PRPs, plasticity will not occur. Therefore, although tagging is
necessary for expression of LTP or LTD, expression is not necessary for tagging. Second, determinants
of both LTP and LTD are modeled. Only the LTP tag allows capture of PKM, whereas the LTD tag
captures PRP only. Empirically, it is not known whether maintenance of LTD depends on persistent
activity of an enzyme, analogous to PKM. Third, the model implicitly assumes an essential role for
dendritic mRNA translation in the synthesis of PKMd and PRP in response to STET or SLFS, which
activate dendritic ERK and CaM kinase. Several pathways exist for induction of translation by these

13

Smolen et al.

kinases [27,28]. Fourth, the model simulates slow-onset synaptic potentiation induced by chemical
stimuli such as forskolin or BDNF, by assuming these stimuli activate ERK and elevate synaptic and
dendritic Ca2+, thereby setting TLTP and activating PKM. Imaging of dendrites has demonstrated Ca2+
elevations during BDNF application [29] and during intracellular cAMP elevation [30]. Recently, PKM
activity was found necessary to maintain forskolin-induced LTP [31], as in the model.
The model does not represent all processes needed for tagging, such as cytoskeletal
rearrangements [32], protein kinase A (PKA) anchoring [33]; and possible creation of slots for PRPs
[34]. LTP also depends on PKA activation [35], and PKM synthesis is regulated by several kinases [11].
Thus, our representations of tagging and PRP synthesis are highly simplified. These simplified
representations were chosen for a qualitative model that simulates the nonlinear stimulus-response
relationships describing LTP/LTD induction, and LTP maintenance depending on persistent PKM
activity. We also believe it is important that the model qualitatively represents the necessity for two
compartments to describe PKM dynamics. To our knowledge, no other model has illustrated the need for
a dendritic compartment in which PKM is synthesized, coupled with capture of PKM into a synaptic
compartment and consequent persistent activity.
The model does not simulate metaplasticity in which a sliding threshold separating LTP
induction from LTD induction depends on the history of postsynaptic activity, as in BienenstockCooper-Munro theory [36]. Allowing parameters that govern the synthesis of LTP and LTD tags, and the
synthesis of PRPs, to themselves depend on the activity history might allow simulation of such a
threshold. Also, because the model does not represent sub-second kinetics of NMDA receptors, such as
relief of Mg2+ block, it cannot currently simulate spike timing-dependent plasticity.
LTP maintenance is likely to depend on multiple, reinforcing feedback loops
Auto-induction of PKM synthesis is unlikely to constitute the only positive feedback loop
necessary to maintain LTP. Maintenance at late times also appears to rely on continued reactivation of
NMDA receptors due to ongoing neuronal activity [37]. It is plausible such reactivation resets LTP and
LTD tags, allowing for continued capture of PKM and other PRPs [38]. Interaction between CAMKII
and NMDA receptors is needed to enhance spine growth [39] and maintain LTP [40]. Because activation
of CAMKII induces its translocation to synaptic sites [41], it is plausible that continued reactivation of
NMDA receptors is necessary to maintain this CAMKII – NMDAR interaction, and therefore LTP. Data
from Aplysia suggest that aggregation of active cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein
may also be important for late maintenance of synaptic strength [42].
Fear conditioning memory is maintained despite inhibition of PKM in the amygdala [43] and the
hippocampus [44]. Therefore, feedback loops other than those involving PKM may suffice to maintain
some forms of memory. However, maintenance of spatial, instrumental, and classically conditioned
memories is disrupted by inhibitors of PKMζ [17] as are drug reward memory and avoidance responses
[45,46].
Models suggest MAPK activity may exhibit bistability mediated by positive feedback [47]. LTP
maintenance may also, in part, rely on feedback wherein transient activation of PKA phosphorylates and
renders functional a critical number of AMPARs, sufficient to saturate phosphatases, so that basal PKA
can subsequently maintain AMPAR phosphorylation [48]. Persistent activation of PKM together with
another feedback loop with a shared common output (increase of functional AMPARs) could add
robustness to LTP maintenance, generating a stable steady state that is more robust to stimulus
fluctuations [49] and more robust to fluctuations in molecule numbers [50] and to inhibition of protein
synthesis [51]. Further investigation of how feedback loops implicated in LTP interact to promote

14

Smolen et al.

robustness and to maintain reliable induction, while filtering out fluctuations due to spontaneous
activity, is important to understand how memory is induced and maintained.
Molecular and phenomenological models of STC each have advantages
Our model can be contrasted with two recent models [52,53] that also simulate aspects of STC. Both
those models simulate STC and cross capture. They use variables that are more abstract or
phenomenological than the molecular species of our model. In [53], Markovian transitions occur among
synaptic states that differ in the presence or absence of tags for LTP/LTD and in the state lifetimes. A
population of synapses onto one neuron is modeled in [52], which also represents LTP/LTD tags with
bimodal variables, PRPs with a single variable p, and long-term maintenance of LTP with a state
transition in a bistable variable z, the molecular nature of which is not specified. A strength of these
more phenomenological models is that they can concisely represent and make clear the qualitative
dynamics that must emerge from any plausible molecular schema for STC. We believe that our approach
is complementary to the approach of those models, and has the strength of making predictions for the
dynamics of specific molecules. Both modeling approaches should be pursued in tandem.
The model suggests experiments to delineate mechanisms governing PKMζ synthesis and LTP
The model assumes SLFS induces PKM synthesis, in order to simulate LTP upon pairing of
WTET and SLFS. However, empirically, an LFS of intermediate strength (3 Hz for 5 min) decreases
PKM in hippocampal slice [54,55]. That intermediate LFS is weaker than the standard SLFS, and
therefore may not elevate dendritic [Ca2+] and ERK activity sufficiently to induce PKM synthesis.
Nevertheless, consideration of these observations suggests a plausible alternate model. SLFS may only
induce PKM synthesis if paired with WTET. In this scenario, SLFS would upregulate the activity of
unspecified translation factors. The synaptic tag induced by WTET would include a propensity for
increased synthesis of PKMs, perhaps due to modified PKM mRNA structure or interactions. Increased
synthesis of PKMd and increased PKMs would only occur if this propensity for increased PKM
synthesis overlapped with upregulated activity of translation factors induced by SLFS. This alternate
model is compatible with the induction of LTP by STC and cross capture protocols, whether WTET
precedes or follows SLFS [4], as long as the tag overlaps with upregulation of translation factors.
A critical experiment, to distinguish between our model and this alternative, will be to examine
whether PKM synthesis is induced by SLFS alone, or only by SLFS paired with WTET. Furthermore, if
PKM synthesis can be induced by SLFS alone, its accumulation is predicted to be diffuse within a
dendrite rather than punctate, due to the absence of tagged synapses that can capture PKM. In addition,
if WTET is paired with SLFS, punctate accumulation should be observed.
The model assumes dendritic PKM synthesis depends on an unspecified CaM kinase, CKd . This
kinase is plausibly CaMKII, because application of KN-93, a CAMKII inhibitor, prevents the induction
of PKM synthesis [11]. However, if SLFS alone is capable of inducing dendritic PKM synthesis, then
CKd would apparently be activated at lower Ca2+ levels than are required to activate CaMKIIs (tetani
have been shown to activate dendritic CaMKII [56,57], but SLFS has not). The experiments of [11] used
20 µM KN-93. At this concentration KN-93 may also inhibit other CaM kinases [58], thus this use of
KN-93 has not firmly established CKd as CaMKII. These considerations suggest a further critical
experiment, determination of whether a peptide inhibitor of CaMKII, such as autocamtide-2 related
inhibitory peptide [59], blocks induction of PKM synthesis in a) a standard STET protocol, and in b) a
cross capture protocol where WTET is paired with SLFS.

15

Smolen et al.

With our model, chem-LTP relies on a minor elevation of synaptic Ca2+ elevation and CaMKII
activation – enough to, over 30 min of stimulus, set the LTP tag. Therefore, CaMKII inhibition during
stimulation with BDNF or forskolin is predicted to block LTP. BDNF or forskolin are also predicted to
induce punctuate accumulation of PKM at spines.
Several mechanisms may underlie the positive feedback by which activity of PKM is maintained.
PKM may catalyze enhanced translation of PKM mRNA, possibly via an intermediate step in which
PKM represses Pin1 isomerase, thereby derepressing translation [60]. In another hypothesized feedback
loop, synapses that have undergone LTP exhibit increased time-averaged synaptic activation [61] and
increased average Ca2+ levels [38], leading to increased activity of kinases that drive further PKM
synthesis. Development of an expression construct that couples PKM mRNA elements with a
fluorescent reporter, and examination of the reporter dynamics following electrical stimuli or glutamate
applications, could help delineate the mechanisms of feedback.
METHODS
Michaelis-Menten or first-order kinetics describe phosphorylations and dephosphorylations.
Variables and parameters associated with the synaptic and dendritic compartments are respectively
identified by the subscripts ‘s’ and ‘d’. The exceptions to this nomenclature are the LTP and LTD tags
(TLTP and TLTD) and W and its associated variables F and N, restricted to the synaptic compartment, and
a representative plasticity-related protein, PRP, generated in the dendritic compartment. Units are µM
for concentrations of molecular species, including phosphorylation sites. F, N, and W are dimensionless.
The dynamics are described by 23 ordinary differential equations (ODEs) and auxiliary equations. Some
of these equations are from our previous model of LTP induction [18]: Eqs. 1-17 describing activation of
synaptic CaMKII, Raf, and ERK, and dendritic Raf and ERK; and Eq. 20 describing phosphorylation of
the LTP tag site. Standard values for parameters are given in Methods, and were used in all simulations
except where noted.
Raf/MEK/ERK cascade
The ERK cascade is present in the dendritic (Rafd/MEKd,/ERKd) and synaptic (Rafs/MEKs/ERKs)
compartments (Eqs. 1-16). Total amounts of these enzymes are conserved (Eqs. 11-16). Stimuli elevate
the rate constants for activation of Rafd and Rafs, kp_Raf,d and kp_Raf,s.The equations and parameters for
the ERKd and ERKs cascades were identical, except that the two ERK cascades responded differently to
stimuli, with different amplitudes of increase for kp_Raf,s vs. kp_Raf,d.

d
=
( pRafs ) k p_Raf,s Rafs − k dp_Raf pRafs
dt

(1)

MEK s
pMEK s
d
− k p_MEK pRafs
+ k dp_MEK
( MEK s ) =
dt
MEK s + K MEK
pMEK s + K MEK

(2)

pMEK s
ppMEK s
d
=
− k dp_MEK
( ppMEK s ) k p_MEK pRafs
dt
pMEK s + K MEK
ppMEK s + K MEK
ERK s
pERK s
d
− k p_ERK ppMEK s
+ k dp_ERK
( ERKs ) =
dt
ERK s + K ERK
pERK s + K ERK

16

(3)

(4)

Smolen et al.

pERK s
ppERK s
d
=
− k dp_ERK
( ppERK s ) k p_ERK ppMEK s
dt
pERK s + K ERK
ppERK s + K ERK

(5)

d
=
( pRafd ) k p_Raf,d Rafd − k dp_Raf pRafd
dt

(6)

MEK d
pMEK d
d
− k p_MEK pRaf d
+ k dp_MEK
( MEK d ) =
dt
MEK d + K MEK
pMEK d + K MEK

(7)

pMEK d
ppMEK d
d
=
− k dp_MEK
( ppMEK d ) k p_MEK pRafd
dt
pMEK d + K MEK
ppMEK d + K MEK

(8)

ERK d
pERK d
d
− k p_ERK ppMEK d
+ k dp_ERK
( ERK d ) =
dt
ERK d + K ERK
pERK d + K ERK
pERK d
ppERK d
d
=
− k dp_ERK
( ppERK d ) k p_ERK ppMEK d
dt
pERK d + K ERK
ppERK d + K ERK

(9)

(10)

Rafs + pRafs =
TotRafs

(11)

MEK s + pMEK s + ppMEK s =
TotMEK s

(12)

ERK s + pERK s + ppERK s =
TotERK s

(13)

Raf d + pRaf d =
TotRaf d

(14)

MEK d + pMEK d + ppMEK d =
TotMEK d

(15)

ERK d + pERK d + ppERK d =
TotERK d

(16)

Standard parameter values for Eqs. 1-16 are as follows: kp_Raf,s and kp_Raf,d = 0.003 min-1 (basal value),
kdp_Raf = 0.12 min-1, kp_MEK = 0.6 min-1, kdp_MEK = 0.025 µM min-1, KMEK = 0.25 µM, kp_ERK = 0.52
min-1, kdp_ERK = 0.025 µM min-1, KERK = 0.25 µM. TotRafs, TotRafd, TotMEKs, TotMEKd, TotERKs, and
TotERKd = 0.25 µM.
For many parameters, standard values are not well constrained by current empirical data. Here
and below, we note constraints that were used for some parameters. The remaining parameters were
assigned standard values such that time courses of model variables had the qualitative properties needed
to simulate STC and cross capture. In the model, standard total concentrations of Raf, MEK, and ERK
are similar to estimates for neurons ([42], estimates range from 0.18 to 0.36 µM). Empirical estimates of
the duration of ERK activation due to STET vary considerably (30 min – several hours [62,63]) such
that the simulated duration of ~90 min is plausible.
ERK activity is not necessary for the LTP tag [64]. However, ERK activity is necessary for the
induction of LTP [63,64,65]. ERK phosphorylates translation regulators including eukaryotic initiation

17

Smolen et al.

factor 4E (eIF4E) [27]. Therefore the model assumes ERKd phosphorylates a site in the dendritic
compartment that regulates the translation of PKM as well as of a second plasticity-related protein, PRP.
ERK regulates some forms of hippocampal LTD [66,67] and is necessary for LTD tagging [64]. Thus in
the model, translation of PRP is necessary for LTD, and ERKs, in conjunction with PP, activates TLTD.
Ca2+-dependent kinases
Two Ca2+-dependent kinases are modeled: CaMKII in the synaptic compartment (CaMKIIs), and CKd, a
dendritic kinase that has yet to be characterized. CaMKII activity is necessary for LTP tagging [64]. The
model assumes CaMKIIs is responsible for phosphorylating a LTP tag (TLTP). Tetani increase Ca2+
sufficiently to activate CaMKIIs, but SLFS does not. Induction of PKM synthesis can be blocked by a
calmodulin analogue, KN-93 [11]. Calmodulin analogues can bind to CaM kinases to form inactive
complexes. However, we did not denote as CaMKII the dendritic CaM kinase required for PKM
synthesis, because its identity is not yet firmly established (see Discussion). Therefore, an unspecified
kinase CKd, in conjunction with active ERKd, induces the synthesis of PKM. For both CaMKIIs and
CKd, Ca2+-dependent activation is implemented as fourth powers in Hill functions.
4

Ca 2+ 

s

d
=
− k b_CK,s CaMKIIs
( CaMKIIs ) k f_CK,s
4
dt
Ca 2+  +K1s4

s

(17)

4

Ca 2+ 

d

d
=
− k b_CK,d CK d
( CK d ) k f_CK,d
4
dt
Ca 2+  +K1d4

d

(18)

Standard parameter values are: [Ca2+]s and [Ca2+]d = 0.04 µM (basal value), kf_CK,s = 200 µM min-1,
kb_CK,s = 1.0 min-1, K1s = 1.4 µM, kf_CK,d = 200 µM min-1, kb_CK,d = 1.0 min-1, K1d = 0.6 µM.
Empirically, binding of Ca2+ to activate CaMKII is characterized by a dissociation constant of
~1-2 µM [68], compatible with the standard value for K1s. The decay of CaMKII activity after tetanus is
rapid (~1 min [1]), compatible with the standard value of kb_Ck,s. CKd has a lower dissociation constant
(K1d) for Ca2+ than does CAMKII. The lower value of K1d was chosen so that SLFS, which elevates
Ca2+ less than STET, suffices to activate CKd and PKM synthesis.
Ca2+-dependent protein phosphatase
Empirically, inhibition of either PP2A [69] or PP2B [70] blocks hippocampal LTD. PRP synthesis is
thought to subsume both LTP and LTD [3,7], whereas the type of tag (TLTP vs. TLTD) confers specificity
[64]. Because phosphatase inhibition has not been reported to block LTP, it is reasonable to assume such
inhibition interferes with TLTD. A phosphatase activity in the synaptic compartment, PPs, is therefore
assumed necessary to increase TLTD. Stimuli increase PPs via increases in Ca2+. PPs is a nonlinear
function of Ca2+.
4

Ca 2+ 

s

d
=
− k b_PP,s PPs
( PPs ) k f_PP,s
4
dt
Ca 2+  +K2s4

s

18

(19)

Smolen et al.

Standard parameter values are: kf_PP,s = 2 µM min-1, kb_PP,s = 0.5 min-1, K2s = 0.225 µM. The Ca2+
sensitivity of PPs (K2s) is within the range of Ca2+ dissociation constant estimates for PP2B [71].
LTP and LTD tags (TLTP, TLTD)
TLTP is set by phosphorylation of a CaMKIIs target site (“set” denotes increasing a tag variable from a
low baseline to a substantial fraction of its maximal value). The amount of phosphorylated site is
denoted SCK, and is scaled to range from 0 to 1. The dynamics of SCK are described by a first-order
ODE. The amount of TLTP is given by the square of SCK. The square represents heuristically the
likelihood that multiple phosphorylation events are necessary for tag setting.

d
=
(SCK ) k p1 CaMKIIs (1 − SCK ) − k dp1 SCK
dt

(20)

TLTP = ( SCK )

(21)

2

TLTD is set by ERKs and PPs. Setting TLTD requires phosphorylation of an ERKs target site and
dephosphorylation of a separate site by PPs. The ERKs site is denoted SERK and the PPs site is denoted
SPP. SPP is increased by dephosphorylation. TLTD is proportional to the product of SERK and SPP.

d
(S=
ERK ) k p2 ppERK s (1 − SERK ) − k dp2 SERK
dt

(22)

d
(S=
PP ) k dp3 PPs (1 − SPP ) − k p3 SPP
dt

(23)

TLTD = SERK SPP

(24)

Rate constant values are chosen such that ERKs activates relatively slowly compared to CaMKIIs. This
is necessary so that a brief tetanus does not set TLTD and generate LTD.
Standard parameter values for Eqs. 20-24 are: kp1 = 0.45 µM-1 min-1, kdp1 = 0.006 min-1, kp2 = 2.0 µM-1
min-1, kdp2 = 0.011 min-1, kdp3 = 0.04 min-1, kp3 = 0.011 min-1.
Plasticity-related protein (PRP)
Regulation and action of PRPs other than PKM were combined into a single variable, PRP. Induction of
PRP synthesis was assumed to require phosphorylation by ppERKd at two dendritic sites. These sites are
assumed to have the same kinetic parameters, so that a single variable, pTransERK, describes either site.
These two phosphorylations could represent activation of translation factors. The rate of PRP synthesis
is taken as proportional to the square of pTransERK. The square represents the requirement for
phosphorylation of both sites. There is also a small basal rate of PRP synthesis, and first-order decay.

d
=
( pTransERK
) k pERK ppERK d (1 − pTransERK ) − k dpERK pTransERK
dt
d
=
( PRP ) k trans_PRP ( pTransERK )2 + vbas_PRP − k d_PRP PRP
dt

19

(25)

(26)

Smolen et al.

Standard parameter values for Eq. 26 are: kpERK = 4.0 µM-1 min-1, kdpERK = 0.1 min-1, ktrans_PRP

= 2.2

µM min-1, vbas_trans = 0.001 µM min-1, kd_PRP = 0.022 min-1.
For Eqs. 20-26, parameter values are not constrained by data because the molecular identity of the LTP
and LTD tags and of PRP(s) has not yet been characterized.
Protein kinase M
PKM dynamics are represented in synaptic and dendritic compartments by the variables PKMs and
PKMd. PKM mRNA is localized in dendrites [72], and inhibition of either ERK or CaM kinases prevents
induction of PKM synthesis [11]. Therefore, in the model, synthesis of dendritic PKMd relies on
activation of ERKd and CKd. ERKd and CKd phosphorylate sites denoted by variables pTransERK and
pTransCK. The dynamics of these sites are described by Eqs. 25 and 27.

d
( pTransCK ) = k pCK CK d (1 − pTransCK ) − k dpCK pTransCK
dt

(27)

Concurrent phosphorylation of these sites induces PKMd translation (Eq. 28). PKMd can also translocate
to the synaptic compartment (Eqs. 28, 29) and constitutively active PKMs exerts positive feedback on its
own synthesis (Eq. 29). The translocation rate is proportional to TLTP, representing capture of PKM.
Positive feedback leads to bistability and consequent persistently high PKMs levels. In Eq. 29, the
feedback is nonlinear, with the synthesis rate proportional to a Hill function of (PKMs)2. Such
nonlinearity is required for bistability, and could be generated if multiple PKMs-mediated
phosphorylations are required to induce PKMs synthesis. Bistability appears necessary to explain how a
brief stimulus can give rise to persistent activation of PKM. In Eqs. 28-29, Vsd denotes the volume ratio
of the synaptic to dendritic compartments, with a standard value of 0.03.

d
=
( PKM d ) k trans_PKM,d pTransERK pTransCK − k d→s PKM d TLTP
dt
+ k s→d Vsd PKMs + v bas_PKM,d − k d_PKM PKM d

( PKMs )
k d→s
d
PKM d TLTP
=
+
( PKMs ) k trans_PKM,s
2
2
dt
V
PKM
K
+
sd
( PKM )
(
s)

(28)

2

(29)

− k s→d PKMs + v bas_PKM,s − k d_PKM PKM s
Standard parameter values for Eqs. 27 – 29 are: kpCK = 0.015 µM-1 min-1, kdpCK = 0.02 min-1, ktrans_PKM,d
= 0.5 µM min-1, kd→s = 0.0025 min-1, ks→d = 0.012 min-1, Vsd = 0.03, kd_PKM = 0.02 min-1, ktrans_PKM,s =
0.055 µM min-1, KPKM = 0.75 µM, vbas_PKM,d and vbas_PKM,s = 0.0003 µM min-1. These parameters are not
well constrained by data.
The model does not describe the dynamics of mRNA for PKM or PRP. Therefore it does not
represent later, transcription-dependent phases of maintenance of LTP / LTD [73,74]. However,
inhibition of transcription does not result in degradation of CA3-CA1 LTP until 5 - 8 h after induction
[75,76]. The model does not simulate these times, but instead represents interactions of tags and PRPs

20

Smolen et al.

during the first hours after stimuli. This time suffices to represent LTP formation and the establishment
of persistently active PKMs.
Synaptic weight (W)
Changes in W represent empirical increases/decreases in excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs).
Empirically, changes in W during induction of LTP or LTD, and during inhibition of PKM, occur on
several time scales. Inhibition of PKM reverses LTP relatively rapidly, in ~ 1 h [15]. Late LTD can
persist for several h or longer [20]. To implement these dynamics using a single synaptic weight variable
would require a relatively small time constant for the return of W to baseline, in order to simulate the
decay following PKM inhibition. However, the duration of LTD would then be limited to ~ 1 h by this
time constant, unless LTD was maintained by its own bistable switch.
Instead of implementing a second bistable switch, an alternate approach was used. Eqs. 30-32
describe the dynamics of two variables, F and N, and set W as their product. Biophysically, this product
could represent the number of functional AMPA receptors (AMPARs) in the synaptic spine (see below).
F depends on PKMs, and N depends on the LTD tag and therefore does not change significantly during
LTP protocols. During LTP, F increases with PKMs, and F, like PKMs, relaxes to a stable upper state. N
changes little, therefore W follows F. PKM activity is not necessary for LTD [16]. Thus, in the model,
PKMs and F change little during LTD. However N, and therefore W, decreases when the LTD tag is set
and PRP, the plasticity-related protein, is concurrently present. Eq. 30 gives the rate of decrease of N as
proportional to the product of TLTD and PRP. This decrease of N and W is a simple representation of the
empirical requirement for STC to drive late LTD [4,20]. There is also first-order decline in the number
of AMPA receptors in the absence of replenishment.

d
N
− k LTD TLTD PRP ( N ) + v bas_N −
( N) =
tN
dt

(30)

d
F
=
( F ) k LTP PKMs + vbas_F −
tF
dt

(31)

W = NF

(32)

Standard parameter values are: kLTD = 0.03 µM-2 min-1, tN = 600 min, vbas_N = 0.0033 min-1, kLTP =
0.014 min-1, tF = 30 min, vbas_F = 0.01 min-1.
These standard values were chosen such that LTP induced by STET and LTD induced by SLFS both
have magnitudes similar to empirical LTP and LTD [13], and develop over ~2 h, as does late LTP
induced by BDNF/forskolin [12]. N was assigned a slow time constant so that following SLFS, LTD
persists for several h. However, since N is not bistable, W eventually returns to its basal value. F was
assigned a smaller time constant, to simulate observed kinetics of LTP decay after PKM inhibition.
Empirically, PKM maintains LTP by modifying trafficking of AMPARs to increase receptor
insertion into postsynaptic sites [77,78]. During LTD, in contrast, dephosphorylation of Glu-R1 S845
appears to decrease the number of AMPARs available for insertion, by decreasing receptor abundance at
extrasynaptic membrane or by destabilizing Glu-R1 homomers [79,80]. In the model, N represents the
amount of available AMPARs. Assuming equilibration maintains a fixed ratio between the number of
available receptors and inserted receptors, a simulated decrease in N (with F remaining approximately

21

Smolen et al.

constant) represents a decrease in the number of inserted receptors and therefore represents LTD. In
contrast, an increase in the variable F, driven by increased PKMs during LTP, represents an increase in
the number of inserted receptors, without an overall change in the number of available receptors N. In
all simulations, F remains below N. In Eqs. 30 and 31, small basal rates of increase of N and F are also
present in order to sustain basal values of F, N, and W.
We believe this simplified model is reasonable given current data. However, it is undoubtedly
incomplete. For example, LTP also correlates with phosphorylation of Glu-R1 S845 and Glu-R1 S831
[79], and the site(s) that PKM phosphorylates are not yet determined.
Although a recent model of LTP and LTD [52] assumed that a large number of spines (~50 or
more) need to be activated to induce LTP, our basic model assumes the induction and expression of LTP
and LTD occurs at single spines. Empirically, when glutamate was applied to a single spine, PRP
synthesis and LTP were both observed [81]. We do expand the model to include a population of spines in
simulations examining the extent of LTP as a function of the interval between S1 and S2 stimuli in STC.
Compartment volumes and stochastic simulations
The parameter Vsd (Eqs. 28-29) denotes the ratio of the synaptic to dendritic compartment volumes. A
standard value of 0.03 was chosen based on the following considerations: Radii of apical dendrites are
typically ~0.25 µm [25,47,82]. Spine head volumes, which we identify with the synaptic compartment,
vary widely, over a range of 0.02 – 0.6 µm3 [83]. In an STC protocol, dendritic diffusion of PKM and
other plasticity-related proteins, near and between the two groups of spines corresponding to the
stimulated inputs, would contribute to determining an effective Vsd. For protocols based on field stimuli,
the typical distance scale between these groups of spines has not yet been determined. However, for an
STC protocol based on stimulus of two separated single spines, LTP was observed to be near maximum
for distances of <~20 µM [81]. If we adopt 20 µM as a relevant dendritic length scale, and use dendritic
radii and spine volumes given above, a value of Vsd in the range 0.01 – 0.1 is suggested, with 0.03 being
the midpoint on a log scale. Stochastic simulations suggest bistability of PKMs, and stimulus-induced
state transitions, can be preserved when Vsd varies over this range, as long as the spine volume exceeds
~0.1 µm3 (see Results).
Stochastic simulations used Eq. 29, with TLTP = 0. For these simulations PKMs represents the
number of active PKM molecules in a single spine. Fluctuations in PKMs were simulated using the
Gillespie algorithm [84]. This algorithm takes variable time steps, and during each step exactly one
reaction occurs. Which reaction occurs is determined randomly, with the probability of each reaction
type proportional to its deterministic rate expression. In Eq. 29 with TLTP = 0, there are four reaction
types, with probabilities proportional to the four remaining terms on the RHS. These reactions are
respectively synthesis of PKMs by positive feedback, efflux of PKMs into the dendrite, basal synthesis
of PKMs, and degradation of PKMs. For the simulations of Figs. 8A-B, the Hill function in Eq. 29 was
used directly to give the probability of PKMs synthesis instead of being replaced by elementary reaction
steps. This simplification was motivated by a recent study [85] which found that for several models,
direct use of Hill functions did not result in substantial differences in dynamics when compared to more
complex simulations in which multiple elementary reactions were used. PKMs and the Hill constant
Kpkm were rescaled to molecule copy number by multiplication with a factor proportional to volume,
denoted fstoch. A spine volume of 0.2 µm3 was assumed initially. In this volume 1 µM corresponds to 120
molecules, thus fstoch = 120. The zero-order rate constants ktrans_PKM,s and vbas_PKM,s were also multiplied
by fstoch. First-order rate constants were unchanged.

22

Smolen et al.

For the simulation of Fig. 8C, the Hill function was replaced by a series of elementary reaction
steps, with parameters chosen to preserve similar dynamics to Fig. 8A. The Hill coefficient of 2 was
replaced by a requirement for two PKM molecules to bind sequentially to an unspecified target species.
Only when the target was fully occupied could PKM synthesis be induced. The total amount of target is
denoted Ttot, and the amounts with one and two PKM molecules bound are denoted T1 and T2. In the
Gillespie algorithm, the single reaction probability corresponding to positive feedback was replaced by
the following five reaction probabilities:
Binding of PKM to the first target site, kon PKMs (Ttot – T1 – T2)
Dissociation of PKM from the first site, koff T1
Binding of PKM to the second site, kon PKMs T1
Dissociation of PKM from the second site, koff T2
Synthesis of PKM, ktrans_PKM,s T2
Parameter values for these reactions were: fstoch = 120, Ttot = 1.5fstoch, kon = 10.0 / fstoch, koff = KPKM kon.
This value of Ttot yields a maximal PKMs synthesis rate 50% greater than that in the simulation of Fig.
9A. This rate increase was found necessary to maintain stability of the upper state.
Simulating STC and cross capture
Synaptic tagging and capture (STC) was simulated as follows. Synapse 1 (S1) is given a weak stimulus
(WTET or WLFS). In the model, the dynamics of all synaptic variables take place at S1. S2 is given
STET or SLFS. These STET or SLFS only affect dendritic variables, which primarily respond to the S2
stimulus, with a minor contribution from the weak stimulus at S1. In tagging or cross capture
experiments, a time offset ∆t, positive or negative, usually is placed between the S1 and S2 stimuli. For
positive ∆t, the S1 stimulus occurs first and sets either an LTP or LTD tag. Then, the S2 stimulus does
not further affect the synaptic variables. However, PRP and PKMd synthesis are strongly induced. For
either positive or negative ∆t, only after both S1 and S2 stimuli will LTD occur at S1 (if TLTD was set by
the S1 stimulus), or LTP occur (if TLTP was set).
Simulation of stimulus protocols
Stimuli elevate [Ca2+] and activate ERK signaling. Empirically, STET consists of three 1-s duration 100
Hz bursts of electrical stimuli, at intervals of 5 min. WTET is a single 1-s duration 100 Hz burst of
activity. SLFS is a series of bursts, each of three stimuli at 20 Hz, with an inter-burst interval of 1 s,
continuing for 15 min [6]. WLFS is a 15-min train of single stimuli at 1 Hz.
Details of Ca2+ dynamics were not modeled. Instead, the Ca2+ responses were modeled simply as
square-wave increases from a basal level of 0.04 µM. Two Ca2+ variables were used, the concentrations
of synaptic and dendritic Ca2+, [Ca2+]s and [Ca2+]d. For STET, each 1-s tetanus was simulated as a 3-s
increase of [Ca2+]s to 1.4 µM and of [Ca2+]d to 0.65 µM. This duration of Ca2+ elevation appears
compatible with data that imply a time constant in the range of 1-3 s for decay of [Ca2+]s and [Ca2+]d
elevations after tetanus [86,87]. WTET is modeled as a single 3-s increase in [Ca2+]s and [Ca2+]d to these
same values. SLFS was modeled as a 15-min elevation of [Ca2+]s and [Ca2+]d to 0.17 µM. WLFS was
modeled as a 15-min elevation of [Ca2+]s to 0.16 µM, and [Ca2+]d remains at basal.
kp_Raf,s

Each tetanus, SLFS, or WLFS generated transient increases in the first-order rate constants
and kp_Raf,d that govern Rafs and Rafd phosphorylation and activation (Eqs. 1, 6). Increases in

23

Smolen et al.

these rate constants correspond to increases in Ras activity. The neuronal Ras -> ERK cascade can be
activated by Ca2+ acting via CaM kinase I [88] or by cAMP elevation [89,90] or by a Ca2+-independent
pathway involving mGluR5 [91]. Rather than modeling these mechanisms in detail, we used data to
approximate time constants for Ras activation and inactivation. Recent studies indicate the time required
for Ras activity to increase to a peak following tetanus is ~ 1 min in dendrites and spines [92,93],
although with considerable variability. Ras activity in both compartments then returns to baseline over
the following 6-10 min, again with variability. These time courses were used as follows. For each
tetanus, the simulated time courses of kp_Raf,s and kp_Raf,d were each represented as the product of two
factors. The first was an exponential rise from a low basal value, kp_Raf,bas, to approach a maximal
amplitude AMAX, with a time constant of 0.5 min. The second factor was an exponential decay from 1 to
0 with a time constant of 4 min. For both exponentials, zero time was taken as the end of the 1-s tetanus.
For the STET protocol, the decay time constant is similar to the interval between tetani, thus summation
of the elevations of kp_Raf,s and kp_Raf,d was included. The equation for the time course of kp_Raf,s due to
STET is therefore
k p_Raf,s = k p_Raf,bas + ( A MAX − k p_Raf,bas )

−t

 −t

1 − exp 
} exp  4.0 
∑
{
0.5




i =1
3

i

i

(33)

In Eq. 33, the ti denote, respectively, the amounts of time since the end of tetani 1-3.
For LFS, the time course of Ras activation does not appear to have been quantified. Therefore, to
model the elevations of kp_Raf,s and kp_Raf,d due to SLFS and WLFS, the same time constants were used as
for tetanus. However, zero time for the rising exponential was taken as the beginning of the 15-min LFS,
whereas the decaying exponential remained at 1 until the end of LFS. The time course of kp_Raf,s due to
SLFS or WLFS is therefore

{

}

−t
 exp  −t2

k p_Raf,s = k p_Raf,bas + ( A MAX − k p_Raf,bas ) 1 − exp  1



0.5
4.0





(34)

In Eq. 34, t1 and t2 denote respectively the amounts of time since the beginning and end of an LFS. In
Eqs. 33 and 34, each exponential was set to 1 whenever its ti was negative.
In spine and dendrite, kp_Raf,bas was 0.003 min-1. For tetani, the maximal amplitude AMAX of
kp_Raf,s was 0.006 min-1. For SLFS and WLFS, AMAX of kp_Raf,s was 0.02 min-1. For kp_Raf,d, AMAX was
0.03 min-1 (tetanus), 0.017 min-1 (SLFS), or 0.006 min-1 (WLFS). These amplitudes are not well
constrained by current data. Therefore, the values were chosen not to fit data precisely, but rather to
allow simulation of observed dynamics of STC and cross capture. For example, STET increases kp_Raf,d
more than kp_Raf,s, in order that substantial activation of ERK occurs in the dendrite but not in the spine.
Thus PKM is synthesized in the dendrite, but the LTD tag is not set in the spine. With SLFS, kp_Raf,s is
lower than for STET. The lower value of kp_Raf,d was chosen to avoid excessive activation of dendritic
ERK by the longer SLFS stimulus, overproduction of PRP, and excessive LTD.
The assumption that STET activates synaptic Raf less than dendritic Raf could be valid if a
specific configuration of Raf and other components of the ERK cascade is mediated through anchoring
proteins. The configuration might generate slow kinetics at a step such as interaction of activated Ras
with Raf. In that case, the synaptic ERK cascade might be activated only slightly by a brief tetanic
stimulus, but strongly by the much longer SLFS.

24

Smolen et al.

Numerical methods
For the simulations of Figs. 2 and 3, the ODEs were integrated by two methods, forward Euler and
fourth-order Runge-Kutta [94]. No significant differences were observed in the results, therefore
forward Euler was used for the remaining deterministic simulations. The time step was 12 ms. No
significant improvements in accuracy resulted from further reducing the time step. Prior to any
plasticity-inducing stimulus, model variables were equilibrated for at least two simulated days and the
slowest variable, W, was set to an equilibrium basal value determined by the remaining variables. The
models were programmed in Java. Programs are available upon request.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Harel Shouval for his comments on the manuscript. Supported by NIH grant R01
NS073974.

25

Smolen et al.

REFERENCES
1.

Lee SR, Escobedo-Lozoya Y, Szatmeri EM, Yasuda R (2009) Activation of CaMKII in single
dendritic spines during long-term potentiation. Nature 458: 299-304.

2.

Scheuss V, Yasuda R, Sobczyk A, Svoboda K (2006) Nonlinear [Ca2+] signaling in dendrites and
spines caused by activity-dependent depression of Ca2+ extrusion. J. Neurosci. 26: 8183-8194.

3.

Redondo RL, Morris RG (2011) Making memories last: the synaptic tagging and capture
hypothesis. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12: 17-30.

4.

Sajikumar S, Frey JU (2004) Late-associativity, synaptic tagging, and the role of dopamine during
LTP and LTD. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 82: 12-25.

5.

Frey U, Morris RG (1997) Synaptic tagging and long-term potentiation. Nature 385: 533-536.

6.

Frey U, Morris RG (1998) Weak before strong, dissociating synaptic tagging and plasticity-factor
accounts of late-LTP. Neuropharmacology 37: 545-552.

7.

Barco A, Lopez de Armentia M, Alarcon JM (2008) Synapse-specific stabilization of plasticity
processes: the synaptic tagging and capture hypothesis revisited 10 years later. Neurosci. Biobehav.
Rev. 32: 831-851.

8.

Serrano P, Yao Y, Sacktor TC (2005) Persistent phosphorylation by protein kinase Mζ maintains
late-phase long-term potentiation. J. Neurosci. 25: 1979-1984.

9.

Sacktor TC (2011) How does PKMζ maintain long-term memory? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12: 9-15.

10.

Sajikumar S, Korte M (2011) Metaplasticity governs compartmentalization of synaptic tagging and
capture through brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and protein kinase Mζ (PKMζ). Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108: 2551-2556.

11. Kelly MT, Crary JF, Sacktor TC (2007) Regulation of protein kinase Mζ synthesis by multiple
kinases in long-term potentiation. J. Neurosci. 27: 3439-3444.
12. Patterson SL, Pittenger C, Morozov A, Martin KC, Scanlin H, et al. (2001) Some forms of cAMPmediated long-lasting potentiation are associated with release of BDNF and nuclear translocation of
phospho-MAP kinase. Neuron 32: 123-140.
13. Debanne D, Poo MM (2010) Spike-timing dependent plasticity beyond synapse – pre- and postsynaptic plasticity of intrinsic neuronal excitability. Front. Synaptic Neurosci. 2: 21-25.
14. Osten P, Valsamis L, Harris A, Sacktor TC (1996) Protein synthesis-dependent formation of protein
kinase Mζ in long-term potentiation. J. Neurosci. 16: 2444-2451.
15. Pastalkova E, Serrano P, Pinkhasova D, Wallace E, Fenton AA, et al. (2006) Storage of spatial
information by the maintenance mechanism of LTP. Science 313: 1141-1144.
16. Sajikumar S, Navakodde S, Sacktor TC, Frey JU (2005) Synaptic tagging and cross-tagging, the
role of protein kinase Mζ in maintaining long-term potentiation but not long-term depression. J.
Neurosci. 25: 5750-5756.
17. Serrano P, Friedman EL, Kenney J, Taubenfeld SM, Zimmerman JM, Hanna J, Alberini C, Kelley
AE, Maren S, Rudy JW, Yin JC, Sacktor TC, Fenton AA (2008) PKMζ maintains spatial,
instrumental, and classically conditioned long-term memories. PLoS Biol. 6: 2698-2706.

26

Smolen et al.

18. Smolen P, Baxter DA, Byrne JH (2006) A model of the roles of essential kinases in the induction
and expression of late long-term potentiation. Biophys. J. 90: 2760-2775.
19. Hsieh C, Tsokas P, Serrano PA, Sacktor TC (2010) Persistent increases of PKMζ in the hippocampal
CA1 region during spatial memory storage. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 452.10.
20. Kauderer BS, Kandel ER (2000) Capture of a protein synthesis-dependent component of long-term
depression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 13342-13347.
21. Bhalla US (2004) Signaling in small subcellular volumes. II. Stochastic and diffusion effects on
synaptic network properties. Biophys. J. 87: 745-753.
22. Smolen P, Baxter DA, Byrne JH (2000) Mathematical modeling of gene networks. Neuron 26: 567580.
23. Smolen P, Baxter DA, Byrne JH (2008) Bistable MAP kinase activity: a plausible mechanism
contributing to maintenance of late long-term potentiation. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 294: C503C515.
24. Yasumatsu N, Matsuzaki M, Miyazaki T, Noguchi J, Kasai H (2008) Principles of long-term
dynamics of dendritic spines. J. Neurosci. 28: 13592-13608.
25. Harris KM, Stevens JK (1989) Dendritic spines of CA1 pyramidal cells in the rat hippocampus:
serial electron microscopy with reference to their biophysical characteristics. J. Neurosci. 9: 29822997.
26. Ostroff LE, Fiala JC, Allwardt B, Harris KM (2002) Polyribosomes redistribute from dendritic
shafts into spines with enlarged synapses during LTP in developing rat hippocampal slices. Neuron
35: 535-545.
27. Banko JL, Hou L, Klann E (2004) NMDA receptor activation results in PKA- and ERK-dependent
Mnk1 activation and increased eIF4E phosphorylation in hippocampal area CA1. J. Neurochem. 91:
462-470.
28. Atkins CM, Davare MA, Oh MC, Derkach V, Soderling TR (2005) Bidirectional regulation of
cytoplasmic polyadenylation element-binding protein phosphorylation by Ca2+/calmodulindependent protein kinase II and protein phosphatase I during hippocampal long-term potentiation. J.
Neurosci. 25: 5604-5610.
29. Kovalchuk Y, Hanse E, Kafitz KW, Konnerth A (2002) Postsynaptic induction of BDNF-mediated
long-term potentiation. Science 295: 1729-1734.
30. Kaneishi K, Sakuma Y, Kobayahi H, Kato M (2002) Cyclic adenosine monophosphate augments
intracellular Ca2+ and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) release in immortalized GnRH
neurons in an Na+ dependent manner. Endocrinology 143: 4210-4217.
31. Mei F, Nagappan G, Ke Y, Sacktor TC, Lu B (2011) BDNF facilitates L-LTP maintenance in the
absence of protein synthesis through PKMζ. PLoS One 6: e21568.
32. Ramachandran B, Frey JU (2009) Interfering with the actin network and its effect on long-term
potentiation and synaptic tagging in hippocampal CA1 neurons in slices in vitro. J. Neurosci. 29:
12167-12173.

27

Smolen et al.

33. Huang T, McDonough CB, Abel T (2006) Compartmentalized PKA signaling events are required for
synaptic tagging and capture during hippocampal late-phase long-term potentiation. Eur. J. Cell
Biol. 85: 635-642.
34. Lisman J, Raghavachari S (2006) A unified model of the presynaptic and postsynaptic changes
during LTP at CA1 synapses. Sci. STKE 2006(356): re11.
35. Nguyen PV, Woo NH (2003) Regulation of hippocampal synaptic plasticity by cyclic AMPdependent protein kinases. Prog. Neurobiol. 71: 401-437.
36. Bienenstock EL, Cooper LN, Munro PW (1982) Theory for the development of neuron selectivity:
orientation specificity and binocular interaction in visual cortex. J. Neurosci. 2: 32-48.
37. Cui Z, Wang H, Tan Y, Zaia KA, Zhang S, et al. (2004) Inducible and reversible NR1 knockout
reveals crucial role of the NMDA receptor in preserving remote memories in the brain. Neuron 41:
781-793.
38. Smolen P (2007) A model of late long-term potentiation simulates aspects of memory maintenance.
PLoS One 2: e445.
39. Hamilton AM, Oh WC, Vega-Ramirez H, Stein IS, Hell JW, Patrick GN, and Zito K (2012)
Activity-dependent growth of new dendritic spines is regulated by the proteasome. Neuron 74:
1023-1030.
40. Sanhueza M, Fernandez-Villalobos G, Stein IS, Kasumova G, Zhang P, Bayer KU, Otmakhov N,
Hell JW, Lisman J (2011) Role of the CAMKII/NMDA receptor complex in the maintenance of
synaptic strength. J. Neurosci. 31: 9170-9178.
41. Strack S, Choi S, Lovinger DM, Colbran RJ (1997) Translocation of autophosphorylated
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II to the postsynaptic density. J. Biol. Chem. 272:
13467-13470.
42. Si K, Choi YB, White-Grindley E, Majumdar A, Kandel ER (2010) Aplysia CPEB can form prionlike multimers in sensory neurons that contribute to long-term facilitation. Cell 140: 421-435.
43. Parsons RG, Davis M (2011) Temporary disruption of fear-potentiated startle following PKMζ
inhibition in the amygdala. Nat. Neurosci. 14: 295-296.
44. Kwapis JL, Jarome TJ, Lonergan ME, Helmstetter FJ (2009) Protein kinase M ζ maintains fear
memory in the amygdala but not in the hippocampus. Behav. Neurosci. 124: 844-850.
45. Li YQ, Xue YX, He YY, Li FQ, Xue LF, Xu CM, Sacktor TC, Shaham Y, Lu L (2011) Inhibition of
PKMζ in nucleus accumbens core abolishes long-term drug reward memory. J. Neurosci. 31: 54365446.
46. Gamiz F, Gallo M (2011) Intra-amygdala ZIP injections impair the memory of learned active
avoidance responses and attenuate conditioned taste-aversion acquisition in rats. Learn. Mem. 18:
529-533.
47. Bhalla US, Iyengar R (1999) Emergent properties of networks of biological signaling pathways.
Science 283: 381-387.
48. Hayer A, Bhalla US (2005) Molecular switches at the synapse emerge from receptor and kinase
traffic. PLoS Comput. Biol. 1: 137-154.

28

Smolen et al.

49. Brandman O, Ferrell JE, Li R, Meyer T (2005) Interlinked fast and slow positive feedback loops
drive reliable cell decisions. Science 310: 496-498.
50. Smolen P, Baxter DA, Byrne JH (2009) Interlinked dual-time feedback loops can enhance
robustness to stochasticity and persistence of memory. Phys. Rev. E 79: 031902.
51. Zhang Y, Smolen P, Baxter DA, Byrne JH (2010) The sensitivity of memory consolidation and
reconsolidation to inhibitors of protein synthesis and kinases: computational analysis. Learn. Mem.
17: 428-439.
52. Clopath C, Ziegler L, Vasilaki E, Büsing L, Gerstner W (2008) Tag-Trigger-Consolidation: a model
of early and late long-term-potentiation and depression. PLoS Comput. Biol. 4: e1000248.
53. Barrett AB, Billings GO, Morris RG, van Rossum MC (2009) State-based model of long-term
potentiation and synaptic tagging and capture. PLoS Comput. Biol. 5: e1000259.
54. Hrabetova S, Sacktor TC (1996) Bidirectional regulation of protein kinase Mζ in the maintenance of
long-term potentiation and long-term depression. J. Neurosci. 16: 5324-5333.
55. Hrabetova S, Sacktor TC (2001) Transient translocation of conventional protein kinase C isoforms
and persistent downregulation of atypical protein kinase Mζ in long-term depression. Brain Res.
Mol. Brain Res. 95: 146-152.
56. Ouyang Y, Rosenstein A, Kreiman G, Schuman EM, Kennedy MB (1999) Tetanic stimulation leads
to increased accumulation of Ca2+ / calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II via dendritic protein
synthesis in hippocampal neurons. J. Neurosci. 19: 7823-7833.
57. Ouyang Y, Kantor D, Harris KM, Schuman EM, Kennedy MB (1997) Visualization of the
distribution of autophosphorylated calcium/calmodulin dependent protein kinase II after tetanic
stimulation in the CA1 area of the hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 17: 5416-5427.
58. Wayman GA, Lee YS, Tokumitsu H, Silva AJ, Soderling TR (2008) Calmodulin-kinases:
modulators of neuronal development and plasticity. Neuron 59: 914-931.
59. Ishida A, Kameshita I, Okuno S, Kitani T, Fujisawa H (1995) A novel, highly specific, and potent
inhibitor of calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 212: 806812.
60. Westmark PR, Westmark CJ, Wang S, Levenson J, O’Riordan KJ, et al. (2010) Pin1 and PKMζ
sequentially control dendritic protein synthesis. Science Signal. 3: ra18.
61. Wittenberg GM, Sullivan MR, Tsien JZ (2002) Synaptic reentry reinforcement based network model
for long-term memory consolidation. Hippocampus 12: 637-647.
62. Ahmed T, Frey JU (2005) Plasticity-specific phosphorylation of CAMKII, MAP kinases and CREB
during late-LTP in rat hippocampal slices in vitro. Neuropharmacology 49: 477-492.
63. English JD, Sweatt JD (1997) A requirement for the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade in
hippocampal long term potentiation. J Biol Chem 272: 19103-19106.
64. Sajikumar S, Navakodde S, Frey JU (2007) Identification of compartment- and process-specific
molecules required for synaptic tagging during long-term potentiation and long-term depression in
hippocampal CA1. J Neurosci 27: 5068-5080.

29

Smolen et al.

65. Rosenblum K, Futter M, Voss K, Erent M, Skehel PA, et al. (2002) The role of extracellular
regulated kinases I/II in late-phase long-term potentiation. J. Neurosci. 22: 5432-5441.
66. Gallagher SM, Daly CA, Bear MF, Huber KM (2004) Extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase
activation is required for metabotropic glutamate-receptor dependent long-term depression in
hippocampal area CA1. J. Neurosci. 24: 4859-4864.
67. Coba MP, Valor LM, Kopanitsa MV, Afinowi NO, Grant SG (2008) Kinase networks integrate
profiles of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated gene expression in hippocampus. J. Biol.
Chem. 283: 34101-34107.
68. Shifman JM, Choi MH, Mihales S, Mayo SL, Kennedy MB (2006) Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase II (CaMKII) is activated by calmodulin with two bound calciums. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 103: 13968-13973.
69. Nicholls RE, Alarcon JM, Malleret G, Carroll RC, Grody M, et al. (2008) Transgenic mice lacking
NMDAR-dependent LTD exhibit deficits in behavioral flexibility. Neuron 58: 104-117.
70. Jurado S, Biou V, Malenka ER (2010) A calcineurin/AKAP complex is required for NMDA
receptor-dependent LTD. Nat. Neurosci. 13: 1053-1055.
71. Burroughs SE, Horrocks WD Jr, Ren H, Klee CB (2010) Characterization of the lanthanide ionbinding properties of calcineurin-B using laser-induced luminescence spectroscopy. Biochemistry
33: 10428-10436.
72. Muslimov IA, Nimmrich V, Hernandez AI, Tcherapanov A, Sacktor TC, et al. (2004) Dendritic
transport and localization of protein kinase Mζ mRNA: implications for molecular memory
consolidation. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 52613-52622.
73. Nguyen PV, Abel T, Kandel ER (1994) Requirement of a critical period of transcription for
induction of a late phase of LTP. Science 265: 1104-1107.
74. Nguyen PV, Young JZ (2005) Homosynaptic and heterosynaptic inhibition of synaptic tagging and
capture of long-term potentiation by previous synaptic activity. J. Neurosci. 25: 7221-7231.
75. Frey U, Frey S, Schollmeier F, Krug M (1996) Influence of actinomycin D, a RNA synthesis
inhibitor, on long-term potentiation in rat hippocampal neurons in vivo and in vitro. J. Physiol. 490:
703-711, 1996.
76. Vickers CA, Dickson KS, Wyllie DJ (2005) Induction and maintenance of late-phase long-term
potentiation in isolated dendrites of rat hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons. J. Physiol. 568: 803813.
77. Migues PV, Hardt O, Wu DC, Gamache K, Sacktor TC, et al. (2010) PKMζ maintains memories by
regulating GluR2-dependent AMPA receptor trafficking. Nat. Neurosci. 13: 630-634.
78. Yao Y, Kelly MT, Sajikumar S, Serrano P, Tian D, et al. (2008) PKMζ maintains late long-term
potentiation by N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor/GluR2-dependent trafficking of postsynaptic
AMPA receptors. J. Neurosci. 28: 7820-7827.
79. Lee HK, Kirkwood A (2011) AMPA receptor regulation during synaptic plasticity in hippocampus
and neocortex. Semin. Cell. Dev. Biol. 22: 514-520.

30

Smolen et al.

80. Oh MC, Derkach VA, Guire ES, Soderling TR (2006) Extrasynaptic membrane trafficking regulated
by GluR1 serine 845 phosphorylation primes AMPA receptors for long-term potentiation. J. Biol.
Chem. 281: 751-758.
81. Govindarajan A, Israely I, Huang SY, Tonegawa S (2011) The dendritic branch is the preferred
integrative unit for protein synthesis-dependent LTP. Neuron 69: 132-146.
82. Glantz LA, Lewis DA (2000) Decreased dendritic spine density on prefrontal cortical pyramidal
neurons in schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 57: 65-73.
83. Harris KM (2004) Dendritic spines: cellular specializations imparting both stability and flexibility
to synaptic function. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 17: 341-371.
84. Gillespie DT (2007) Stochastic simulation of chemical kinetics. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 58: 35-55.
86. Gonze D, Abou-Jaoude W, Ouattara DA, Halloy J (2011) How molecular should your molecular
model be? On the level of molecular detail required to simulate biological networks in systems and
synthetic biology. Methods Enzymol. 487: 171-215.
86. Malenka RC, Lancaster B, Zucker RS (1992) Temporal limits on the rise in postsynaptic calcium
required for the induction of long-term potentiation. Neuron 9: 121-128.
87. Pologruto TA, Yasuda R, Svoboda K (2004) Monitoring neural activity and [Ca2+] with genetically
encoded Ca2+ indicators. J. Neurosci. 24: 9572-9579.
88. Schmitt JM, Guire ES, Saneyoshi T, Soderling TR (2005) Calmodulin-dependent kinase
kinase/calmodulin kinase I activity gates extracellular-regulated kinase-dependent long-term
potentiation. J. Neurosci. 25: 1281-1290.
89. Morozov, A., I. A. Muzzio, R. Bourtchouladze, N. Van-Strien, K. Lapidus, D. Yin, D. G. Winder, J.
P. Adams, and J. D. Sweatt. 2003. Rap1 couples cAMP signaling to a distinct pool of p42/44MAPK
regulating excitability, synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory. Neuron 39:309-325.
90. Grewal SS, Horgan AM, York RD, Withers GS, Banker GA, Stork PJ (2000) Neuronal calcium
activates a Rap1 and B-Raf signaling pathway via the cyclic adenosine monophosphate-dependent
protein kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 3722-3728.
91. Yang L, Mao L, Tang Q, Samdani S, Liu Z, Wang JQ (2004) A novel Ca2+-independent pathway to
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase by coactivation of NMDA receptors and metabotropic
glutamate receptor 5 in neurons. J. Neurosci. 24: 10846-10857.
92. Yasuda R, Harvey CD, Zhong H, Sobczyk A, van Aelst L, Svoboda K (2006) Supersensitive Ras
activation in dendrites and spines revealed by two-photon fluorescence lifetime imaging. Nat.
Neurosci. 9: 283-291.
93. Harvey CD, Yasuda R, Zhong H, Svoboda K (2008) The spread of Ras activity triggered by
activation of a single dendritic spine. Science 321: 136-140.
94. Press WH, Teukolsky SA, Vertterling WT, Flannery BP (1992) Numerical Recipes in Fortran 77.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

31

