Diffusion-limited rates on low-dimensional manifolds with extreme aspect ratios
Aleksandr Kivenson1 and Michael F. Hagan2, ∗

arXiv:1208.5156v1 [q-bio.BM] 25 Aug 2012

1

Department of Biochemistry, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA
2
Department of Physics, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA
(Dated: December 9, 2013)

We consider a single-species diffusion-limited annihilation reaction 2A → ∅ with reactants confined to a two-dimensional surface with one arbitrarily large dimension and the other comparable
in size to interparticle distances. This situation could describe reactants which undergo both longitudinal and transverse diffusion on long filamentous molecules (such as microtubules), or molecules
that undergo truly one-dimensional translational diffusion (e.g. a transcription factor on DNA)
but simultaneously exhibit diffusive behavior in a second dimension corresponding to a rotational
or conformational degree of freedom. We combine simple analytical arguments and Monte Carlo
simulations to show that the reaction rate law exhibits a crossover from one-dimensional to twodimensional diffusion as a function of particle concentration and the size of the smaller dimension.
In the case of a reversible binding reaction, the diffusion limited reaction rate is given by the Smoluchowski expression, but the crossover is revealed in the statistics of particle collision histories. The
results can also be applied to a particle-antiparticle annihilation reaction A + B → ∅.
I.

INTRODUCTION

This paper studies a diffusion-limited single-species annihilation reaction 2A → ∅ on a finite two-dimensional
manifold for which one dimension is macroscopic in size
and the size of the second is comparable to interparticle distances. Collisions between particles confined to
this manifold lead to the formation of reaction products
which are either inert or irreversibly dissociate from the
manifold. Diffusion-limited annihilation reactions play
important roles in a variety of physical and chemical systems (e.g. [1]) and the kinetics of particle annihilation
in low dimensions has been studied extensively in the
context of particle-antiparticle annihilation (e.g. [2, 3]).
It has been shown that correlations among particle positions render the traditional Smoluchowski expression
for the diffusion-limited rate incorrect for systems with
fewer than three dimensions, and different rate laws have
been established for one or two macroscopic dimensions.
However, the effect of boundaries on low-dimensional reaction rates has not been thoroughly investigated, and it
remains unclear what rate law applies for systems with
extreme aspect ratios.
While our results can be applied to particleantiparticle annihilation, we were specifically motivated
to consider reactions on manifolds with disparate dimensions because many reactions in biological systems
take place on one- or two- dimensional scaffolds, such as
lipid-bilayer membranes, microtubules, or nucleic acids.
It is becoming apparent that biological systems exploit
low-dimensional manifolds to increase the rate at which
molecules collide beyond the diffusion limited rate for
molecules in three dimensions (3D). For example, extensive theoretical work (e.g. [4–6]) and in vitro experiments
(e.g. [7–11] and reviewed recently in [12]), and even in

∗

hagan@brandeis.edu

vivo measurements [13, 14] on transcription factors show
that augmenting 3D diffusion with one-dimensional (1D)
sliding of transcription factors on DNA molecules enhances the rate at which they find specific target regions
on DNA. Similar increases in reaction rates have been
identified for membrane-bound G-protein signaling (reviewed in [15]), and it has been proposed that the sliding
of viral capsid protein molecules along an RNA molecule
enhances the rate of capsid assembly [16–18].
We thus consider a physical system in which particles diffuse on a filamentous molecule such as a long microtubule or nucleic acid, and undergo bimolecular reactions to form complexes that either dissociate from the
filament or become otherwise inert. Our analysis can
also describe molecules that diffuse and react with specific sites on the filament, such as a transcription factor searching for a specific region of sequence. In the
systems under consideration, the macroscopic dimension
corresponds to the longitudinal direction along the filament. The short dimension can correspond to the lateral
direction if molecules undergo transverse diffusion (e.g.
on a microtubule). Alternatively, for molecules that undergo true one-dimensional translational diffusion (e.g.
along a DNA molecule), the short dimension can correspond to a rotational or conformational degree of freedom whose value determines the reaction probability. For
example, cross-sections for protein association reactions
depend critically on the relative orientations of the colliding reactants, and recent measurements indicate that
a transcription factor has a relatively small probability
of binding to its operator region each time it slides over
it [14]. We show that the reaction rate law in such a
system exhibits a density-dependent crossover from onedimensional to two-dimensional behavior as the size of
the bounded dimension increases.
The important implication of this result is that experimentally measured rate constants in such a system will
depend on particle concentration for some system parameters, with a form that itself varies with concentra-

2
tion. Our prediction of a crossover between one- and twodimensional behavior also applies to particle-antiparticle
annihilation reactions. Furthermore we show that for
reversible diffusion-limited reactions, the particle correlations leading to alternative rate laws in low dimensions
for irreversible reactions are reflected in the histories of
particle-pair identities.

II.
A.

THEORY

Unbounded dimensions

We consider a system of N particles which have diffusion constant D and annihilate upon collision; i.e.
2A → ∅. For the moment consider a system in d dimensions, each of which has macroscopic size L.
Traditionally the diffusion-limited rate R is calculated
under the “mean field” approximation that particle concentration ρ = N/Ld is uniform in space and thus the bimolecular collision rate is given by R = dρ/dt = kρ2 /2.
The rate constant k = 16πRD with R the particle radius
can be obtained from the Smoluchowski equation as described in the appendix. However, for fewer than three
dimensions the inefficiency of the diffusion mechanism
leads to amplifications of initial local density fluctuations
and the reaction rate takes different, density-dependent
forms. This was shown using dimensional analysis by
Toussaint and Wilczec [3] and Krapivsky [2] as follows.
In the mean field approximation it can be assumed that
the rate constant depends on the particle radius and the
diffusion constant, k = k(D, R), in which case dimensional analysis leads to k ∝ DRd−2 with d the number
of dimensions. To be physically realistic, the rate constant must increase with radius R, leading to the conclusion that the mean field expression is only valid for
d > 2. For d ≤ 2 we must assume that the rate constant
depends on the particle density rather than the radius,
k = k(D, ρ), in which case dimensional analysis leads
to k ∝ Dρ−1+2/d and thus the reaction rate is given by
R ∝ Dρ1+2/d for d ≤ 2. Since d = 2 is the marginal
dimension, logarithmic corrections to the mean field expression arise [2], which we derive approximately in the
appendix. The dimension dependent reaction rates can
then be summarized as
R1D = A1 Dρ3

(1)
2

A2 Dρ
ln (B/ρ)

(2)

R3D = 8πRDρ2

(3)

R2D =

where A1 , A2 , and B are unknown scaling constants,
with A1 and A2 determined by D and the collision crosssections.

B.

Bounded dimension

The expressions for the diffusion limited rates (Eqs.
1-3) apply to a manifold that is unbounded in each dimension. We now address the question of what happens
on a manifold in which one of the dimensions is finite.
We consider N particles in a 2D system with dimensions
of size L and w with L >> w. Motivated by the physical
systems described in the introduction, we consider the
short dimension to be periodic, but the results are qualitatively unchanged for reflecting boundary conditions.
Without loss of generality we set the diffusion constants
in each dimension equal to D; the size of the second dimension can always be rescaled to achieve this situation.
For sufficiently large w the particles are unaffected by
the boundary conditions and we expect eq. (2) to apply, with ρ = N/Lw. However, below a threshold value
of w, particles cover space in the short direction more
rapidly than they collide. In this limit the short dimension size will play no role, and the reaction rate will follow
r = A1 Dρ31D with the effective one-dimensional concentration ρ1D = N/L. We expect a crossover between the
one- and two-dimensional rate laws at the threshold value
of w. A mean field argument would suggest that the
crossover occurs at the particle concentration for which
the typical distance between particles is equal to the short
dimension size, ρ1D = w−1 ; however, the correlations between particle positions described above change this estimate dramatically. Instead, noting that the frequency of
collisions can never exceed that predicted by either equation (1) or (2), the crossover can be determined as the
short dimension size w and 2D particle concentration ρc
for which collision frequencies predicted by the 1D and
2D expressions are equal:
 
B
A2 1
ρc ln
.
(4)
=
ρc
A1 w 2
This transcendental equation can be solved numerically
for ρ given w, L, with the parameters B and A2 /A1 determined independently from measured reaction rates.
C.

Reversible diffusion-limited reactions

It is important to note that the equations described
above apply to nonequilibrium irreversible reactions. In
the case of a reversible diffusion limited reaction, where
particles form dimer complexes with finite lifetimes, the
mean-field prediction that reaction rate will be proportional to the square of the concentration must be correct,
since the particle positions are distributed uniformly in
the absence of energetic interactions to satisfy the Boltzmann distribution [19]. However, the nature of diffusion
in low dimensions and the resulting correlations described
above are reflected in the history of particle collisions.
Specifically, the rate of “novel collisions”, meaning collisions between pairs of particles which have never previously interacted, will follow the forms given in (1) or (2).

3
10
5
0
ln(rate)

With particle tracking techniques and or single molecule
fluorescence experiments [10, 11, 13, 14] it is possible to
monitor the history of particle collisions in a reversible
system. We show below that the expressions (1) and (2)
are nearly recovered even if particle collisions are monitored only to first order, i.e., a collision between particles
i and j is defined as “first-order novel” so long as particle j is not the last particle that i was bound to and vice
versa.

−5
−10
w = 25
100
400

−15

III.

SIMULATIONS

To investigate the predicted rate laws (1) and (2) and
the density-dependent crossover size (4), we performed
Monte Carlo simulations to study a diffusion-limited annihilation reaction on a two-dimensional rectangular lattice with periodic boundary conditions, with side lengths
L and w measured in units of the lattice spacing a. In
each Monte Carlo move a particle was chosen randomly
and moved to one of its four neighboring lattice sites,
chosen at random. If the move placed the chosen particle on an already occupied lattice site, the two particles
annihilated each other (i.e. they were deleted from the
system). We measure distances in units of a and time in
units of Monte Carlo sweeps, defined as the number of
moves required for each particle to make on average one
move in the long direction. Thus the diffusion constant
was D = 1/2.
Since the model was intended to investigate the effects
of correlations and particle positions in a nonequilibrium
system, a statistically appropriate initialization of particle positions was essential. We began all simulations with
100% of lattice sites occupied by particles, in which case
there was only one possible arrangement and thus no a
priori assumptions about the distribution were necessary.
We then measured the annihilation rate as a function of
the number of particles N (t) until the particle number
decreased to near zero.
We considered a second set of simulations to test the
assertions corresponding to reversible collision-limited
reaction rates. These simulations were performed as
described for the annihilation simulations, except that
when a Monte Carlo move would transfer a particle on
to an already occupied lattice site, the initial positions of
the two particles were swapped. This simulated formation of a complex whose lifetime is short in comparison
to the characteristic timescale for a particle to diffuse its
diameter. The results pertaining to the form of the reaction rate law did not change when longer complex lifetimes were considered. In these simulations the previous
reaction partner of each particle was stored in memory,
and we recorded both the overall rate of collisions and
the rate of first order novel collisions as defined above.
These simulations were performed for a range of particle
numbers N .
In most simulations we set the long dimension size L =
106 , but to enable sufficient statistics at low densities

−20
−12

−10

−8

−6

−4

−2

ln(ρ1D)

FIG. 1. Simulations for all short dimension sizes w
demonstrate a crossover from 2D to 1D behavior, and
that annihilation rates in the 1D regime do not depend on w. Color online. Annihilation rates as a function
of the effective one-dimensional concentration ρ1D = N/L are
shown for three representative values of w. The red solid lines
and blue dashed line respectively show fits to the 2D (Eq. (2))
and 1D (Eq. (1)) rate laws.

we performed additional simulations with L = 107 . We
varied w in the range w ∈ [5, 500]. We performed 10
– 100 simulations for each value of w. The simulations
were optimized to efficiently handle large systems with
concentrations ranging from 100% to near 0%.

IV.

RESULTS

Simulations for all sizes w of the short dimension
demonstrate a crossover from the 2D diffusion-limited
rate law at high concentrations (i.e. large values of N ) to
1D scaling at low concentrations. Furthermore, the annihilation rates at different values of w below the crossover
concentration collapse onto a single curve, consistent
with the expectation of one-dimensional behavior. To illustrate these observations, annihilation rates as a function of the effective one-dimensional concentration ρ1D
are shown for three short dimension sizes in Fig. 1. We
see that the measured reaction rates at small or large
densities agree very well with the theoretical rate laws
for one and two dimensions, (1) and (2) (shown as solid
red and dashed blue lines, respectively). The data was
fit to the theoretical expressions independently at each
value of w, with fit parameters A1 for R1D and A2 for
R2D . The parameter B for R2D is also unknown, but
we held it constant at B = 1 to reduce the number of
fit parameters. Further evidence that the theories match
the simulation data is shown in Fig. 2, where we see that
the independently fit values of A1 and A2 are constant
within error over a wide range of w.
Near the crossover, the measured rate is smaller than
that predicted by either expression, as assumed in the

4
22

4
A2
A1

2
0
ln(rate)

fit parameter value

20
18

−2
−4

16
−6
14

mean−field scaling fit
1D scaling fit
all collisions
first−order novel collisions

−8
−10
−9.5

12
0

100

200

300

400

−9

500

−8.5

−8
−7.5
ln(ρ1D)

−7

−6.5

−6

w

FIG. 2. Fit parameter values are independent of w.
Color online. The fitted values for A1 and A2 are shown
as functions of short-dimension width w. They are approximately constant over the simulated range of w, except at the
extremes where statistics are limited. The constant values
for A1 and A2 used for the global fit in Fig. 3 are shown
respectively as a solid red line and a dotted blue line.
−4

FIG. 4. Reversible reaction rates follow mean-field
scaling, but first-order novel collision rates approach
the irreversible scaling. Color online. Collision rates are
shown for a system in which particles swap places rather than
annihilate upon colliding, with w = 10 over a range of effective
one-dimensional concentrations ρ1D well below the crossover
density. The overall collision rate (red solid line) obeys the
mean-field approximation for two dimensions ( ). However,
the rate of “first-order novel” collisions (), defined in the
text, nearly restores the 1D irreversible collision rate scaling
(dashed blue line).

−6

ln(ρc)

−8
−10
−12
−14
−16
0

100

200

300

400

500

w

FIG. 3. Measured crossover densities match theoretical predictions. Color online. The measured crossover
concentration ρc corresponds well to Eq. (4) solved using constant values of A1 = 12.6 and A2 = 18.4 (solid red line, see
Fig. 2) over the entire range of short-dimension sizes w. The
simulated crossover densities (+ symbols) are obtained from
averages over many independent simulations at each value of
w as described in the text. If the logarithmic correction to
2D behavior is neglected, the fit worsens (the best attempt is
shown as a blue dotted line).

theoretical analysis. The fact that the 1D and 2D theoretical rate laws fit the data for small and large w respectively, with essentially constant values of A1 and A2 , then
ensures that the theoretical prediction for the crossover
density, ρc in Eq. (4), will provide a good match for the
data. To illustrate this, we define the simulated crossover
densities as the densities for each value of w at which the
rate laws fit respectively to small and large N intersect.

In Fig. 3 we then compare these simulated crossover densities to the the theoretical prediction Eq. (4) calculated
using constant values of A1 = 12.6 and A2 = 18.4. We see
that the correspondence between the simulated and theoretical crossover densities is excellent over two decades of
short dimension sizes. We also show in the figure the best
fit for the crossover densities if the logarithmic correction
factor for the two-dimensional regime is not included in
Eq. (2). This expression is slightly but consistently less
accurate.

A.

Reversible reaction rates

Reaction rates for the reversible model in which particles swap rather than annihilate upon colliding were
measured at w = 10 over a range of densities well below the crossover density ρc = 2.0 × 10−3 . In contrast
to the irreversible annihilation model, which behaved according to the one-dimensional diffusion limited rate law
at these densities, the overall reaction rates for this reversible system are well fit by the mean field rate expression R ∼
= Dρ2 (Fig. 4). Interestingly though, the
one dimensional law is nearly recovered when the rate
of first-order novel collisions (defined in section II C) is
plotted as a function of density.

5
V.

1.

CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK

The results of our simulations demonstrate that
diffusion-annihilation reactions on two-dimensional manifolds with large aspect ratios transition from onedimensional behavior to two-dimensional behavior as the
size of the shorter dimension crosses a threshold value.
The simulation results are well fit by our theoretical expressions, and confirm the significance of the logarithmic correction that arises in the diffusion-annihilation
rate law in two-dimensional systems. Furthermore, our
simulations of the reversible reaction system show that
particle correlations and the resulting transition to onedimensional behavior at extreme aspect ratios are reflected in the history of reaction partners.
While we consider one macroscopic dimension and one
small dimension, extension of our results to other situations is straightforward. For example, in the case of
one macroscopic dimension with length L and two small
dimensions with sizes w and h (e.g. a particle diffusing
within a narrow tube, or a particle undergoing translational diffusion on a filament and two rotational dimensions) and a particle density ρ = N/Lwh, we expect a
crossover from one-dimensional to three-dimensional behavior at density ρ ∼
= R/d2 wh. Similarly for diffusion and
reaction of particles on a membrane, a single rotational
dimension leads to a crossover between two-dimensional
and three-dimensional (i.e. mean field) behavior. The
important observation is that the crossover size of the
“small” dimensions can become quite large for sufficiently
small particle densities.
Finally, extension of our results to particle-antiparticle
annihilation, A + B → ∅, is straightforward. While this
reaction and the single species annihilation we consider
here yield different kinetics for inhomogeneous starting
conditions [2], the crossover relationship we predict is
unchanged except within scaling constants.

VI.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by the NIH through Award
Number R01AI080791 from the National Institute Of Allergy And Infectious Diseases; MFH was also supported
by NSF-MRSEC-0820492. We thank Pavel Sountsov and
Jeff Bombardier for performing initial simulations that
motivated this work. We gratefully acknowledge computational support provided by the Brandeis HPC and the
NSF XSEDE facilities (Purdue Condor).

Fick’s Law approach

First, we follow the classical solution for the diffusionlimited rate in three dimensions. In this approach, the
rate constant for bimolecular collisions of particles each
with radius R and diffusion constant D is mapped on to
the problem of calculating the flux of point particles with
diffusion constant D0 = 2D to an infinitely absorbing
sphere with radius Rs = 2R [20]. The concentration
of point particles is held fixed at ρ∞ at a radius b >
R. We then seek the steady-state flux of point particles
to the sphere by solving the steady-state solution of the
diffusion equation with ρ(r) the concentration of point
particles at position r:
∇2 ρ(r) =0

(A1)

with ρ(Rs ) = 0, ρ(b) = ρ∞ and r = |r|. In three dimensions with spherical symmetry this yields
ρ(r) = ρ∞

1 − Rs /r
.
1 − Rs /b

(A2)

The reaction rate constant k3D is then given by the area
of the absorber, 4πRs2 , times the inward flux, −J(R), to
give
k3D = 4πRs ρ∞ D

1
.
1 − Rs /b

(A3)

The usual expression for the diffusion limited rate is
obtained by setting b = ∞, substituting D0 = 2D
and Rs = 2R and assuming the mean-field expression
R3D = k3D ρ∞ /2 = 8πRDρ2 .
Following the same approach in one or two dimensions
yields (assuming b  R):
4πDρ∞
ln(b/2R)
=2Dρ∞ /b

k2D =
k1D

(A4)

One immediately sees that the classical approach for
three dimensions breaks down because there is no steadystate solution in the limit b → ∞. The situation can be
rescued, however, by realizing that within the mean field
assumption the bulk concentration must be established
−1/d
within a distance b ∼
from any molecule with d
= ρ∞
the number of dimensions. Substituting this relationship
into (A4) yields
k2D =

8πDρ∞
ln(1/4ρ∞ R2 )

k1D =2Dρ2∞

(A5)

and thus
Appendix A: Diffusion limited rates in one and two
dimensions

In this section we obtain scaling laws for the diffusion limited rate in one and two dimensions by two approaches.

R2D =4πDρ2∞
R1D =Dρ3∞

1
ln(1/4ρ∞ R2 )

(A6)
(A7)

which are nearly equivalent to the expressions obtained
by the more sophisticated quasi-static analysis that follows.

6
2.

Quasi-static approximation

In this approach we begin by considering the rate expression for the diffusion-annihilation reaction 2A → ∅,
with the density of species at position r and time t given
by ρ(r, t) and mean density ρ∞ (t), particle size R and diffusion constant D. Following Ref. [2] we start with the
fundamental expression for the reaction rate as r ∼ ρ/T
with T the typical time interval before a given particle
experiences a collision. Now we consider a tagged particle
and work in a coordinate system with origin at the center of the tagged particle. Neglecting correlations among
nearby particles with each other, their density satisfies
the time-dependent diffusion equation
∂ρ(r, t + τ )
= 2D∇2r ρ(r, t + τ )
∂τ

(A8)

with the factor of 2 because the tagged particle diffuses
as well.
In the quasi-static approximation [2, 21] it is assumed
that density correlations over time τ with respect to the
tagged particle are limited to the distance it sweeps out

[1] D. Avnir and M. Kagan, Nature 307, 717 (1984).
[2] P. L. Krapivsky, Phys. Rev. E 51, 4774 (1994).
[3] D. Toussaint and F. Wilczek, J. Chem. Phys. 78, 2642
(1983).
[4] O. G. Berg, R. B. Winter, and P. H. von Hippel, Biochemistry 20, 6929 (1981).
[5] T. Hu, A. Y. Grosberg, and B. I. Shklovskii, Biophys. J.
90, 2731 (2006).
[6] P. H. Richter and M. Eigen, Biophys. Chem. 2 (1974).
[7] D. M. Gowers, G. G. Wilson, and S. E. Halford, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102 (2005).
[8] A. Jeltsch, C. Wenz, F. Stahl, and A. Pingoud, EMBO
J. 15 (1996).
[9] T. Ruusala and D. M. Crothers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 89 (1992).
[10] P. C. Blainey, A. M. van Oijent, A. Banerjee, G. L. Verdine, and X. S. Xie, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103
(2006).
[11] I. Bonnet, A. Biebricher, P.-L. Porte, C. Loverdo,
O. Benichou, R. Voituriez, C. Escude, W. Wende, A. Pingoud, and P. Desbiolles, Nucleic Acids Res. 36 (2008).
[12] J. Gorman and E. Greene, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 15,

√
in space by diffusion, 2Dτ . Thus we solve (A8) with
boundary
conditions ρ(r = 2R) = 0 for τ > 0 and ρ(r ≥
√
2Dτ , τ ) = ρ∞ to obtain
ρ(r, t + τ ) ≈ ρ(0, t)

2 ln (r/2R)
.
ln (Dτ /2R2 )

(A9)

The collision time T is then calculated as the time at
which the flux across the circle of radius r = 2R equals
unity:
Z
8πDR
0

T

∂ρ(r = 2R, t + τ )
dτ = 1.
∂r

(A10)

Inserting (A9) into (A10) gives to leading order T ≈
ln(1/32πρ∞ R2 )/8πDρ∞ . We then obtain the reaction
rate
R2D = 4πDρ2

1
.
ln(1/32πρR2 )

(A11)

The same analysis for d = 1 yields (A7).

768 (2008).
[13] J. Elf, G.-W. Li, and X. S. Xie, Science 316 (2007).
[14] P. Hammar, P. Leroy, A. Mahmutovic, E. G. Marklund,
O. G. Berg, and J. Elf, Science 336, 1595 (2012).
[15] A. Baker, A. Sauliere, F. Dumas, C. Millot, S. Mazeres, A. Lopez, and L. Salome, Eur. Biophys. J. 36,
849 (2007).
[16] O. Elrad and M. Hagan, Phys. Biol. 7, 045003 (2010).
[17] T. Hu and B. I. Shklovskii, Phys. Rev. E 75, 051901
(2007).
[18] A. Kivenson and M. Hagan, Biophys. J. Vol 99 Issue
2, 619 (2010).
[19] M. Sinder and J. Pelleg, Phys. Rev. E 62, 3340 (2000);
Z. Koza, European Physical Journal B 32, 507 (2003);
B. Chopard, M. Droz, T. Karapiperis, and Z. Racz, Phys.
Rev. E 47, R40 (1993).
[20] H. Berg, Random walks in biology (Princeton University
Press, 1993).
[21] S. Redner and D. ben-Avraham, J. Phys. A 23, 1169
(1990).

