D.S. NOVOPASHINA, E.K. APARTSIN, A.G. VENYAMINOVA

FLUORECENTLY LABELED BIONANOTRANSPORTERS
OF NUCLEIC ACID BASED ON CARBON NANOTUBES

arXiv:1208.3570v1 [q-bio.BM] 17 Aug 2012

D.S. NOVOPASHINA, E.K. APARTSIN, A.G. VENYAMINOVA
PACS 61.48.De
c
2012

Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine of the SB RAS
(8, Acad. Lavrentiev Ave., Novosibirsk 630090, Russia; e-mail: danov@niboch.nsc.ru)

We propose an approach to the design of a new type of hybrids of
oligonucleotides with ﬂuorescein-functionalized single-walled carbon nanotubes. The approach is based on stacking interactions
of functionalized nanotubes with pyrene residues in conjugates
of oligonucleotides. The amino- and ﬂuorescein-modiﬁed singlewalled carbon nanotubes are obtained, and their physico-chemical
properties are investigated. The eﬀect of the functionalization
type of carbon nanotubes on the eﬃcacy of the sorption of pyrene
conjugates of oligonucleotides was examined. The proposed noncovalent hybrids of ﬂuorescein-labeled carbon nanotubes with oligonucleotides may be used for the intracellular transport of functional nucleic acids.

1. Introduction
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) possessing chemical passivity
and compatibility with biomacromolecules and cells are
investigated actively in diﬀerent ﬁelds of nanobiotechnology and biomedicine. The wide variety of both covalent and non-covalent functionalization methods have
been described [1]. The application of CNTs as transporters of biologically active compounds into living cells
requires the presence of reporter groups in their structure to carry out the monitoring of transfection during
both in vitro and in vivo experiments. The presence
of ﬂuorophore residues linked to the CNT surface could
provide us the possibility to observe the nanocomplexes
by confocal microscopy.

Shimadzu UV-vis-2100 (Shimadzu, Japan), electron microscopes LEO 1430 (LEO, Germany) and JEM 2010
(JEOL, Japan), confocal microscope Cell Observer SD
(Zeiss, USA), IR-spectrometer Scimitar FTS 2000 (Digilab, Australia), Raman spectrometer T64000 (Horiba
Jobin Yvon, Italy), CNT-analyzer Carlo Erba 1106
(Carlo Erba, Italy), and thermoanalyzer TG 209 F1
(NETZSCH, Germany) were used for these purposes.
Hexamethylenediamine and PAMAM G3.0 functionalized SWNTs (SWNT-HMDA and SWNT-PAMAM)
were prepared by analogy with [2,3]. Fluoresceinlabeled carbon nanotubes, SWNT-HMDA-FITC and
SWNT-PAMAM-FITC, were obtained by analogy with
[4,5]. Oligonucleotides were synthesized within the
solid-phase phosphoramidite method on an automatic synthesizer ASM-800 (Biosset, Russia). Conjugates of oligodeoxyribonucleotides and oligo(2′ O-methylribonucleotides) with pyrene residues attached to the 5′ -phosphate group directly or via a
hexa(ethyleneglycol) phosphate linker were synthesized
as described previously [6] and used for the preparation
of hybrids with SWNT. The structure of the conjugates
was proved by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry, UV and
ﬂuorescent spectroscopies.
For the preparation of hybrids, the functionalized
SWNTs were dispersed in a 5 × 10−6 М water solution
of 5′ -pyrene conjugate of oligonucleotide by ultrasonication during 30 min. The concentrations of functionalized
SWNT were varied within 2.5–250 µg/ml.

2. Experimental Part
3. Results and Discussion
Commercial carboxylic acid functionalized singlewalled carbon nanotubes (SWNT-COOH, SigmaAldrich, 652490) were used in this work.
Functionalized nanotubes and their hybrids with
oligonucleotides were characterized by UV-Vis, ﬂuorescent, and infrared spectroscopies, Raman spectroscopy,
thermogravimetric and elemental analyses, transmission and scanning electron microscopies. A ﬂuorimeter Cary Eclipse (Varian Inc., USA), spectrophotometer

718

Here, we propose an approach to the preparation of
non-covalent hybrids of oligonucleotides with ﬂuorescent
single-walled carbon nanotubes based on the stacking interactions of pyrene conjugates of oligonucleotides with
the surface of nanotubes. This approach does not require severe conditions at the stage of a modiﬁcation of
CNTs and is remarkable due to the relative simplicity
of the synthesis of pyrene conjugates and a higher denISSN 2071-0186. Ukr. J. Phys. 2012. Vol. 57, No. 7

FLUORECENTLY LABELED BIONANOTRANSPORTERS

Fig. 1. Strategy of SWNT multifunctionalization

sity of CNT functionalization as compared with other
methods.
We have developed the multifunctionalization strategy
including primary covalent SWNT functionalization by
the aminolinker introduction, secondary covalent SWNT
functionalization by the coupling of ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) to amino groups, and the non-covalent
attachment of 5′ -pyrene conjugates of oligonucleotides
on the SWNT surface (Fig. 1).
Two types of amino-modiﬁed SWNT bearing hexamethylenediamine residue (SWNT-HMDA) or polyamidoamine dendrimer G3.0 (SWNT-PAMAM) were prepared. The Kaiser test [7] was employed to quantify the
amount of amino groups after the primary functionalization step (0.11–0.26 mmol/g). The ﬂuorescein-labeled
SWNTs (SWNT-HMDA-FITC and SWNT-PAMAMFITC) were obtained, by using these amino-modiﬁed
SWNTs. Amino- and ﬂuorescein-modiﬁed nanotubes
were characterized by infrared spectroscopy, thermogravimetric analysis, elemental analysis, Raman spectroscopy, and transmission and scanning electron microscopies.
T a b l e 1. The data of thermogravimetric and elemental
analyses of functionalized SWNTs
Functionalized
SWNT
SWNT-COOH
SWNT-HMDA
SWNT-PAMAM
SWNT-HMDA-FITC
SWNT-PAMAM-FITC

Element content, % Weight loss upon
C
H
N
heating up
400 ◦ С, %
89.8
79.5
56.2
70.7
63.6

0.7
2.5
5.5
3.0
2.9

–
4.7
14.6
3.5
5.7

7.7
27.8
42.5
46
44

ISSN 2071-0186. Ukr. J. Phys. 2012. Vol. 57, No. 7

Fig. 2. FTIR spectrum of SWNT-PAMAM-FITC

The FTIR spectra of aminomodiﬁed (SWNT-HMDA
and SWNT-PAMAM) and ﬂuorescently labeled (SWNTHMDA-FITC и SWNT-PAMAM-FITC) carbon nanotubes show characteristic vibration modes corresponding to ν(N–H) in amino groups and ν(C=O) and ν(C–
N) in amide groups. The FTIR spectrum of SWNTPAMAM is presented in Fig. 2 as an example.
Thermogravimetric and elemental analyses conﬁrmed
the presence of HMDA, PAMAM, and FITC residues on
the surface of functionalized SWNTs (Table 1).
The maxima in the region of 260–290 nm (corresponded to SWNTs) and 495 nm (corresponded to ﬂuorescein) were observed in the electronic absorption spectra of ﬂuorescein-labeled SWNTs. The Raman spectra
of functionalized SWNTs display the D band (ωD = 1300
cm−1 ), G band (ωG = 1500–1550 cm−1 ), and the radial
breathing mode (RBM) band (ωRBM = 158 cm−1 ). The
diameter was calculated according to [8] and was equal

719

D.S. NOVOPASHINA, E.K. APARTSIN, A.G. VENYAMINOVA

Fig. 3. Raman spectra of functionalized SWNTs (a) and ID /IG ratios (b). 1 – SWNT-COOH, 2 – SWMT-HMDA, 3 – SWNT-HMDAFITC

2
1

Fig. 4. Confocal microscopy of SWNT-HMDA-FITC. 1 – bundle
of nanotubes; 2 – individual nanotubes

to 1.71 nm. The ratio ID /IG grows upon the functionalization that can be considered as an indirect conﬁrmation of the organic molecule attachment to the SWNT
surface (Fig. 3).
The individual SWNTs with length up to 1.5 µm and
their aggregates were observed, by using SEM. The additional organic groups were visualized as bulky structures
on the ends of SWNTs. The presence of PAMAM and
PAMAM-FITC groups on the SWNT surface was conﬁrmed by TEM. The possibility of the visualization of
ﬂuorescently labeled SWNTs by confocal microscopy was
demonstrated (Fig. 4).

720

5′ -Pyrene conjugates of oligodeoxyribonucleotides and
oligo(2′-O-methylribonucleotides) (Fig. 5) were puriﬁed
by PAAG electrophoresis and immobilized on functionalized SWNTs.
The ﬂuorescent properties of the obtained hybrids
were investigated. The increasing amount of SWNTs in
a solution reduced the ﬂuorescence intensity of pyrene
groups because of the ﬂuorescence quenching upon the
interaction with nanotubes [9]. We used this phenomenon to elaborate the method of quantitative estimation of the amount of oligonucleotides ﬁxed on the
SWNT surface. This method may be applied for the
concentration of nanotubes in a solution up to 50 mg/ml.
The presence of bulky functional groups on the nanotube surface may aﬀect the rate and the completeness
of the sorption of pyrene residues. The isotherms (25◦ C)
of the absorption of 5′ -pyrene modiﬁed oligonucleotides
on the nanotubes surface are plotted in Fig. 6.
It is shown that the rates of oligonucleotide sorption
are slightly diﬀerent in the cases of modiﬁed and unmodiﬁed SWNTs. The complete sorption of oligonucleotide (90-95%) was achieved when the concentration
of SWNTs was about 50 µg/ml irrespective of the type
of nanotube functionalization. The presence of a hexaethyleneglycol linker between the pyrene residue and
an oligonucleotide decreases the oligonucleotide sorption
eﬃciency, if the concentration of SWNTs is less than
50 µg/ml. The capacity of a carbon nanotube was
amounted to be about 100 µmol/g.
The data on non-covalent hybrids of oligonucleotides
with functionalized SWNTs were obtained, by using high-resolution electron microscopy. TEM imISSN 2071-0186. Ukr. J. Phys. 2012. Vol. 57, No. 7

FLUORECENTLY LABELED BIONANOTRANSPORTERS

Fig. 5. 5′ -Pyrene-modiﬁed oligonucleotides used for the preparation of hybrids

Fig. 6.
Isotherms of the 5′ -pyrene conjugate (Ia) absorption
on the surface of functionalized nanotubes. Conditions: 25 ◦ C,
oligonucleotide concentration 5 × 10−6 М

ages demonstrated the simultaneous presence of a functional group (FITC, PAMAM, PAMAM-FITC) and an
oligonucleotide in the structure of hybrids. Oligonucleotides were visualized as folded nanosized structures
on the SWNT surface (Fig. 7).
The investigation of the desorption of 5′ -pyrene conjugates of oligonucleotides from the CNT surface was
performed. Pyrene conjugates of oligonucleotides were
displaced from the CNT surface by methylene blue that
caused the precipitation of carbon nanotubes. The increase of the desorbed 5′ -pyrene conjugate of oligonucleotides in supernatant upon a rise of the methylene
blue concentration was observed by the gel electrophoresis assay. These data conﬁrmed the non-covalent nature
of hybrids.
The stability of oligonucleotides during the preparation of hybrids was studied. The gel electrophoresis assay displayed no strand breaks in oligonucleotides afISSN 2071-0186. Ukr. J. Phys. 2012. Vol. 57, No. 7

Fig. 7. TEM-image of the non-covalent hybrid of 5′ -pyrene conjugate (IIa) with SWNT-HMDA-FITC

Fig. 8. Stability of oligonucleotide (Ia) during preparation of
their hybrids with functionalized SWNTs (NT) and ultrasonication (US). Pip – piperidine treatment

ter the ultrasonication in the presence of SWNT-COOH
(Fig. 8). The absence of apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP)
sites in oligonucleotides attached to SWNT-COOH was
demonstrated by the piperidine treatment. The reversed phase HPLC analysis of hydrolyzates of the same
oligonucleotides did not detect any products of nucle-

721

D.S. NOVOPASHINA, E.K. APARTSIN, A.G. VENYAMINOVA

oside oxidation. These data proved the stability of
oligonucleotides during the formation of hybrids.

5. I.J. Majoros, A. Myc, T. Thomas, C.B. Mehta, and
J.R. Baker, jr., Biomacromol. 7, 572 (2006).

4. Conclusions

6. D.S. Novopashina, O.S. Totskaya, S.A. Kholodar,
M.I. Meschaninova, and A.G. Venyaminova, Russ. J.
Bioorg. Chem. 34, 602 (2008).

The results obtained demonstrate the feasibility of the
proposed approach for the design of hybrids of oligonucleotides with CNTs. Such non-covalent hybrids may be
applied to making the bionanotransporters of functional
nucleic acids (siRNA, NA-enzymes, aptamers, etc.)
The authors thank the collaborators from the Scientiﬁc and Educational Centre of NSU “Nanosystems and
modern materials” and Cooperative centre “Nanostuctures”, Dr. V.I. Zaikovskiy for performing the physical
analysis of modiﬁed nanotubes, and Dr. V.V. Koval for
the registration of MALDI-TOF mass spectra.
This work was supported by the RFBR grant 11-0401014-a, FTP “Scientiﬁc and scientiﬁc-educational personnel of the innovative Russia” (grant P1334), FASIE
grant, and the RAS Presidium program of basic research
No. 27 (project 62).
1. D. Tasis, N. Tagmatarchis, A. Bianco, and M. Prato,
Chem Rev. 106, 1105 (2006).
2. X. Shi, S.H. Wang, M. Shen, M.E. Antwerp, X. Chen,
C. Li, E.J. Petersen, Q. Huang, W.J. Weber, and J.R. Baker, Biomacromol. 10, 1744 (2009).
3. L. Gu, P.G. Luo, H. Wang, M.J. Meziani, Y. Lin,
L.M. Veca, L. Cao, F. Lu, X. Wang, R.A. Quinn,
W. Wang, P. Zhang, S. Lacher, and Y.P. Sun, Biomacromol. 9, 2408 (2008).
4. D. Pantarotto, J.P. Briand, M. Prato, and A. Bianco,
Chem. Commun. 40, 16 (2004).

722

7. V.K. Sarin, S.B. Kent, J.P. Tam, and R.B. Merrifield,
Anal. Biochem. 117, 147 (1981).
8. C. Thomsen, and S. Reich, Light Scattering in Solid IX,
edited by M. Cardona and R. Merlin (Springer, Berlin,
2007), p.115.
9. T. Lemek, J. Mazurkiewicz, L. Stobinski, H.M. Lin, and
P.J. Tomasik, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 7, 3081 (2007).
Received 09.10.11
ФЛУОРЕСЦЕНТНО МIЧЕНI
БIОНАНОТРАНСПОРТЕРИ НУКЛЕЇНОВИХ
КИСЛОТ НА ОСНОВI ВУГЛЕЦЕВИХ НАНОТРУБОК
Д.С. Новопашина, Є.К. Апарцiн, А.Г. Веньямiнова
Резюме
У данiй роботi ми пропонуємо новий пiдхiд до створення гiбридiв олiгонуклеотидiв з флуоресцентно мiченими одностiнними вуглецевими нанотрубками. Використаний нами пiдхiд
заснований на стекинг-взаємодiї залишкiв пiрену в складi пiренiльних кон’югатiв олiгонуклеотидiв з поверхнею функцiоналiзованих нанотрубок. Було отримано амiно- i флуоресцеїнмодифiкованi одностiннi вуглецевi нанотрубки i вивчено їх
фiзико-хiмiчнi властивостi. Дослiджено ефект впливу типу
функцiоналiзацiї вуглецевих нанотрубок на ефективнiсть сорбцiї пiренiльних кон’югатiв олiгонуклеотидiв. Запропонованi в
роботi нековалентнi гiбриди флуоресцентно мiчених вуглецевих нанотрубок з олiгонуклеотидами в перспективi можуть бути використанi як транспортери функцiональних нуклеїнових
кислот у клiтини.

ISSN 2071-0186. Ukr. J. Phys. 2012. Vol. 57, No. 7

