1

Quorum sensing contributes to activated B cell homeostasis and to prevent
autoimmunity.

Caroline Montaudouin1,2, Marie Anson1,2, Yi Hao1,2, Susanne V. Duncker1,2, Tahia
Fernandez1,2, Emmanuelle Gaudin1,2, Michael Ehrenstein3, William G. Kerr4, Jean-Hervé
Colle1,2, Pierre Bruhns5,6, Marc Daëron5,6, António A. Freitas1,2

1

Institut Pasteur, Départment d’Immunologie, Unité de Biologie des Populations

Lymphocytaires, Paris, France, 2CNRS, URA1961, Paris, France, 3University College,
London, UK, 4SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA 5Institut Pasteur,
Départment d’Immunologie, Unité d’Allergologie Moléculaire et Céllulaire, Paris, France
6

Inserm, U760, Paris, France.

Running title: Quorum sensing in B cell homeostasis.

Correspondence to: Antonio A. Freitas, UBPL, Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr. Roux, 75015
Paris. Tel: +33145688582; Fax: +33145688921; email: antonio.freitas@pasteur.fr
1

1 1

This work was supported by grants from the European Research Council (ERC), the
Agence Nationale pour la Recherche (ANR) and the Agence pour la Recherche sur le Cancer
(ARC) and by the Institut Pasteur, Centre National pour la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS)
and Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM). CM, YH, and EG
were supported by the Direction Recherche Enseignement et Technologie (DRET), TF by the
Fondation IMABIS (Spain) and the Fondation de le Recherche Médicale (FRM) and WGK by
the U.S. NIH (RO1 HL72523, R01 101748) and the Paige Arnold Butterfly Run.

2
Abstract
Maintenance of plasma IgM levels is critical for immune system function and homeostasis in
humans and mice. However, the mechanisms that control homeostasis of the activated IgMsecreting B cells are unknown. After adoptive transfer into immune-deficient hosts, Blymphocytes expand poorly but fully reconstitute the pool of natural IgM-secreting cells and
circulating IgM levels. By using sequential cell transfers and B cell populations from several
mutant mice, we were able to identify novel mechanisms regulating the size of the IgMsecreting B cell pool. Contrary to previous mechanisms described regulating homeostasis,
which involve competition for the same niche by cells having overlapping survival
requirements, homeostasis of the innate IgM-secreting B cell pool is also achieved when B
cells populations are able to monitor the number of activated B cells by detecting their
secreted products. Notably, B cell populations are able to assess the density of activated B
cells by sensing their secreted IgG. This process involves the FcγRIIB, a low-affinity IgG
receptor that is expressed on B cells and acts as a negative regulator of B cell activation, and
its intracellular effector the inositol phosphatase SHIP. As a result of the engagement of this
inhibitory pathway the number of activated IgM-secreting B cells is kept under control. We
hypothesize that malfunction of this quorum-sensing mechanism may lead to uncontrolled B
cell activation and autoimmunity.

3
Introduction
Maintenance of plasma IgM levels is critical for innate and adaptive immune system function
and homeostasis in humans and mice. Decreased IgM levels result in diminished innate
protection against bacterial invasion (1, 2). In humans, splenectomy, a therapeutic measure
following trauma, cancer or autoimmune diseases, results in increased susceptibility to
bacterial infections (3); asplenic (Hox-11-/-) or splenectomized mice also show diminished
immune responses to bacterial infection (2). Such reduction in the innate protection against
bacterial invasion is related to decreases in both natural plasma IgM levels and the number of
IgM-secreting cells (2). In contrast, increased IgM titers are often associated with
autoimmunity (4, 5). For example, humans develop autoimmune disorders when they have
primary immune deficiencies that are characterized by elevated natural IgM levels when Blymphocytes are unable to switch to IgG producing cells. These deficiencies could be due
either to defective T-B cell cooperation, as is the case of CD40/CD40L deficiencies, or to an
intrinsic inability of the B cells to perform class switch recombination (4, 5). Similarly,
increased IgM levels in mice are associated with several autoimmune disorders (6). For
example, mice with activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) defects that prevent class
switch recombination develop hyper IgM-like syndromes that are associated with
autoimmune diseases (7). Thus, any failure to maintain the homeostasis of IgM-secreting B
cells is deleterious, either by increasing susceptibility to infection or by inducing autoimmune
disorders; however, the underlying mechanisms are unknown. In most cases, homeostatic
regulation is achieved by competition of different cells for the same “survival niches” (8, 9).
However, it is unclear whether such mechanism would also apply to IgM homeostasis, as not
only secreting B cell numbers should be maintained, but also the total amount of IgM they
produce must also be regulated. It is also not clear, which mechanisms could limit lymphocyte

4
numbers during immune responses, in situations where resources are not limiting and
physiological niches may be disrupted.
In here we report an experimental strategy allowing studying the mechanisms involved in this
regulation. Indeed, in contrast to T lymphocytes that undergo considerable homeostatic
expansion when transferred into immune-deficient (10) naïve B lymphocytes expand poorly
but reach a stable equilibrium and fully reconstitute the pool of IgM-secreting B cells and
circulating IgM levels (11). The size and composition of this pool is tightly controlled as it
remains stable for up to 6 months after transfer, independently of the number of injected naïve
B cells (11). Thus, in these host mice the number of Ig-secreting cells is kept under strict
homeostatic regulation as observed in intact mice (8). This model is therefore ideal to study
the mechanisms of homeostasis of the number of IgM-secreting B cells, since only an
adoptive transfer strategy allows the follow-up of different B cell populations (recognized by
different allotypes) in the same mouse. Indeed, by using sequential transfers of B cell
populations from several mutant mice, we identified feedback mechanisms regulating the size
of the IgM-secreting B cell pool in a B-cell specific manner, i.e. excluding side effects
induced by the mutations in other non-lymphoid cells. We found that contrary to the previous
mechanisms described regulating homeostasis, which involve competition for the same niche
by cells sharing overlapping survival signals (8, 9), homeostasis of the innate IgM-secreting B
cell pool is also achieved when B cell populations are able to monitor the number of activated
B cells by detecting their secreted products. Notably, B cell populations are able to assess
their density and limit the number of activated IgM-secreting B cells when they sense the
levels of secreted IgG via FcγRIIB, a low affinity IgG receptor that is expressed on B cells
and acts as a negative regulator of B cell activation (12) by a SH2-containing inositol-5phosphatase 1 (SHIP1)-mediated pathway (12, 13). These results reveal a new mechanism of
homeostatic regulation, which recalls mechanisms found in procariots, which have been

5
collectively named as quorum sensing (14, 15). Importantly, it finally explains the
development of autoimmune conditions when IgG production is impaired, and the apparent
paradox of the beneficial effects of IV Ig therapy in several autoimmune disorders (16).

6
Materials and Methods:
Mice and cell transfers. C57BL/6(B6).Ly5bIgHb, B6.Ly5aIgHb, B6.Ly5bIgHa, B6.Ly5aIgHa,
B6.Ly5bIgHaIgMs-/- (17), B6.Ly5bIgHbCD3ε-/-, B6.Ly5aIgHaCD3ε-/-, B6.Ly5bIgHbFcγRIIB-/(12), B6.Ly5aIgHbSHIP1-/- (18), and B6.Rag2-/- mice were purchased from Charles River,
France, ; the Centre Des Techniques Avancées (CDTA), Centre Nationale de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS), Orleans, France, ; or Taconic, Hudson, NY, USA; or were from our
animal facilities at the Institut Pasteur. LN cells containing approximately 5x106 B cells were
injected i.v. into Rag-/- hosts. In experiments involving sequential cell transfers the injected
populations differed by allotype markers (Ly5a or b and IgHa or b allotype). Recipient mice were
bled and killed at different times after cell transfer. The number of B cells derived from each
cell population was calculated. Experiments were preformed according to the Pasteur Institute
Safety Committee in accordance with French and European guidelines and the ethics
Committee of Paris 1 (permits 2010-0002, -0003 and -0004).
Flow Cytometry and cell sorting. Cells were stained using anti-CD19 (1D3), anti-IgMa
(DS1), anti-IgMb (AF6-78), anti anti-Ly5a (A20), anti-Ly5b (104), anti-CD21 (7G6), antiCD23 (B3B4), anti-IgM (R6-60.2), and anti-IgD (11-26c.2a) monoclonal antibodies from BD
Pharmingen coupled with the appropriate fluorochromes. Four/six color staining used the
appropriate combinations of FITC, PE, TRI-color, PerCP, PECy7, biotin, APC,
AlexaFluor647 and APCCy7-coupled antibodies. Biotin-coupled antibodies were secondarily
labeled with APC-, TRI-Color- (Caltag, San Francisco, CA, USA), PerCP- (Becton
Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA) or APCCy7-coupled (Pharmingen) streptavidin. Dead cells
were excluded based on light scattering. All acquisitions and data analysis were performed
with a FACSCanto or LSRFortessa (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA) interfaced to
with the Macintosh FlowJo software. Subsets of follicular (CD21highCD23high), marginal
(CD21highCD23low) or activated (CD21lowCD23low) B cells were sorted on a FACSAria

7
(Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA) cytometer. The purity of the sorted populations
varied from 90-95%.
ELISA and ELISA Spot Essay. Sera Ig concentrations were quantified by ELISA. Plates
were coated either with antibodies to total IgM, IgMa or IgMb and saturated with PBS-1%
gelatin. Dilutions of sera were added. After incubation (1 hour, 37°C) and washing, POlabeled goat anti-mouse IgM antibodies were added. After incubation and washing, bound
antibodies were revealed with the substrate O-phenylenediamine and H2O2. The reaction was
stopped after 10 min. by addition of 10% SDS and the absorbance read at 450nm in a titertek
multiscan spectrometer (Flow laboratories, Irvine, Scotland). Titration of serum IgM and IgG
was performed using purified mouse IgM or IgG as standards purified mouse IgM or IgG
(Southern Biotechnology, Inc.). Ig concentrations were determined by comparing the
displacement of the dilution curves in the linear interval between standards at a concentration
of 10 mg/ml and the serum samples. Specificity of the reactions for the detection of both IgMa
and IgMb was confirmed using serum from B6.IgHa and B6.IgHb donor mice. For
autoantibodies, plates were coated with mice mouse tubulin or DNA. To test for OxLDL, we
used the OxLDL-Ab ELISA kit purchased from IMTEC. The quantification of IgM secreting
cells was assayed by ELISA Spot Essay technique. Briefly, plates were coated with goat antimouse IgM antibodies or anti-allotypic IgM antibodies. After saturating, the cells were
distributed into the micro wells in RPMI1640-2%FCS. The plates were incubated for 4-6 h at
37°C, 5% CO2 atmosphere. After extensive wash, plates were incubated with goat anti-mouse
IgM labeled with alkaline phosphatase. After washing, the revealing substrate was added
(2,3mM 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate diluted in 2-amino-2-methyl-1-proprenolol
buffer).

8
Results
Replenishment of the IgM-secreting B cell pool is strictly controlled. Upon adoptive
transfer of LN cells from immune competent into immune deficient mice, T cells expanded to
reconstitute a considerable fraction of the peripheral T cell pool (10). In contrast, the majority
of the IgMlowIgDhighCD21int/highCD23high follicular LN B cells (Fig. 1a) did not proliferate and
therefore, the number of recovered B cells was limited and did not exceed 2 × 106 cells (11),
i.e. less than the number of injected cells. The size and composition of the pool of persisting
cells was regulated independently of the number of injected B cells and remained stable for up
to 6 months after transfer (11). Most of the persisting B cells expressed activated
IgMhighIgDlowCD21highCD23low marginal zone (MZ) or IgMlowIgDlowCD21lowCD23low
phenotypes (Fig. 1a). In the spleen, Ig-secreting cells were recovered with increased
frequency, primarily among the CD21lowCD23low B cells (Fig. 1b). However, since
quantification of the total number of activated B cells in the spleen is not a reliable method to
evaluate the total size of the activated B cell pool, as activated B cells could have migrated to
organs (as the liver, gut or the flat bones bone-marrow) where numbers cannot be accurately
measured, we chose the serum IgM levels as the most reliable indicator of the state of B cell
activation and of the total number of IgM-secreting B cells in the whole mouse
(Supplementary Note 1). In these host mice we found that the serum IgM and IgG
concentrations were similar to those of control mice, despite reduced B cell numbers (Fig. 1c).
Interestingly, the titers of self-reactive antibodies were increased compared to donor mice
(Fig. 1d), suggesting that the persisting B cell populations were naturally selected on the basis
of their reactivity against self and environmental antigens. These findings indicate that the
transfer of mature B cells restored a stable and tightly controlled pool of IgM-secreting B cells
in immune-deficient mice, but they do not provide insight into the homeostatic mechanisms
that limits their number.

9
Feedback mechanisms control newly arriving B cell activation and IgM
production. To identify the mechanisms that control the number of the IgM-secreting cells,
we investigated whether an established population of B cells could modify the fate of a newly
transferred B cell population. To do this, we used a sequential cell transfer strategy as follows.
Rag-deficient murine hosts were first injected with LN cells from Ly5aIgHa donors; second, 4
weeks later, the hosts were injected with LN cells from double congenic Ly5bIgHb mice
(Supplementary Fig. 1). We evaluated the number, phenotype, and function of the B cells
recovered 6 weeks after the transfer of the second population into the hosts. We found that,
amongst the second population, the number of naïve B cells recovered was not significantly
altered by the presence of a first B cell population. However, the fraction and number of
activated B cells (CD21highCD23low and CD21lowCD23low) was significantly reduced in hosts
injected first with B cells from Ly5aIgHa donors compared to controls (Fig. 2a).
Consequently, the amount of IgMb that the second B cell population generated in the Ragdeficient hosts was significantly lower than the amount generated by the same cell population
when transferred alone into naïve hosts (Fig. 2b). At the same time, total IgM levels were
slightly greater in mice receiving both B cell populations (Fig. 2b). In summary, we found
that in mice injected sequentially with two LN cell populations, B cells from the first
population replenished the compartment of activated IgM-secreting cells leading to normal
serum Ig levels and used a “feedback” mechanism to regulate activation of the second
population of transferred B cells and, ultimately, their IgM production. Thus, by using this
sequential cell transfer strategy we unraveled feedback mechanisms that maintained the
number of the activated IgM-secreting B cells stable. This feedback regulation could result
from competition for cellular niches (8, 9), but could also occur in response to soluble factors
secreted by the first B cell population.

10
Plasma IgG regulates the number of activated B cell and IgM production. To
investigate whether secreted specific B cell products, such as immunoglobulin, were involved
in the feedback regulation mechanism, we investigated the role of IgM produced by the first B
cell population. Rag-deficient mice were injected with a population of Ly5bIgHa LN cells
from IgMs-/- mice; the B cells of these donor mice express but cannot secrete IgM (17). Four
weeks later, mice were injected with LN cells from wild-type (WT) Ly5aIgHb mice. As a
control, the second WT cell population was also transferred into hosts that were not injected
with the first cell population. The two groups of mice were sacrificed 6 weeks after transfer of
the WT cell population. As shown in Fig. 3a the amount of IgMb produced by the WT B cell
population were markedly lower in mice already hosting cells from IgMs-/- donors than in host
mice that received only the WT population (Fig. 3a). We concluded that IgM produced by the
first population of B cells was not responsible for the feedback effect, since secretion of IgM
was disabled in those cells.
Since B cells from IgMs-/- donors can secrete IgG (17) (Supplementary Figure 2), we
next investigated the role of IgG in feedback inhibition. B cell class-switch recombination and
IgG production requires T cell help and consequently T cell deficient mice show severely
reduced levels of serum IgG (19). Therefore, to prevent strong IgG production by the first
population of transferred B cells, Rag-deficient mice were injected with LN cells from
Ly5bIgHa CD3ε-/- T cell deficient mice (Supplementary Note 2) and, 4 weeks later, with LN
cells from Ly5aIgHb WT donors. Of note, B cells from CD3ε-/- mice behave similarly as B
cells from WT donors in that the number of recovered cells was identical. We monitored the
number of activated B cells and the IgMb produced by the second WT B cell population 6
weeks after the second cell transfer. In the quasi absence of IgG secreted by the first
population of B cells (Supplementary Figure 2), there was no inhibition of IgM production by
the second B cell population (Fig. 3b).

11
We had observed that the level of feedback inhibition of the IgM production by the
second B cell population was variable in different host mice injected with two WT
populations. Considering that the feedback inhibition seems to be determined by the presence
of IgG, we compared the IgM levels produced by the second B cell populations with the IgG
levels present in individual mice from several different experiments. Notably, we found that
the amount of IgM produced by the second B cell population inversely correlated with IgG
levels in the host serum (Fig. 3c).
To confirm the role of IgG in the feedback regulation of IgM production, we transferred
LN cells into Rag2-deficient hosts that were either untreated (control) or injected with
purified mouse IgG. The number of B cells with an activated phenotype and the IgM
production were significantly reduced in the mice injected weekly with an IgG dose required
to reach and maintain the physiological levels of serum IgG (Fig. 3d), but not in mice injected
with lower doses of IgG or in mice receiving as control soluble IgMs (Supplementary Note 3
and Supplementary Figure 3). These findings also indicate that the IgG-mediated inhibitory
signals require threshold levels of circulating IgGs. If these levels are not attained, as it was
the case in mice receiving lower doses of IgG or injected with B cells from CD3-/- origin, B
cell activation and IgM production are not inhibited.
In conclusion, our findings, clearly demonstrate that an active IgG-dependent
suppressive mechanism can regulate IgM production. In the absence of IgG secretion by the
first B cell population, IgM production by the second B cell population was not inhibited, and
the amount of IgM produced by the second B cell population was inversely correlated with
the IgG level in the host serum. More importantly, they indicate a presence of a yet nondescribed mechanism of homeostatic control. It has been proposed that homeostasis of Igsecreting cells is due to competition for a common niche of restricted size (8, 9). We now

12
show that, in the absence of competing populations, passively administered IgG reduced
activation and further IgM production by subsequently introduced B cells.
The inhibitory FcγRIIB is required for IgG-mediated feedback regulation. To
investigate the mechanism of action underlying the IgG-dependent control of IgM production,
we first injected Rag-deficient mice with LN cells from Ly5aIgHa WT mice; 4 weeks later, we
injected them with a second population of LN cells from either WT or FcγRIIB-/- Ly5bIgHb
donors. FcγRIIB is a low-affinity IgG receptor expressed on B cells that acts as a negative
regulator of B cell activation (12). We found that the first (WT) B cell population did not
suppress the second B cell population that lacked FcγRIIB (Fig. 4a, b), but was able to
suppress 50% of the IgM production by a population of WT B cells (Fig. 4b). Inhibition of B
cell activation may require FcγRIIB cross-linking, which can be achieved in the presence of
either immune complexes or Ig aggregates (20). Notably, as mentioned we found higher titers
of self-reactive antibodies in the sera of cell transfer host mice than in donor mice (Fig. 1d).
These autoantibodies might form immune complexes that could either cross-link FcγRIIB or
co-aggregate B cell receptors (BCR) with FcγRIIB and generate negative signals (20) by
enabling tyrosyl-phosphorylation of FcγRIIB and recruitment of SHIP (13). To test this
hypothesis, we injected Rag-deficient mice first with Ly5bIgHa WT cells and then, 4 weeks
later, with a population of cells from either WT or SHIP1-/- Ly5aIgHb donors (18). We found
that WT B cells, while inhibiting a second population of WT B cells, failed to reduce the
number of activated SHIP1-/- Ly5a B cells or their IgMb production (Fig. 4c, 4d). Since these
findings were obtained upon adoptive cell transfer into lymphocpenic hosts their validity
could be questioned, as the new environment would not reflect that of an intact mouse.
Nevertheless, the size and composition of the IgM-secreting B cell pool remains stable for up
to 6 months after transfer indicating that its homeostasis mimics the rules observed in intact
mice. By using the strategy of sequential transfer of B cell populations from several mutant

13
mice, we were able to study the mechanisms regulating the size of a stable IgM-secreting B
cell pool. Notably, our findings obtained using adoptive cell transfers, were fully supported by
the observation that both intact non-manipulated FcγRIIB-/- and SHIP1-/- mice had IgM serum
levels that were significantly higher than those of control littermates (Fig. 4e). Additionally,
the cell transfer strategy demonstrated that these defects are B-cell specific and not induced
by the lack of expression of the FcRIIB or SHIP1 on other non-lymphoid host cells. Taken
together, these results show that there are feedback mechanisms that regulate the number of
activated B cell and plasma IgM levels and that these mechanisms involve plasma IgG- and
FcγRIIB-mediated, SHIP1-dependent negative signals (Supplementary Note 4 and
Supplementary Fig. 4).

14
Discussion
The strategies to approach autoimmune disorders displaying elevated immunoglobulin
(Ig) levels in the absence of obvious immunization are yet unclear. These disorders include
hyper IgM syndromes and other pathological conditions such as SLE. In some cases,
therapeutic intervention with the administration of IV Igs were shown to have beneficial
effects (16) but it appears paradoxical that in steady-state conditions where Ig levels are
already increased and induce pathology, further increases in circulating Ig could still have any
beneficial effects. Above and beyond the possible anti-inflammatory effects of the
administered Igs (21), the present findings showing that there are feedback mechanisms that
regulate the number of activated B cell and plasma IgM levels and that these mechanisms
involve plasma IgG- and FcγRIIB-mediated, SHIP1-dependent negative signals, may provide
another explanation to this phenomenon.
It has been long known that passively administered antigen-specific IgG can suppress or
enhance specific primary thymus-dependent (22, 23) and thymus-independent IgM antibody
responses (24). It is generally accepted that IgG-mediated suppression is antigen-specific (22).
The suppressive effects could either be due to epitope masking and antigen sequestration by
the high affinity IgG preventing initiation of new IgM responses (23), or be mediated by an
Fcγ-dependent regulation of B cell activation (for review see (22)). Trials on whether F(ab’)2
fragments kept the suppressive activity of intact IgG have given contradictory results (25). It
has also been reported that IgG suppressed specific antibody responses as efficiently in FcγRdeficient mice as in wild type controls (26, 27) questioning the role of this inhibitory receptor
in the control of immune responses. However, FcγRIIB-deficient mice down regulate late
responses to immune complexes (28) or during inflammation (29, 30) suggesting that these
receptors may act to prevent overextended immune responses (25). It should be pointed out
that studies that investigated the in vivo role of IgG-mediated regulation of B cell activation

15
and immune responses have all used actively immunized mice, under conditions where high
titers of antigen-specific antibodies were produced (22, 25). The novelty of our approach
resides on the fact that we preformed our studies in the absence of any antigenic challenge. In
these novel conditions our results show that circulating IgG, constitutively present in nonimmunized mice, may have a fundamental role in controlling natural activated B cell numbers
and the IgM they produce. They seal a hiatus and provide new valuable information as they
demonstrate that FcγRIIB-dependent negative regulation controls B cell activation without
any intentional immunization.
We show that regulation of IgM production engages a FcγRIIB-mediated, SHIP1dependent inhibitory feedback loop in which B cells themselves sense the number of activated
B cells by detecting their secreted IgG. When there are enough activated B cells, the high
titers of IgG and self-reactive antibodies that they produce can lead either to FcγRIIBmediated aggregation by immune complexes, possibly inducing activated B cell apoptosis
(31, 32) or to co-aggregation of BCR and FcγRIIB, which dampens B cell activation (20).
Either mechanism may prevent the accumulation of activated IgM-secreting B cells.
However, while direct FcγRIIB cross-linking may inhibit B cells independently of their
antigenic-specificity and affect a large fraction of the cells, BCR and FcγRIIB co-aggregation
will preferentially inhibit self-reactive B cells. Considering the stronger effects observed
using SHIP1-deficient B cells, it is possible that alternative FcγRIIB-independent inhibitory
pathways may also participate in the control of the IgM-secreting cell pool. SHIP was indeed
shown to control activation/proliferation signals triggered by a variety of receptors that
activate PI3 Kinase (13). Once IgG levels reestablished normal B cell activation can proceed
in response to new antigenic stimulation.
Our current findings may provide an evolutionary explanation for the expression of
inhibitory Fcγ receptors by B cells: By simultaneously allowing detection of plasma IgG

16
levels and inhibiting B cell activation, these receptors contribute to control the number of
activated Ig-secreting B cells and prevent autoimmune disorders. They indicate that selfreactive B cells can expand and secrete auto-reactive Igs if not held in check by sufficient IgG
in their environment. This notion is supported by other independent data. The inability of B
cells to detect plasma IgG because of defects in FcγRIIB expression or signaling leads to
increased IgM levels and autoimmune disease (12, 29, 33-35). Altered human FcγRIIB
signaling in B cells resulting from the I232T polymorphism (36, 37) as well as decreased
FcγRIIB expression in memory B cells (38) have been reported in SLE patients. Inversely,
partial restoration of FcγRIIB expression in the B cells of FcγRIIB-/- mice (39) or FcγRIIB
overexpression in B cells reduces systemic lupus erythematous (SLE) incidence (40). Finally,
the failure to produce IgG either because of early thymectomy in toads (41), inappropriate TB cell cooperation humans (5) (Supplementary Note 5) or because of the intrinsic inability of
AID-mutant B cells to switch to IgG production in both mice and human (4, 7) results in
hyper-IgM syndromes and autoimmune pathology. They may also be of relevance to the
perception of the proposed “hygiene hypothesis” (42). Indeed, increase incidence of infections
in the developing countries may lead to higher serum titers of IgG and thus, help to prevent
development of autoimmune and allergic diseases.
Our findings also suggest an as-yet unsuspected physiological role for natural selfreactive antibodies. Specifically, it has never been clear why natural self-reactive Abs should
be allowed to exist; but our observation of IgG-mediated feedback regulation of innate IgM in
normal non-immunized mice suggests that natural self-reactive antibodies, which make up a
significant fraction of the natural plasma Ig (43), by facilitating FcγRIIB aggregation provide
a “warning signal” that reflects B cell density. Thus, natural self-reactive Abs might
participate in activated B cell homeostasis under physiological steady-state conditions.

17
In conclusion, these results identify a new mechanism of homeostatic control. So far, in
mammals, homeostatic control was believed to be due to competition of cellular populations
for a common niche of restricted size, defined by the ensemble of cellular interactions and
trophic factors required for cell survival (8, 44). However, in situations where resources are
not limiting, i.e. immune responses, excess of self-antigens or cytokines, it is not clear, which
mechanisms could limit expanding lymphocyte numbers. Thus, the question: how lymphocyte
populations “count” the number of their individuals and how do they “know” when to stop
growing? We now show that in absence of competing cell populations, passively administered
IgG reduced activation and IgM production by subsequently introduced B cells. Thus, we
propose that control of lymphocyte numbers could also be achieved by the ability of
lymphocytes to perceive the density of their own populations (44). Such mechanism would be
reminiscent of the primordial “quorum-sensing” systems used by some bacteria in which a
bacterium senses the accumulation of bacterial signaling metabolites secreted (by the same or
other cells), allowing the bacterium to sense the number of cells present in a population and
adapt their growth accordingly (14, 15). In summary, these “quorum-sensing” mechanisms
allow bacteria to coordinate their gene expression according to the density of their population
(14, 15). Quorum sensing can play a critical role in lymphocyte homeostasis with the proviso
that lymphocytes have the capacity to assess the number of molecules they interact with and
can mount a standard response once a threshold number of molecules is detected. The
situation described here seems to support this hypothesis. We found that homeostasis of the
innate IgM-secreting B cell pool is achieved when total B cell populations are able to monitor
the number of activated B cells by detecting products secreted by some of their members (Fig.
5a). The ability of B cells to detect plasma IgG levels through such a “quorum-sensing”
mechanism may be crucial to immune system homeostasis, providing a critical checkpoint
mechanism to prevent excessive B cell activation and autoimmunity. Malfunction of this

18
“quorum-sensing” mechanism may lead to uncontrolled B cell activation and autoimmune
disease (Fig. 5b, c). It is possible that similar quorum-sensing mechanisms may work to
maintain the homeostasis of other lymphocyte populations (44) or control organ size during
development.

Acknowledgements We thank Drs. B. Rocha for critical assessment of the manuscript and G.
Laval for help with statistics. We also thank M-P Mailhé for technical assistance and the
Plateforme de Cytométrie de Flux for cell sorting.

Authorship Contributions: CM, YH, SVD, MA, TF and EG performed research and
analyzed data. ME, WGK, JHC and PB contributed vital new reagents or analytical tools. All
of the authors analyzed the results and commented on the manuscript. PB helped to write the
paper. MD wrote the paper. AAF designed research, analyzed data and wrote the paper.

Disclosure of Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no conflict of interest to declare

19
References
1.

Kruetzmann, S., M. M. Rosado, H. Weber, U. Germing, O. Tournilhac, H. H. Peter, R.
Berner, A. Peters, T. Boehm, A. Plebani, I. Quinti, and R. Carsetti. 2003. Human
immunoglobulin M memory B cells controlling Streptococcus pneumoniae infections
are generated in the spleen. The Journal of experimental medicine 197:939-945.

2.

Wardemann, H., T. Boehm, N. Dear, and R. Carsetti. 2002. B-1a B cells that link the
innate and adaptive immune responses are lacking in the absence of the spleen. The
Journal of experimental medicine 195:771-780.

3.

Waghorn, D. J. 2001. Overwhelming infection in asplenic patients: current best
practice preventive measures are not being followed. Journal of clinical pathology
54:214-218.

4.

Durandy, A., P. Revy, K. Imai, and A. Fischer. 2005. Hyper-immunoglobulin M
syndromes caused by intrinsic B-lymphocyte defects. Immunological reviews 203:6779.

5.

Lougaris, V., R. Badolato, S. Ferrari, and A. Plebani. 2005. Hyper immunoglobulin M
syndrome due to CD40 deficiency: clinical, molecular, and immunological features.
Immunological reviews 203:48-66.

6.

Vyse, T. J., and B. L. Kotzin. 1998. Genetic susceptibility to systemic lupus
erythematosus. Annual review of immunology 16:261-292.

7.

Hase, K., D. Takahashi, M. Ebisawa, S. Kawano, K. Itoh, and H. Ohno. 2008.
Activation-Induced

Cytidine

Deaminase

Deficiency

Causes

Organ-Specific

Autoimmune Disease. PLoS ONE 3:e3033.
8.

Freitas, A. A., and B. Rocha. 2000. Population biology of lymphocytes: the flight for
survival. Annual review of immunology 18:83-111.

20
9.

Manz, R. A., A. E. Hauser, F. Hiepe, and A. Radbruch. 2005. Maintenance of serum
antibody levels. Annual review of immunology 23:367-386.

10.

Rocha, B., N. Dautigny, and P. Pereira. 1989. Peripheral T lymphocytes: expansion
potential and homeostatic regulation of pool sizes and CD4/CD8 ratios in vivo.
European journal of immunology 19:905-911.

11.

Agenes, F., and A. A. Freitas. 1999. Transfer of small resting B cells into
immunodeficient hosts results in the selection of a self-renewing activated B cell
population. The Journal of experimental medicine 189:319-330.

12.

Takai, T., M. Ono, M. Hikida, H. Ohmori, and J. V. Ravetch. 1996. Augmented
humoral and anaphylactic responses in Fc gamma RII-deficient mice. Nature 379:346349.

13.

Ono, M., S. Bolland, P. Tempst, and J. V. Ravetch. 1996. Role of the inositol
phosphatase SHIP in negative regulation of the immune system by the receptor
Fc(gamma)RIIB. Nature 383:263-266.

14.

Diggle, S. P., A. S. Griffin, G. S. Campbell, and S. A. West. 2007. Cooperation and
conflict in quorum-sensing bacterial populations. Nature 450:411-414.

15.

Miller, M. B., and B. L. Bassler. 2001. Quorum sensing in bacteria. Annual review of
microbiology 55:165-199.

16.

Tha-In, T., J. Bayry, H. J. Metselaar, S. V. Kaveri, and J. Kwekkeboom. 2008.
Modulation of the cellular immune system by intravenous immunoglobulin. Trends
Immunol 29:608-615.

17.

Ehrenstein, M. R., T. L. O'Keefe, S. L. Davies, and M. S. Neuberger. 1998. Targeted
gene disruption reveals a role for natural secretory IgM in the maturation of the
primary immune response. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 95:10089-10093.

21
18.

Wang, J. W., J. M. Howson, T. Ghansah, C. Desponts, J. M. Ninos, S. L. May, K. H.
Nguyen, N. Toyama-Sorimachi, and W. G. Kerr. 2002. Influence of SHIP on the NK
repertoire and allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Science (New York, N.Y
295:2094-2097.

19.

Malissen, M., A. Gillet, L. Ardouin, G. Bouvier, J. Trucy, P. Ferrier, E. Vivier, and B.
Malissen. 1995. Altered T cell development in mice with a targeted mutation of the
CD3-epsilon gene. The EMBO journal 14:4641-4653.

20.

Daeron, M. 1997. Fc receptor biology. Annual review of immunology 15:203-234.

21.

Anthony, R. M., T. Kobayashi, F. Wermeling, and J. V. Ravetch. 2011. Intravenous
gammaglobulin suppresses inflammation through a novel T(H)2 pathway. Nature.

22.

Heyman, B. 2000. Regulation of antibody responses via antibodies, complement, and
Fc receptors. Annual review of immunology 18:709-737.

23.

Moller, G., and H. Wigzell. 1965. Antibody Synthesis at the Cellular Level. AntibodyInduced Suppression of 19s and 7s Antibody Response. The Journal of experimental
medicine 121:969-989.

24.

Obukhanych, T. V., and M. C. Nussenzweig. 2006. T-independent type II immune
responses generate memory B cells. The Journal of experimental medicine 203:305310.

25.

Heyman, B. 2003. Feedback regulation by IgG antibodies. Immunology letters 88:157161.

26.

Karlsson, M. C., A. Getahun, and B. Heyman. 2001. FcgammaRIIB in IgG-mediated
suppression of antibody responses: different impact in vivo and in vitro. J Immunol
167:5558-5564.

27.

Karlsson, M. C., S. Wernersson, T. Diaz de Stahl, S. Gustavsson, and B. Heyman.
1999. Efficient IgG-mediated suppression of primary antibody responses in Fcgamma

22
receptor-deficient mice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 96:2244-2249.
28.

Wernersson, S., M. C. Karlsson, J. Dahlstrom, R. Mattsson, J. S. Verbeek, and B.
Heyman. 1999. IgG-mediated enhancement of antibody responses is low in Fc
receptor gamma chain-deficient mice and increased in Fc gamma RII-deficient mice.
Journal of immunology 163:618-622.

29.

Takai, T. 2002. Roles of Fc receptors in autoimmunity. Nature reviews. Immunology
2:580-592.

30.

Ujike, A., Y. Ishikawa, M. Ono, T. Yuasa, T. Yoshino, M. Fukumoto, J. V. Ravetch,
and T. Takai. 1999. Modulation of immunoglobulin (Ig)E-mediated systemic
anaphylaxis by low-affinity Fc receptors for IgG. The Journal of experimental
medicine 189:1573-1579.

31.

Ono, M., H. Okada, S. Bolland, S. Yanagi, T. Kurosaki, and J. V. Ravetch. 1997.
Deletion of SHIP or SHP-1 reveals two distinct pathways for inhibitory signaling. Cell
90:293-301.

32.

Pearse, R. N., T. Kawabe, S. Bolland, R. Guinamard, T. Kurosaki, and J. V. Ravetch.
1999. SHIP recruitment attenuates Fc gamma RIIB-induced B cell apoptosis.
Immunity 10:753-760.

33.

Bolland, S., and J. V. Ravetch. 2000. Spontaneous autoimmune disease in
Fc(gamma)RIIB-deficient mice results from strain-specific epistasis. Immunity
13:277-285.

34.

Pritchard, N. R., A. J. Cutler, S. Uribe, S. J. Chadban, B. J. Morley, and K. G. Smith.
2000. Autoimmune-prone mice share a promoter haplotype associated with reduced
expression and function of the Fc receptor FcgammaRII. Curr Biol 10:227-230.

23
35.

Westhoff, C. M., A. Whittier, S. Kathol, J. McHugh, C. Zajicek, L. D. Shultz, and D.
E. Wylie. 1997. DNA-binding antibodies from viable motheaten mutant mice:
implications for B cell tolerance. J Immunol 159:3024-3033.

36.

Floto, R. A., M. R. Clatworthy, K. R. Heilbronn, D. R. Rosner, P. A. MacAry, A.
Rankin, P. J. Lehner, W. H. Ouwehand, J. M. Allen, N. A. Watkins, and K. G. Smith.
2005. Loss of function of a lupus-associated FcgammaRIIb polymorphism through
exclusion from lipid rafts. Nat Med 11:1056-1058.

37.

Kono, H., C. Kyogoku, T. Suzuki, N. Tsuchiya, H. Honda, K. Yamamoto, K.
Tokunaga, and Z. Honda. 2005. FcgammaRIIB Ile232Thr transmembrane
polymorphism associated with human systemic lupus erythematosus decreases affinity
to lipid rafts and attenuates inhibitory effects on B cell receptor signaling. Human
molecular genetics 14:2881-2892.

38.

Mackay, M., A. Stanevsky, T. Wang, C. Aranow, M. Li, S. Koenig, J. V. Ravetch, and
B. Diamond. 2006. Selective dysregulation of the FcgammaIIB receptor on memory B
cells in SLE. The Journal of experimental medicine 203:2157-2164.

39.

McGaha, T. L., B. Sorrentino, and J. V. Ravetch. 2005. Restoration of tolerance in
lupus by targeted inhibitory receptor expression. Science (New York, N.Y 307:590-593.

40.

Brownlie, R. J., K. E. Lawlor, H. A. Niederer, A. J. Cutler, Z. Xiang, M. R.
Clatworthy, R. A. Floto, D. R. Greaves, P. A. Lyons, and K. G. Smith. 2008. Distinct
cell-specific control of autoimmunity and infection by FcgammaRIIb. The Journal of
experimental medicine 205:883-895.

41.

Weiss, N., J. D. Horton, and L. Du Pasquier 1973. The effect of thymectomy on cell
surface associated and serum immunoglobulin in the toad, Xenopus laevis (Daudin). .
In L'étude phylogénique et ontogénique de la réponse immunitaire et son apport à la
théorie immunologique. J. P. e. P. L. eds., ed. INSERM, Paris. 165-174.

24
42.

Okada, H., C. Kuhn, H. Feillet, and J. F. Bach. 2010. The 'hygiene hypothesis' for
autoimmune and allergic diseases: an update. Clin Exp Immunol 160:1-9.

43.

Avrameas, S. 1991. Natural autoantibodies: from 'horror autotoxicus' to 'gnothi
seauton'. Immunology today 12:154-159.

44.

de Freitas, A. A. 2009. Tractus Immuno-logicus: a brief history of the Immune System.
Landes Bioscience, Austin.

25
Figure Legends:
Figure 1 – Fate of LN B cells transferred into Rag-deficient hosts. a., LN cells containing
about 5x106 B cells were transferred i.v. into immune deficient hosts. Left dot plots show the
IgM, IgD (top), and CD21, CD23 (bottom) phenotype of donor LN B cells before transfer
(gated on CD19+ cells). Right dot plots show the IgM, IgD (top), and CD21, CD23 (bottom)
phenotype of the donor B cells recovered from the spleen of the host mice 8 weeks after
transfer. The relative representation of the different CD21, CD23 subpopulations is displayed.
Note that the majority of the B cells recovered 8 weeks after transfer into Rag-deficient hosts
showed IgMhighIgDlow or IgMlowIgDlow and CD21highCD23low or CD21lowCD23low activated
phenotypes. b., Different populations of B cells follicular (FO - CD21int/highCD23high),
marginal zone (MZ - CD21highCD23low), and CD21lowCD23low B cells recovered from the
spleen of host mice 8 weeks after B cell transfer were purified by cell sorting and the number
of IgM-secreting cells in each B cell subset detected by ELISPOT. Bars show the mean % of
IgM-secreting cells among donor B6 spleen B cells and total host spleen B cells as well of the
sorted follicular (FO - CD21int/highCD23high), marginal zone (MZ - CD21highCD23low), and
CD21lowCD23low B cells recovered from the spleen of host mice 8 weeks after B cell transfer.
Note that the majority of IgM-secreting cells detected by ELISPOT were recovered among the
activated CD21lowCD23low B cells. Each column represents the mean of values for 3
individual mice. Similar findings were obtained in 3 independent experiments. c., Shows the
IgM (left) and IgG (right) concentrations in the serum of donor B6 mice and of Rag-/- hosts 8
weeks after B cell transfer. Each bar represents the mean ± sd of values for 8 individual mice.
Note that in spite of the low number of B cells recovered, Ig concentrations in these hosts
were identical or slightly higher than those present in the donor mice. Similar results were
obtained in more than 7 independent experiments. d., Titers (expressed in arbitrary units) of
self-reactive anti-mouse DNA (left), anti-mouse tubulin (middle), and anti-mouse OxLDL in

26
the serum of individual donor B6 mice or in the serum of Rag-deficient hosts. The hosts were
injected 8 weeks previously with LN B cells from WT B6 mice. Bars indicate the mean
values. Note the increased titers of self-reactive antibodies in the serum of the host mice.
Statistically significant differences are indicated (* p < 0.05; *** p < 0.001).
Figure 2 – Sequential B cell transfers. a., Shows the number of FO - CD21int/highCD23high
(left panel), MZ - CD21highCD23low (middle panel), and CD21lowCD23low (right panel)
recovered from the second Ly5bIgHb population when injected alone (left) or into mice
injected 4 weeks before with a first Ly5a IgHa cell population. Each bar represents the mean ±
sd of values for 9 individual mice. Note that while the number of resting B cells was not
altered, the number of activated CD21highCD23low and CD21lowCD23low present among the
second set of B cells was significantly lower when these cells are were transferred into host
mice homing already injected with a first set of B cells. b., Shows the quantity of IgMb
produced by the second B cell population when transferred into naïve hosts (left) or into a
host containing a first B cell population. Each bar represents the mean ± sd of values for 9
individual mice. Note the significantly reduced IgM production by the second B cell
population when these cells were transferred into mice containing a first set of B cells
transferred 4 weeks before (right). Note that the total IgM concentrations were slightly greater
in mice injected with two B cell populations than in the mice injected with the first population
only (left). Similar results were obtained in five independent experiments or when the order of
injection of the two B cell populations was inverted. Statistically significant differences are
shown (* p < 0.05; *** p < 0.001).
Figure 3 – Role of immunoglobulin in feedback regulation of IgM production. a, The
IgMb produced by a second Ly5aIgHb B cell population transferred alone into naïve mice or
into mice pre-injected 4 weeks before with a first population of cells from Ly5bIgHa µs-/donor mice. Each bar represents the mean ± sd of values for 6 mice. Note that in spite of the

27
inability of the first B cell population to secrete IgM, the IgM production by the second
population was significantly reduced in these hosts as compared to its production in naïve
hosts. Similar results were obtained in a second independent experiment.

b, The IgMb

produced by a second Ly5aIgHb B cell population from normal donors transferred alone into
naïve mice or into mice pre-injected 4 weeks before with a first population from Ly5bIgHa
CD3ε-/- donors. Each bar represents the mean ± SD of values for 6-9 mice. Note that in this
case, the levels of IgM produced by the second B cell population were identical in the two
groups of host mice (p = NS). Similar results were obtained in a second independent
experiment. c, Correlation of the levels of IgM produced by the second population with IgG
levels present in the sera of 24 host mice pooled from different experiments. The correlation
coefficient is shown (r2 = 0.47, p < 0.001). d, The IgM produced by the B cells of a LN
population transferred alone into untreated naïve mice or into mice injected i.v. with 1mg of
purified soluble mouse IgG (Innovative Research, Inc.) the day before cell transfer and
thereafter intraperitoneally every week for 5 weeks. Each bar represents the mean ± SD of
values for 10 mice. Note that in mice injected with IgG, the IgM production by the transferred
B cells was significantly reduced. Similar results were obtained in a second independent
experiment. Statistically significant differences are shown (** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001).
Figure 4 – Role of the FcRγIIB and SHIP1 in feedback regulation of IgM production. a,
The number of MZ - CD21highCD23low (left panel) and CD21lowCD23low (right panel) B cells
recovered from the second FcRγIIB-/- Ly5bIgHb cell population when injected alone or into
mice injected 4 weeks before with a first Ly5aIgHa WT population. Each bar represents the
mean ± SD of values for 12-14 mice. Note that the number of activated CD21highCD23low and
CD21lowCD23low present among the second set of B cells was not modified by the presence of
a first set of B cells. b, The IgMb titers produced by a second population of WT (left) or
FcRγIIB-deficient (right) B cells transferred into Rag-deficient mice injected 4 weeks before

28
with cells from WT IgHa donors expressed as a % of the control levels obtained after their
transfer into naïve Rag-deficient hosts. Note that the IgMb production by FcRγIIB-deficient B
cells was not inhibited in the presence of a first population of WT B cells. Each bar represents
the mean ± SD of values for 12-14 mice. Data shown were pooled from two independent
experiments. c, The number of MZ - CD21highCD23low (left panel) and CD21lowCD23low (right
panel) B cells recovered from the second SHIP1-/- Ly5aIgHb population when injected alone
(left) or into mice injected 4 weeks before with a first Ly5bIgHa population. Each bar
represents the mean ± SD of values for 12-14 mice. Note that the number of activated Ly5a
CD21highCD23low and CD21lowCD23low present among the second set of B cells was not
modified by the first set of B cells. d, IgMb levels produced by a second population of WT
(left) or SHIP1-deficient (right) B cells transferred into Rag-deficient mice injected 4 weeks
before with cells from WT IgHa donors expressed as a % of the control levels obtained after
their transfer into naïve Rag-deficient hosts. Note that the IgMb production by SHIP1-deficient
B cells was not inhibited in the presence of a first population of WT B cells. Each bar
represents the mean ± SD of values for 12-14 mice. Data shown were pooled from two
independent experiments. e, The left panel shows the IgM concentrations present in the serum
of age-matched WT littermates and FcRγIIB-/- mice. Each bar represents the mean ± SD of
values for 8 mice. IgM titers in the mutant mice were significantly higher (** p < 0.01). The
right panel shows the IgM concentrations present in the serum of age-matched WT littermates
and SHIP1-/- mice. Each bar represents the mean ± SD of values for 4 mice. IgM titers in the
mutant mice were significantly higher (* p < 0.05).
Fig. 5 – (A) « Quorum sensing »: The presence of soluble IgG and the ability of the B cells to
detect its levels are crucial to the homeostasis of the immune system. “Quorum sensing”: The
IgG secreted by activated B cells is detected (sensed) by the inhibitory FcγRIIB expressed by
B cells that prevents further B cell activation. That is to say: overall B cell populations adapt

29
their behavior according to the sensing of the quantities of IgG produced. (B) Failure of
“Quorum sensing” by defective sensor molecule: The inability to detect soluble IgG because
of defects in the FcγRIIB expression (in FcγRIIB-/- mice) or signaling (in SHIP1-/- mice) leads
to hyper IgM syndromes and autoimmune disease. (C) Failure of “Quorum sensing” by
absence of the sensed molecule IgG also leads to hyper IgM syndromes and autoimmune
pathology.

30

31

32

33

34

