An excess of gene expression divergence on the X
chromosome in Drosophila embryos; implications for
the faster-X hypothesis

arXiv:1209.0968v5 [q-bio.PE] 25 Jul 2013

Melek A. Kayserili1,† , Dave T. Gerrard2,† , Pavel Tomancak1,∗ , Alex T. Kalinka1,∗
1 Max Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Pfotenhauerstr. 108, 01307 Dresden,
Germany.
2 Faculty of Life Sciences, The University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road,
Manchester M13 9PT, UK.
† These authors contributed equally ∗ E-mail: Corresponding kalinka@mpi-cbg.de,
tomancak@mpi-cbg.de

Abstract
The X chromosome is present as a single copy in the heterogametic sex, and this hemizygosity is expected to drive unusual patterns of evolution on the X relative to the autosomes. For
example, the hemizgosity of the X may lead to a lower chromosomal effective population size
compared to the autosomes suggesting that the X might be more strongly affected by genetic
drift. However, the X may also experience stronger positive selection than the autosomes because recessive beneficial mutations will be more visible to selection on the X where they will
spend less time being masked by the dominant, less beneficial allele - a proposal known as the
faster-X hypothesis. Thus, empirical studies demonstrating increased genetic divergence on the
X chromosome could be indicative of either adaptive or non-adaptive evolution. We measured
gene expression in Drosophila species and in D. melanogaster inbred strains for both embryos
and adults. In the embryos we found that expression divergence is on average more than 20%
higher for genes on the X chromosome relative to the autosomes, but in contrast, in the inbred
strains gene expression variation is significantly lower on the X chromosome. Furthermore,
expression divergence of genes on Muller’s D element is significantly greater along the branch
leading to the obscura sub-group, in which this element segregates as a neo-X chromosome. In
the adults, divergence is greatest on the X chromosome for males, but not for females, yet in
both sexes inbred strains harbour the lowest level of gene expression variation on the X chromosome. We consider different explanations for our results and conclude that they are most
consistent within the framework of the faster-X hypothesis.

1

Author Summary
There is a single copy of the X chromosome in males, yet two copies in females. This unique
inheritance pattern has long been predicted to influence how the X chromosome evolves. In
particular, theory suggests that the single copy of the X in males could facilitate faster evolution
of the X, although this faster evolution could be either adaptive or non-adaptive. We measured
gene expression across the chromosomes in several different Drosophila species, and also in
several inbred strains of D. melanogaster for both embryos and adults. We found that gene
expression is evolving significantly faster between species in the embryos, yet harbours significantly less variation within inbred strains. In adults, evolution between species appears to
be much slower than in the embryos, yet they also harbour significantly lower levels of gene
expression variation on the X chromosome in inbred strains. Overall, our results are consistent
with there being an excess of adaptive evolution on the X chromosome in Drosophila embryos.
Finally, we underscore the importance of biological context for understanding how chromosomes evolve in different species.

Introduction
It has long been suspected that the distinct properties of the X chromosome might in turn produce distinct patterns of evolution on the X relative to the autosomes [1, 2]. In particular, the
hemizygoisty of the X could be responsible for increased adaptive or non-adaptive evolution on
this chromosome. Assuming an equal sex ratio and an equal variance in reproductive success in
the two sexes, there will be three copies of the X in each mating pair versus four copies of each
autosome thereby exposing the X to elevated levels of genetic drift [3]. If, however, we consider adaptive evolution, then the hemizygosity of the X is expected to facilitate the spread of
recessive beneficial mutations, the selective benefit of which would otherwise be masked when
in a heterozygous state on the autosomes [1, 3–5]. Beneficial mutations with additive effects
in heterozygotes are selectively equivalent on the X chromosome and on the autosomes, and
would therefore be expected to evolve at similar rates across the chromosomes, whereas beneficial mutations that are dominant are expected to evolve faster on the autosomes [5]. A faster
X may also be expected if mutations have sexually antagonistic effects, in which the sign of the
selection coefficient is opposite in males and females [6]. In both adaptive and non-adaptive
scenarios, it is the hemizygous context of the X chromosome in the heterogametic sex that is
expected to drive more rapid evolution relative to the autosomes [7].
Determining the relative importance of different evolutionary forces in shaping the X chromosome is crucial for understanding several phenomena related to the X. For example, Haldane’s rule, which is a classic generalization stating that in the hybrids of inter-species crosses
the heterogametic sex is most often the inviable or sterile sex [8], could be explained by the
fixation of recessive species-specific substitutions on the X chromosome which interact epistatically with autosomal loci [5]. Understanding how the X evolves could also help explain un-

2

usual distributions of genes across chromosomes [9], such as a disproportionate number of
genes involved in cognitive function residing on the X in mammals [10] or an excess of sexually antagonistic genes on the X in Drosophila [11]. A fuller understanding of how selection
acts differentially across autosomes and sex chromosomes could also shed light on the role of
the X chromosome in the evolution of sexually-selected traits [12].
Empirical studies have sought to quantify the importance of adaptative processes in driving
the evolution of the X. While many studies have found that the differences between species
can often be attributed to X-linked loci of large effect [13–15], much of the recent work has
found inconsistent evidence for an excess of positive selection of X-linked proteins. For example, studies of chimpanzee and human orthologs shows that X-linked loci have higher rates of
adaptive protein evolution than autosomal loci [16–18], whereas in Drosophila species, wholegenome comparisons do not reveal any bias towards higher rates of protein evolution on the X
chromosome [19–21]. Other Drosophila studies, which may use biased samples of genes [7],
recover the faster-X effect found in mammals [22–25] including a study that demonstrated accelerated evolution of X-linked genes on the newly-formed X chromosome of D. miranda [26].
A recent study in aphids, an X0 sex determination system, found evidence for adaptive evolution
of X-linked genes [27], and, interestingly, the same finding was reported for the Z chromosome
(the equivalent of the X chromosome in the ZW sex determination system) in a comparison of
chicken and zebra finch orthologs [28].
While the evidence for adaptive evolution of the X remains somewhat patchy, such discrepancies suggest that differences in the biology of different groups of species could strongly
influence their chromosomal evolution. An important parameter in the faster-X theory is the
presence or absence of dosage compensation in the heterogametic sex; that is, whether the
presence of a single copy of a gene in the heterogametic sex is compensated, in terms of gene
expression, to an extent that it is selectively equivalent to the two copies in the homogametic
sex. Theory shows that beneficial mutations will evolve faster on the X compared to the autosomes, only if mutations are at least partially recessive [5]. Thus, to observe a global fast-X
effect, most beneficial mutations must be at least partially recessive. In the absence of dosage
compensation, however, theory suggests that beneficial mutations must be more recessive for
the X to evolve faster provided that the weaker expression in males results in a correspondingly
weaker beneficial selection coefficient [5] – this is because dosage compensation equalises the
expression of genes expressed on the X in males and females, and is therefore assumed to also
equalise their selection coefficients. Thus, fundamental differences in both the extent and mechanism of dosage compensation between different groups of species could have a dramatic effect
on the rate of evolution of the X chromosome [5]. However, it is also possible that adaptive
evolution of protein sequences accounts for a larger fraction of the evolutionary divergence between some groups of species relative to others. Therefore, while we may not see significantly
higher adaptive protein evolution on the X in Drosophila, it is conceivable that adaptive differences in this group of species are most often seen in cis-regulatory, and therefore non-coding,
regions of the genome [20, 29].
We aimed to address evolution on the Drosophila X chromosome relative to the autosomes
3

at the level of gene expression divergence. By focusing on gene expression, we relax the implicit
assumption of previous studies that a majority of adaptive evolution occurs via changes in amino
acid sequences. Additionally, by measuring divergence in terms of gene expression rather than
coding sequences, we could compare expression divergence in embryos relative to adults and
therefore ask whether gene expression is free to evolve independently in different stages of the
animal’s life-cycle. Our results show that mean gene expression divergence is higher for the X
chromosome relative to autosomes and, more surprisingly, this effect is much stronger in the
Drosophila embryos relative to the adults.

4

Results
Higher mean expression divergence on the X chromosome in Drosophila
embryos
Evidence for accelerated evolution of the X in Drosophila has been sought in the adaptive evolution of protein sequences, but has so far produced mixed results [20–24]. We chose to focus
on the evolution of gene expression with the advantage that we could detect the effects of divergence of non-coding regulatory sequences, and in addition we could directly compare evolution
in different stages of the animal’s life-cycle. To explore gene expression divergence across
Drosophila chromosomes we used gene expression data from two distinct stages of the lifecycle – the embryo [30] and the adult [31]. In addition, we extracted RNA from the embryos of
17 inbred strains of D. melanogaster and hybridised the samples to whole-genome microarrays
to provide insight into the maintenance of gene expression variation across chromosomes but
within a single species. Similarly, for adult stages we used whole-genome microarray data from
40 adult inbred strains of D. melanogaster separated into males and females [32, 33]. Table S1
summarises the chromosomal distributions of genes in each dataset.
In the between-species data for embryos, the X chromosome has the highest mean expression divergence (P = 2.19 × 10−7 ; Figure 1A) an effect that ranges from 18% up to 27%
higher and in all cases is significant (see Table S2 for all chromosomal contrasts). In contrast,
the X chromosome shows the lowest level of gene expression variation between the embryos
of inbred D. melanogaster strains (P = 1.16 × 10−9 ; Figure 1B), ranging from 7% up to 10%
lower (Table S3). Bootstrap resampling of the mean divergence across chromosomes confirms
that it is significantly higher on the X between species (Figure 1C) and significantly lower on
the X between strains (Figure 1D). In the between-species data, several specific branches in the
phylogeny have significantly longer mean lengths judged by bootstrapping individual branches
(Figure S1).
In the adults, mean divergence on the X is not higher than the autosomes in females (P =
0.99; Figure 2A; Table S4) yet gene expression variation is significantly lower on the X relative
to the autosomes in female inbred strains (P = 7.28 × 10−6 ; Figure 2B; Table S5). In adult
males, mean divergence is highest on the X, although it is not significant (P = 0.35; Figure
2E; Table S6), but once again mean variation is significantly lower on the X in inbred strains
(P = 9.89×10−11 ; Figure 2F; Table S7). Bootstrap resamples confirm that differences between
the chromosomes are significant only in the strains (Figures 2C,D,G,H). When we reduce genes
and species to a common set belonging to both the embryonic and adult between-species data,
we find that the X remains more significantly divergent in the embryonic data (Tables S8,9). In
addition, we find that genes with sex-biased expression patterns also do not display an X effect
in either sex confirming that the absence of any effect in adults is not caused by combining
genes with different properties in the two sexes (see Methods; Figure S2).
We find that divergence on the X in embryos is not driven by a small subset of time points
(Figure 3), nor can it be explained by artifacts caused by extreme expression levels (Figure
5

S3) or by skews in the sex ratio (Figure S4; see Methods). Overall, these results indicate that
there is a strong and significant excess of gene expression divergence on the X chromosome
in Drosophila embryos together with a significant reduction of gene expression variation on
the X within inbred strains of D. melanogaster. Divergence between species coupled with
conservation within species is often viewed as a signature of adaptive evolution, and, at the
least, is firm evidence against the observed divergence being driven by a relaxation of selective
constraints.

Higher divergence on the ancestral branch of the neo-X in Drosophila embryos
In the obscura sub-group, Muller’s element D (3L in D. melanogaster) has become X-linked
and is referred to as a neo-X chromosome. If X-linkage were the cause of increased expression
divergence, then we would expect to see accelerated evolution of gene expression on this chromosome relative to the remaining autosomes in this lineage [20]. As with the global X-effect,
we see a small but significant increase in divergence on the ancestral branch of the obscura
sub-group in the between-species embryonic dataset (P = 0.0012, Wilcoxon one-tailed test;
Figure 4A). While the ancestral branch shows an excess of divergence (Figure 4A), the terminal branches do not (Figure S5). In the adult dataset, there is only one species in the obscura
sub-group, and the branch leading to this species does not show an excess of divergence (Figure
4B). An excess of gene expression divergence on the ancestral branch leading to the obscura
sub-group for the neo-X suggests that evolution of this chromosome was accelerated more after
its formation. More generally, this finding lends independent support to the notion that the X
evolves more rapidly than the autosomes.

Lower mutational heritability on the Drosophila X
The discovery that Drosophila embryos have both an excess of divergence on the X chromosome between species (Figure 1A) and significantly lower levels of gene expression differentiation between strains of a single species (Figure 1B) is a pattern consistent with what we would
expect to be driven by adaptive evolutionary processes. However, such a pattern could also be
explained by random genetic drift since lower effective population sizes limit the amount of
genetic variance a species can harbour [34] while simultaneously leading to the divergence of
separate species through the accumulation of chance variations along separate lineages.
To determine whether it is likely that the X chromosome in Drosophila could accumulate
mutations at a faster rate than the autosomes simply by virtue of being in a hemizygous state
in males, we analysed data from mutation accumulation lines of D. melanogaster [35]. Twelve
lines of D. melanogaster were allowed to accumulate mutations over a period of 200 generations. Since selection is relaxed in these lines, mutations are free to accumulate in the population
and if the X has a biased accumulation of mutations due to its hemizygosity, we would expect an
excess of gene expression variation between mutation accumulation lines for genes expressed
6

on the X than for those on the autosomes. Gene expression was measured genome-wide at the
late larval and puparium formation stages of the life-cycle. After fitting linear models to the
data, the authors extracted the variance attributable to mutations and scaled it by the residual
variance to give a measure of mutational heritability [35]. Mutational heritability is a dimensionless quantity, defined as the variance in a trait which is attributable to new mutations in
each generation divided by the variance attributable to environmental variance (in an initially
homozygous population) [36]. Thus, this measure captures the rate of increase in the heritability of a trait due to mutations. The trait of interest for us is gene expression, and this metric
allows us to infer how quickly different mutation accumulation lines diverge from one another
in terms of the accumulation of mutations affecting gene expression at individual genes.
The results show that, when we restrict the genes to those that have a measurable mutational
heritability, the X has the lowest mutational heritability at both life-cycle stages (P = 5.7 ×
10−8 , Figure 5A; P = 0.0143, Figure 5B, Wilcoxon one-tailed tests). In addition, when we
include those genes that do not have a measurable mutational heritability, we find that the X has
both more genes with zero mutational heritability and less genes with a measurable mutational
heritability than would be expected by chance (Figures 5C,D). These results suggest that, for
these developmental stages at least, the fixation by random drift of mutations influencing gene
expression is not biased on the X chromosome and hence is unlikely to be driving higher gene
expression divergence on this chromosome. We note, however, that the mutation accumulation
lines do not necessarily perfectly capture the conditions experienced by wild populations of
Drosophila and so we believe it is important to conduct further studies designed to answer the
question of whether the X fixes more mutations due to its hemizygosity.

A paucity of genes expressed in the cellular blastoderm on the Drosophila
X
It was recently discovered that there is a paucity of adult tissue-specific gene expression on
the Drosophila X chromosome [37]. This result suggests that the distribution of genes across
chromosomes may influence observed differences in chromosomal rates of evolution. To test
whether X chromosome genes have unusual embryonic tissue expression patterns, we used a
controlled vocabulary of embryonic expression terms based on in situ expression data [38] to
ask if there is under- or over-representation of expression terms for genes on the X relative to
the whole genome. After correcting for multiple testing, just one term showed a significant
departure from its null expectation; genes expressed in the cellular blastoderm are significantly
under-represented on the Drosophila X (Padj = 9.5 × 10−5 ; Table S11).
This result makes sense when we consider that dosage compensation of X-expressed zygotic
genes in male embryos via the MSL (Male-specific lethal) complex is not fully active until after
the blastoderm stage [39, 40]. The lag in activation of MSL-mediated dosage compensation
may disfavour cellular blastoderm expressed genes from residing on the X, especially as they
would need to evolve an alternative dosage compensation mechanism [40]. More generally,
the absence of strong tissue-expression biases on the X chromosome suggests that an unusual
7

chromosomal distribution of tissue-specific embryonic genes is unlikely to be driving the higher
gene expression divergence that we find on the X chromosome.

The multi-locus faster-X effect with epistasis and linkage
Recent evidence suggests that epistatic interactions between genes constitutes a substantial fraction of the variation of quantitative traits in Drosophila [41]. Therefore, to determine the relative
benefits of chromosomal location and multi-locus co-evolution for beneficial alleles sweeping to
fixation in a population, we analysed several diploid population genetic models of the faster-X
effect. To compare evolution in equivalent genetic scenarios, we used the ratio of the selection
gradient for X-linked versus autosomal cases (see Methods).
The results show that, although a faster-X effect exists in all the cases studied, by far the
greatest advantage of X-linkage occurs when both epistatically interacting loci are linked on
the same chromosome (Figure 6, blue circles; Table S12). When both loci are X-linked there
will be no recombination in the heterogametic sex, and this will contribute to an increase in
the rate of build-up of linkage disequilibrium between the loci. However, in species such as D.
melanogaster there is also no recombination occurring between pairs of homologous autosomes
in males, and therefore such an effect would contribute to increased evolution on the autosomes.
To quantify the magnitude of this effect, we compared the X-linked case to a scenario in which
there is no recombination between autosomally linked loci in males. The results show that the
effect of a lack of recombination in males cannot account for the advantage enjoyed by X-linked
loci, which when compared against the autosomal case in which there is male recombination
shows that the advantage in this case is weak and dependent upon high-levels of genetic variance
(Figure S6). Thus, the benefit of X-linkage in the multi-locus case accrues almost entirely from
the increased efficacy of selection when acting on hemizygous males.
When positively-interacting alleles are located on separate chromosomes, it is extremely
unlikely that they will sweep to fixation within a plausible time period because recombination will very effectively decay the linkage disequilibrium that is built up by selection in each
generation [42]. When located on the same chromosome, interactions between loci could be
considered to be either cis-trans or cis-cis interactions [42], thereby broadening the scope of
possible genetic scenarios that are consistent with faster-X evolution. It remains possible, however, that beneficial trans-acting variants located on the autosomes, and interacting with fixed
cis alleles on the X, are responsible for the excess of divergence that we find on the X. However, there are no reasons to suppose that such interactions ought to be biased in the direction
of trans-autosomal to cis-X, since, due to symmetry, the opposite scenario of trans-X to cisautosomal appears to be just as likely. Indeed, in a recent study of gene expression in hybrids of
D. yakuba and D. santomea, hybrid male mis-expression was found to be greater for autosomal
genes, most likely as a result of faster evolution of X-linked trans-acting factors [43]. Thus,
the available evidence suggests that if there is a bias in positive species-specific interactions
between the X and the autosomes, it is in the direction of trans-X to cis-autosomal. Overall,
both theory and data support the notion that during adaptive evolution, X-linked alleles have a
8

capacity to sweep to fixation faster than their autosomal equivalents, and this effect is greatly
enhanced when there are beneficial interactions between two or more loci.

Higher co-ordination of gene expression in embryos relative to adults
In a recent study of gene expression evolution in mammals, evidence was reported for a faster-X
effect [44] (although a separate study found no evidence for a faster-X effect for gene expression in two species of mice [45]). The authors correlated gene expression across homologous
chromosomes in species pairs and used one minus Spearman’s correlation coefficient as a measure of divergence. The same approach has also been used recently to find an excess of divergence on the X in adult males and females of Drosophila species [46]. Thus, we can ask why
this correlation-based measure of divergence uncovers an X-effect in adults when our per-gene
expression-level measure of divergence does not (at least not globally – see Figure S7).
To aid our search for an answer to this question, we first applied the correlation method
to both embryos and adult males and females in the datasets that we have used. The results
show that the X chromosome has a reduced cross-species correlation relative to the autosomes
in the embryos (Figure 7A), just as it has in both adult males and females (Figure 8A,B; all pairwise comparisons are shown in Figure S8) [46]. However, when we use an absolute distance
metric to determine the per-chromosome differences between species, we find that, while the
X consistently displays a greater distance between species in embryos (Figure 7B), in adults
the X chromosome is largely equivalent to the autosomes (Figure 8C,D; Figure S9). Thus, the
question arises as to why the X chromosome appears more divergent in terms of correlations
but not in terms of distances?
The answer must be sought in the component of gene expression divergence that each measure is capturing. Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient is a dimensionless number that in the
context of gene expression in two species, determines the extent to which expression relationships between genes are retained across the two species, and the strength of the correlation is
insensitive to absolute expression differences (Figure S10). Thus, this measure of divergence
captures how co-ordinated expression is across a specific set of genes in two different species.
In contrast, absolute distances, and per-gene expression changes, measure to what extent individual genes differ in expression level in two species, and these metrics are insensitive to
how co-ordinated expression is between different genes. This suggests, therefore, that gene
expression on the X chromosome in adults is weakly co-ordinated relative to expression on the
autosomes even though absolute expression differences are not significantly greater on the X
(Figure S10).
Furthermore, when we compare the chromosomal correlations in embryos and adults, we
find that embryos have much higher correlations overall than the adults even when we reduce
them both to a common set of genes and species (Figure S11). This suggests that gene expression is generally more highly co-ordinated in Drosophila embryos relative to adults.

9

Discussion
We have presented evidence that gene expression in Drosophila embryos evolves faster on the X
chromosome between species, but slower on the X chromosome within species (Figure 1). The
salience of this result is substantially strengthened by the discovery that the Muller D element
has a significantly longer ancestral branch leading to the obscura sub-group in the embryonic
data (Figure 4A). The Muller D element segregates as a neo-X chromosome in the obscura
sub-group (D. persimilis and D. pseudoobscura in our data), and therefore provides a powerful,
independent test for faster evolution of the X chromosome. In addition, we find that gene
expression evolves faster on the X chromosome in embryos when we employ a more global
measure of expression divergence (Figure 7A), a measure which we find can vary independently
of per-gene expression level divergence (Figures 8,S10). In what follows, we discuss different
potential interpretations of these results.

Adaptive versus non-adaptive evolution
The excess of gene expression divergence that we find in the embryonic data could be driven
by a relaxation of selective constraints acting on X-linked gene expression. We would predict
that relaxed selective constraints would lead to an elevation of within-species gene expression
variation on the X, and, contrary to this prediction, we find that gene expression variation within
inbred strains of D. melanogaster is significantly lower on the X relative to the autosomes (Figure 1B,D) suggesting that X-linked gene expression is not evolving under a relaxation of selective constraint. In support of this finding, we find a corresponding reduction in gene expression
variation on the X in both adult males and females (Figure 2B,D,F,H) [46].
Nonetheless, it remains possible that elevated between-species variance coupled with diminished within-species variance is a consequence of random genetic drift, or demographic effects
such as bottlenecks [3,47]. If the hemizygosity of the X chromosome in males, and the resulting
potentially diminished effective population size of the X, were resposible for the lower withinspecies variance in X-linked gene expression, then we would expect to find an excess of fixation
of X-linked gene expression mutations in separate mutation accumulation lines. However, we
find the opposite pattern, that mutation accumulation lines display less gene expression variation for X-linked genes (Figure 5). Part of the reason for this could be due to the X chromosome
presenting a smaller mutational target than the autosomes as a result of being in a hemizygous
state in males, but this effect of hemizygosity will be present in wild populations of Drosophila
as much as in lab-reared lines. It is also possible that, while the experimenters made every effort
to neutralise the effects of mutations, selective effects remained in the accumulated mutations
and that purifying selection is stronger on the X relative to the autosomes.
Prior studies have found that the X chromosome in Drosophila experiences more effective
purifying selection against weakly deleterious and recessive mutations [48–51], and in nonrecombining chromosomal regions, the X has been shown to experience the smallest reduction
in the efficacy of selection [52]. In addition, studies of nucleotide diversity on the X in both
10

coding and non-coding regions in Drosophila species suggest that adaptive processes best explain the observed variance on the X [29, 47, 53], including recent data showing that there is
an absence of X-autosomal differences for putatively neutral sites [25]. Overall, our findings
are consistent with there being an excess of adaptive evolution of X-linked gene expression,
although this does not mean that drift or demographic effects are not involved in shaping gene
expression evolution.

cis versus trans effects
Gene expression is influenced by both cis-acting regulatory sequences, and by trans-acting
factors, such as transcription factors. Thus, while we observe an excess of X-linked divergence
of gene expression, this could be the result of either trans-acting factors potentially located on
other chromosomes, X-linked cis-acting variants, or a combination of both. Several studies
have found evidence for both cis and trans effects influencing gene expression differences both
within and between Drosophila species [54–59]. Thus far, however, the evidence suggests that
there is an excess of cis-acting variants influencing divergence between species [54–56,60], and
that cis-regulatory divergence increases with the divergence time between species [55, 59]. One
study reported an excess of trans-acting variation influencing gene expression in a comparison
of D. melanogaster and D. sechellia, although as noted by the authors this could be related to
the unusual demographic history and life-history evolution of D. sechellia [59].
It’s possible that the excess of X chromosome divergence that we see is the result of a bias
in the direction of autosomal trans-acting factors impacting the X chromosome more than the
reverse situation of X-linked trans-acting factors affecting the autosomes. Current evidence suggests, however, that the opposite is the case – that there is a bias towards trans-acting factors on
the X impacting autosomal cis-elements resulting in an excess of autosomal mis-expression in
Drosophila hybrids [43], including a study of mis-expression in hyrbid D. simulans males carrying an X-linked allele introgressed from D. mauritiana [61]. Therefore, if there are speciesspecific interactions between the X and the autosomes, it seems unlikely that they would be
biased in such a way as to account for our results.
Theoretical considerations also do not favour the notion that trans-acting factors could be
driving the majority of the divergence that we find, assuming that a substantial fraction of this
divergence is adaptive. Mutations in trans-acting factors are more likely to be pleiotropic, and
so should have less scope to influence adaptive evolution than the more modular effects of
mutations in cis-regulatory regions [42, 62–65]. Furthermore, population genetic models of the
faster-X effect show that if there are two or more interacting loci with beneficial interactions
between them, then X-linked loci enjoy a far greater benefit than autosomal loci (Figure 6).
Whether adaptive changes occur in cis or in trans also has important consequences for the
scope of mutations to have recessive or partially recessive effects on fitness, which in turn is of
central importance for the faster-X phenomenon [5]. We address these issues towards the end
of the Discussion.

11

Embryos versus adults
In the embryonic between-species data, we found evidence for faster evolution of gene expression on the X chromosome using two different measures of divergence (Figures 1A,7A). The
first measure captures the change in expression levels on a per-gene basis (Figure 1A), and the
second captures the extent to which gene expression relationships between genes have changed
in pairs of species, and hence how co-ordinated expression is across a subset of genes (Figures
7A,S10). In contrast, in the adults, we see evidence for higher divergence on the X chromosome
using only the second measure of divergence (Figure 8A) and not the first (Figure 2A). This suggests that, while the X displays lower levels of co-ordinated expression in pairs of species in the
adult, it does not exhibit significant differences in expression level on a per-gene basis. Then we
must ask, why does the embryo diverge more on the X in terms of per-gene expression levels
than the adults?
Embryogenesis is a highly dynamic process, driven by a cascade of gene expression unraveling through a highly co-ordinated developmental network leading to large batteries of genes
being switched on and off at precise moments during development [66]. In contrast, in a fully
developed adult, cells are largely fully differentiated, and gene expression is to a much lesser degree responding to a pre-determined developmental program, and is freer to respond to changes
in the environment. Thus, it makes sense that we find gene expression to be overall much more
highly co-ordinated in the embryo relative to the adults (Figure S11). But it is precisely because of the broad dynamic range of embryonic gene expression, with a large fraction of the
zygotic genome being activated in a series of waves as embryogenesis proceeds (Figure S12),
that even subtle shifts in timing could potentially produce large differences in expression levels.
In a whole adult fly, however, genes are likely expressed in subsets of tissues and organs such
that we will not find extremely low or high expression levels for most genes when we extract
RNA from all of the tissues simultaneously, thereby diminishing the dynamic range of the data.
Therefore, our results highlight the need to perform more precise organ-by-organ comparisons
of gene expression in future between-species studies of adult flies. In addition, our analysis
draws attention to the different components of divergence that are captured by different measures of gene expression divergence.

The faster-X hypothesis
Taking the above considerations and all of our results into account, we believe that the X effect we find in the embryos is best explained within the framework of the faster-X hypothesis.
This does not mean that all of the divergence we see is driven by adaptive substitutions in
cis-regulatory regions on the X chromosome, but rather that the excess of X chromosomal divergence that we find together with the reduction of expression variation in inbred strains of
D. melanogaster is most consistent within an adaptive evolutionary scenario. In support of this
interpretation, researchers found an excess of adaptive substitutions on the X chromosome in a
long-term evolution experiment involving lines of D. melanogaster selected for increased rates

12

of egg-to-adult development [67]. An interesting theoretical corollary of the fast-X interpretation is that it suggests that adaptive substitutions are more likely to occur via new mutations
than from standing genetic variation [68].
If we adopt a faster-X interpretation of the data, then we must provide some explanation as to
why beneficial cis-regulatory mutations have recessive or partially recessive effects on fitness, in
keeping with the original model [1]. Current evidence in adult Drosophila species suggest the
opposite, that cis-acting variants have largely additive effects relative to trans-acting factors,
which show more deviations from additivity towards dominance and recessiveness [55, 59].
However, these experiments determine the additivity of the phenotype of a cis variant (where
the phenotype is its gene expression level), and not necessarily its effect on fitness. Theory
suggests that mutations could have fitness consequences that are non-linear even if they have
additive phenotypic effects [69]. Therefore, it is possible that phenotypic measures of cis-acting
elements fail to capture their effects on fitness.
To understand the fitness effect of a mutation in an organismal context, we must focus on the
biology of the organism, and not just on its genetics. One potential route towards non-additive
intra-locus effects on fitness is canalisation. The canalisation of embryonic development, such
that it is resistant to environmental or genetic perturbations, has long been recognized as a crucial element contributing to the evolution of robustness in developmental systems [70]. The
evolution of dominance is a means by which the components of a network could become
canalised [71–74]. While selection acting on modifiers of dominance will typically be weak
(of the order of the mutation rate), it can be substantially stronger in non-equilibrium populations where genetic variation is maintained at high levels by processes such as migration and
hybridisation [72, 74]. The notion that the evolution of robustness (i.e., an attempt to prevent
change of the phenotype) could lead to faster evolution of the X may seem counter-intuitive.
However, the relationship between robustness and evolvability is well established, and suggests
that the evolution of phenotypic robustness can often facilitate adaptive evolution [75–77]. We
present this scenario partly to illustrate that the biological details of an individual species, such
as species range and migratory pressures, might play a significant role in determining how its
chromosomes evolve.

Outlook
We report evidence that gene expression evolves faster on the X chromosome in Drosophila
embryos. While our results are consistent with adaptive evolutionary processes, more work is
required to unravel the details underpinning this excess of divergence at the genetic, phenotypic, and fitness levels. We contend that variations in biological and life-history details, such
as differences in dosage compensation menchanisms, can strongly impact how the chromosomes of different species evolve. We therefore stress the importance of appreciating biological
context when attempting to understand chromosomal evolution. Deciphering the relationship
between species-specific biology and chromosomal patterns of evolution promises to provide
fertile ground for future research.
13

Methods
Embryo collections and RNA isolation and labeling

We used inbred strains of D. melanogaster, originally collected from farmer’s markets in North
Carolina and provided as a resource by the Drosophila Genetic Reference Panel (DGRP; http://dgrp.gnets.nc
[33]. Seventeen strains were selected for the collection of 0-2 hour old embryos.
Populations of healthy adults from 3-7 days of age, were reared at 25◦ C and used for embryo
collections. To synchronize the age of the embryos in each sample, we pre-laid the flies three
times for 1 hour with a fresh apple juice plate with yeast paste before every collection. Another
fresh plate with yeast was used to collect the embryos. After collection, embryos were rinsed
with distilled water and then dechorionated in 100% bleach for 2 minutes before being washed
in desalinated water. The embryos were then transferred into a 1.5-ml tube and snap-frozen in
liquid nitrogen and stored at −80◦ C. Three biological replicates were collected for each strain.
To isolate RNA, embryos were thawed on ice and homogenized with a pellet pestle and a
pellet pestle cordless motor (Kontes). RNA was isolated with the RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen) and
eluted with 30 ml of distilled water. The RNA concentration was measured with the NanoDrop
spectrophotometer and RNA quality was assessed with Bioanalyser using the Agilent RNA
6000 Nano kit.
To prepare samples for hybridization to the chip, we followed the Agilent One-Colour
Microarray-Based Gene Expression Analysis protocol version 6.5 (Low Input Quick Amp Labeling). The starting amount of RNA was normalized to 100 ng for all samples.

Gene expression data sets
Embryonic expression in Drosophila was taken from a species-specific microarray data set, in
which eight time-points were sampled for the duration of embryogenesis of D. melanogaster, D.
simulans, D. ananassae, D. pseudoobscura, D. persimilis, and D. virilis [30]. Adult Drosophila
expression was collected from a microarray experiment that measured the gene expression of
whole flies sorted into males and females and taken from D. melanogaster, D. ananassae, D.
mojavensis, D. pseudoobscura, D. simulans, D. virilis, and D. yakuba [31]. Gene expression
mutation accumulation data was taken from a microarray study of mutation accumulation lines
of D. melanogaster [35]. Adult D. melanogaster strain data was taken from a whole-genome
microarray study of gene expression in whole adult flies from 40 inbred strains separated into
males and females [32].

Measures of chromosomal expression divergence and differentiation
To quantify gene expression divergence in a chromosomal context, we fitted the following linear
model [78] to log2 gene expression measures, yijkl ,

14

yijkl = µ + Sj + Ck + GCi(k) + SCjk + GCSi(k)j + eijkl
where Sj is the effect of the j’th species, Ck is the effect of the k’th chromosome, and GCi(k)
is the effect of the i’th gene nested in the k’th chromosome. The interaction between the j’th
species and the i’th gene nested in the k’th chromosome, GCSi(k)j , provides information about
species-specific chromosomal expression of a gene and is given by
GCSi(k)j = ȳijk. − ȳi.k. − ȳ.jk. + ȳ..k.
where values are averaged over missing subscripts indicated by dots. Thus, the effect of the
i’th gene in the j’th species is the excess that cannot be explained by the expression of the i’th
gene across species, the expression of the k’th chromosome in the j’th species, and the overall
expression on the k’th chromosome. When there are multiple expression measures over a timecourse, our measure of divergence is designed to detect translations up or down in expression
level across the time course as a whole (see Figure S13).
Differentiation of gene expression between inbred strains was determined using the R package ‘limma’ [79]. Limma fits linear regression models to each gene separately. The differentiation of each gene was then scored as the mean log fold change of the gene across all pairwise
strain comparisons.

Branch length analysis
Absolute pairwise species contrasts of the GCSi(k)j values were transformed into branch lengths
using the FitchMargoliash least squares method (implemented in the PHYLIP program fitch)
[80]. Negative branch lengths were set to zero, and for all genes the topology of the known
phylogeny was used [81]. Per-gene expression divergence was then expressed as the sum of all
of the branch lengths in each gene tree separately.
To test for acceleration on one lineage, for each gene we expressed the branch length of the
focal lineage as a proportion of the total of all branch lengths. In the embryonic dataset we chose
the ancestral branch leading to the common ancestor of D. pseudoobscura and D. persimilis but
not including the terminal branches (Figure 4A). For the adult dataset, which does not have data
for D. persimilis, we used the terminal branch leading to D. pseudoobscura (Figure 4B).

Resampling branch lengths
Mean summed branch lengths were bootstrapped by resampling the genes on each chromosome
10,000 times with replacement and in each bootstrap replicate calculating the mean summed
branch lengths for the genes on each chromosome (Figure 1C,D). Individual branches in the
embryonic and adult datasets were tested for an excess of divergence on the X chromosome
using the number of bootstrap replicates in which mean autosomal branch lengths were greater

15

than the mean on the X chromosome (Figure S1). All resampling was carried out using the R
statistical programming environment [82].
In both of the Drosophila between-species data sets, the smallest sample of genes was on
the X chromosome (Table S1). To determine whether the differences between the X and the
autosomes could have been caused by a sampling bias on the X, we resampled the number of
genes present on the X from the autosomes 10,000 times without replacement and each time
recalculated the mean divergence. The distributions of these resampled means are shown in
Figure S14.

Accounting for sex-biased expression in adults
Expression of genes in the adults can be biased towards one of the sexes [31], and it’s possible
that sex-biased genes might exhibit stronger differences in divergence across the chromosomes.
We focused on male and female-biased genes identified in [31] in each of the species. Genes
that show a male-bias in at least one species show a significant excess of divergence in both
males and females (Pmale = 1.57 × 10−11 ; Pf emale = 6.33 × 10−6 ; Figures S15,S16) [83,
84], and conversely female-biased genes are significantly more conserved in both males and
females (Pmale = 6.27 × 10−7 ; Pf emale = 3.42 × 10−10 ; Figures S15,S16). When we look at
divergence across chromosomes, however, we find that sex-biased genes are not significantly
more divergent on the X in either sex (Figure S2). Interestingly, when we restrict male-biased
genes to those in D. melanogaster and D. simulans we do find a weak but significant excess of
divergence on the X (P = 0.0022; Figure S7), which is absent for the same genes expressed
in females (P = 0.117; Figure S7). The biological function of these genes is enriched for
carbohydrate metabolism (Padj = 2.7 × 10−6 ) and alcohol metabolism (Padj = 1.1 × 10−6 ),
which might suggest that these are genes that have evolved rapidly and relatively recently, thus
preserving the signal of an excess of divergence on the X. Indeed, we find that these genes are
significantly more divergent than average (P = 1.0 × 10−4 ; Figure S17).

The X-effect during embryogenesis
In the between-species embryonic data, our measure of divergence is designed to detect translations in expression up or down in different species across the embryonic time course as a whole
(Figure S13). However, it remains possible that much of the difference that we detect between
the X and the autosomes is driven by a subset of the time points. To test this, we extracted
divergence measures from each time point separately. We then bootstrap resampled divergence
measures for the X chromosome and the autosomes and in each bootstrap replicate calculated
the ratio of mean X to mean autosomal divergence. The results show that at every time point
the X chromosome displays an excess of divergence relative to the autosomes (X/A ratio > 1;
Figure 3). Furthermore, all of the resampled time point distributions heavily overlap with one
another indicating that higher expression divergence on the X is not driven solely by one or a
subset of time points.
16

Resampling according to gene expression level
Differences in gene expression divergence across chromosomes could be influenced by consistent differences in expression levels across chromosomes. In the between-species embryo data,
the X chromosome has the weakest mean expression level (Figure S4), whereas in the adults,
the X chromosome has the highest mean expression level (Figure S18). Higher expression in
the adults could be a reflection of a paucity of adult tissue-specific expression on the X chromosome [37]. To elucidate the relationship between expression level and divergence in these data
sets, we ranked genes by their expression level (lowest to highest), binned them into groups of
50 genes, and measured the deviation of each group’s mean divergence from the global mean
divergence.
The results show that for the embryos, the relationship is non-linear, with groups of the
weakest expressed genes diverging less than the global average (Figure S19). Thus, although an
increasing expression level does predict less divergence, divergence cannot be attributed simply
to stochastic fluctuations of the weakest expressed genes. In the adults, the relationship is more
linear, with the weakest expressed genes showing the highest divergence (Figure S19). Thus,
higher expression on the X in adults may at least partly explain the lower levels of divergence
relative to the embryos.
To clarify the relationship between expression level and chromosomal divergence, we bootstrap sampled genes from each chromosome while weighting their probability of being sampled
according to their expression level. To sample genes according to expression level we weighted
the probability of being sampled according to the cumulative distribution function of a normal
distribution with a specified mean expression level and standard deviation. We defined the standard deviation as the standard deviation of the whole expression level distribution divided by
the number of mean expression levels that were being sampled. Genes were then sampled with
replacement 10,000 times for each mean expression level for each chromosome in both the embryonic and adult datasets. Fewer mean expression levels were taken for the adult data due to
its lower expression level variance.
The results show that, in the embryo, divergence on the X is greater than the autosomes for
intermediate gene expression levels, but not when expression is high or low (Figure S3A). In
contrast to this result, in the adult data the X shows higher expression divergence when gene
expression is low or high (Figure S3B). Thus, the higher expression divergence of the X in the
embryos is not driven by expression levels at the extremes of the distribution.

Testing for sex ratio effects
While divergence on the X is not driven by particular periods during development, it is possible
that there is a bias in the direction of expression differences between species. For example, if
there was a persistent skew towards a male-biased sex ratio in one species relative to another
and if dosage compensation in males was incomplete, then we would expect X-linked genes
to show a skew towards lower expression in this species as the male-biased population would

17

amplify the incomplete dosage compensation. To test this, we contrasted normalized expression
in pairs of species and scored genes as up or down in one species relative to the other. We then
asked if the X-chromosome showed significant skews in the number of genes scored as up or
down in these species pairs relative to the autosomes. The results show this is not the case for
any species pair (Figure S4), and this is shown in more detail for the D. persimilis versus D.
pseudoobscura contrast (Figure S20), which is pertinent given that there is an excess of X chromosome divergence in this species comparison (P = 0.0042; Figures S1, S21). Therefore, there
do not appear to be systematic biases in the direction of expression differences between species
and hence this is unlikely to be a factor driving the higher divergence of the X chromosome.

Uncovering the relationship between expression evolution and excess chromosomal divergence
The discovery that different groups of genes exhibit differences in their chromosomal divergence in adults suggested that there may be a relationship between excess chromosomal divergence and the rate of gene expression evolution. To test this, we scored the ratio of mean
divergence of genes belonging to each percentile of each chromosome’s divergence distribution
relative to the same percentile of the other chromosomes. The results show that in both the
embryos and the adult males, excess divergence on the X chromosome increases as the genes
become more divergent while such a pattern is not seen consistently on any of the other chromosomes (Figure S22). In addition we find that while in the embryos most of the genes on
the X exhibit an excess of divergence relative to the autosomes, in adult males these genes are
restricted to a subset of those on the X. The top enriched biological functions for these genes
are primary sex determination, secondary metabolic process, and adult behavior (Table S10),
all likely to be fast-evolving traits and processes. It is interesting to note that in both cases, the
fastest evolving genes do not display an excess of divergence on the X. Overall, however, we
find that fast-evolving genes tend to diverge more on the X in both embryos and adult males.

Correcting for non-expressed/weakly expressed genes
In the embryonic time course, an initially bimodal gene expression distribution gradually becomes unimodal as the zygotic genome is switched on during embryogenesis (Figure S12). If
the X chromosome happened to be over-represented for genes in the lower mode of this bimodal distribution, then it is possible that much of the excess divergence we find on the X could
be driven by spurious divergence between non-expressed genes. Therefore, to test for this we
used the expectation-maximisation algorithm to determine a cutoff expression level (based on
time point 1) below which a gene could be considered as non-expressed at any time point (log2
expression of 8.513).
We then defined three gene sets based on increasingly more stringent criteria for being
thrown out from the analysis. The first set (termed “Two”) consists of genes that are not expressed in at least two species in at least one time point (1502 genes). The second set (“Six”)
18

consists of genes that are not expressed in at least six species in at least one time point (849
genes), and the final set (“Six-Eight”) consists of genes that are not expressed in at least six
species at every time point (536 genes). Expression distributions for these gene sets shows that
they increasingly capture more weakly expressed genes as the criteria for exclusion becomes
more stringent (Figure S23). When we compare gene expression divergence for the data set after
removing these gene sets, we find that the excess of divergence on the X is not affected (Figure
S24) showing that this effect is not driven by spurious divergence between non-expressed or
weakly expressed genes.

Mutation accumulation analysis
To determine whether the lower effective population size of the X chromosome might increase
the chance that it fixes weakly deleterious mutations, we used gene expression mutation accumulation data to assess potential chromosomal biases in the accumulation of gene expression
differences. We used jack-knifed mutational variance estimates scaled by residual variances to
provide estimates of the mutational heritability of gene expression changes between lines [35].
As a large fraction of the genes at both the late larval and puparium formation stages did not
exhibit measurable mutational heritabilities, we separated the genes with measurable estimates
(Figure 5A,B). In addition, we categorized genes as having measurable mutational heritabilities from those without and compared the ratios of these two categories across chromosomes
using contingency tables. The results were visualized using residual-based shading with the R
package ‘vcd’ [85] (Figure 5 C,D).

Embryonic tissue expression enrichment analysis
A hierarchically-arranged controlled vocabulary (CV) of embryonic tissue expression terms
based on an in situ expression data set [38] was used for assessing under- or over-representation
of expression patterns for genes on the Drosophila X chromosome. Enrichment of terms was
carried out in the R package ’topGO’ [86] using custom-written code. The parent-child algorithm was employed to control for the inheritance bias between parent and child terms in the CV
hierarchy [87] (Table S11). The resulting P-values were adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg
correction in the R package ‘multtest’ [88].

Multi-locus population genetic models of the faster-X effect
In all of our models, we assume that selection coefficients are equal in the two sexes, which
corresponds to the assumption of complete dosage compensation in [5], and, in the case of the
two-locus models, that there is a beneficial epistatic interaction between one of the alleles at
each locus. In addition, we assume that viability selection operates on the diploid zygotes, that
mating is random, and that double heterozygotes experience half of the fitness benefit of single
heterozygotes (Tables S12,13).
19

We derived genotype frequency recurrence equations to describe the evolutionary dynamics
in our models and then solved the equations numerically. To compare evolution in the equivalent X versus autosomal scenarios, we extracted the change in allele frequency of the cis-acting
beneficial allele between generations, ∆P . We used the ratio of selection gradients in the equivalent models as a comparative statistic. The selection gradient describes the change in relative
fitness as the allele frequency of the beneficial variant changes. Using the Robertson-Price
identity [89, 90] to describe the change in allele frequency, P , in terms of relative fitness, w̃,
∆P = Cov(w̃, P ),
and replacing with the regression coefficient, Cov(w̃, P ) = βw̃,P σP2 ,
dw̃
P (1 − P ),
dP
dw̃
, is equal to the change in allele frequency divided by its variance,
then the selection gradient, dP
∆P
˜ =
∆P
. We plot the ratio of selection gradients in the X versus autosomal cases (Figures
P (1−P )
6,S6).
∆P = βw̃,P σP2 =

Correlation-based measures of divergence
Spearman’s ρ was measured for pairs of chromosomes in pairs of species for both the embryonic
and adult data. Correlation coefficients were bootstrapped by resampling the genes 10,000
times on each chromosome separately (Figures 7A,8A). For the embryos, we used expression
averaged across time, and found that correlations derived from this measure agreed very well
with correlations derived from expression within single time points in terms of a reduction of
correlation on the X chromosome. In addition, we took the mean Canberra distance across
chromosomes for pairs of species, averaging it by dividing by the number of genes on each
chromosome separately (Figures 7B,8B).
The correlation approach captures the extent to which chromosomal subsets of genes tend
to conserve their expression relationships in pairs of species. However, this approach fails
to capture the level of conservation of gene expression in a chromosomal subset relative to
a separate chromosomal subset across pairs of species. For example, we might wish to ask
whether the expression relationship of genes on the X chromosome relative to the autosomal
arm 2L shares a conserved pattern in a pair of species. To answer questions of this nature,
we introduce a variant of Spearman’s correlation coefficient which allows us to rank genes in
a chromosomal subset relative to genes in a separate chromosomal subset for pairs of species.
For the correlation of subset A relative to subset B in two species we have
Pn
(xi − x̄A )(yiA:B − ȳA )
,
ρ̃A:B = q P i A:B
Pn
n
2
2
i (xiA:B − x̄A )
i (yiA:B − ȳA )

20

where xiA:B and yiA:B are the ranks of the i’th gene’s expression level (from the n genes that belong to subset A) relative to gene expression in subset B for species x and species y respectively.
Thus, this relative measure captures whether expression in subset A is co-ordinated relative to
subset B in pairs of species.
As it is established that correlation coefficients within subsets can vary, sometimes dramatically, from correlation at the level of aggregates (known as the Yule-Simpson effect [91–95]),
we believe that it is necessary to account for possible discrepancies when measuring correlation within subsets drawn from a larger population (Figure S25). When we measure relativised correlations for chromosomal subsets in the embryonic and adult data, we find that the
X chromosome displays a significantly higher correlation when correlating against an autosomal background in adult females (Figure S26). This suggests that in adult females the X is
generally more co-ordinated in relation to the autosomes than in relation to itself (P = 0.015;
Wilcoxon two-tailed test), a pattern that could be driven, in part, by gene interactions between
the X and the autosomes. More generally, this result highlights the importance of considering
cross-chromosome relationships when using correlation-based measures of divergence.

21

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge Julia Jarrells, Britta Jedamzik, and Nicola Gscheidel at the MPICBG Microarray Facility for their help with processing RNA samples for microarray hybridization. We thank Casey Bergman for helpful discussion and for proposing the analysis of differential rates of evolution on Muller’s elements, and the analysis of mutation accumulation data. We
also thank Nick Barton, Michael Hiller, and four anonymous reviewers for helpful comments
on the manuscript, and Iva Kelava for preparing Figures 7, 8, and S8–S10.

Author Contributions
DTG first discovered higher gene expression divergence on the X chromosome in Drosophila
embryos and conceived the branch length analysis. MAK, PT, and ATK conceived the embryonic inbred strain collections, and MAK conducted the experiments. ATK conceived and
conducted the gene expression and statistical analyses, and analysed the population genetics
models. ATK wrote the manuscript with support from co-authors.

22

References
1. Haldane JBS (1924) A mathematical theory of natural and artificial selection. part i.
Trans Camb Phil Soc 23: 19-41.
2. Muller HJ (1940) The New Systematics, Oxford University Press, chapter Bearings of
the Drosophila work on systematics. pp. 185-268.
3. Avery PJ (1984) The population genetics of haplo-diploids and x-linked genes. Genet
Res 44: 321-341.
4. Hartl DL (1971) Some aspects of natural selection in arrhenotokous populations. Am
Zool 11: 309-325.
5. Charlesworth B, Coyne J, Barton NH (1987) The relative rates of evolution of sex chromosomes and autosomes. Am Nat 130: 113-146.
6. Rice WR (1984) Sex chromosomes and the evolution of sexual dimorphism. Evolution
38: 735-742.
7. Vicoso B, Charlesworth B (2006) Evolution on the x chromosome: unusual patterns and
processes. Nat Rev Genet 7: 645–653.
8. Haldane JBS (1921) Sex-ratio and unisexual sterility in hybrid animals. J Genet 12:
101-109.
9. Gurbich TA, Bachtrog D (2008) Gene content evolution on the x chromosome. Curr
Opin Genet Dev 18: 493–498.
10. Skuse DH (2005) X-linked genes and mental functioning. Hum Mol Genet 14 Spec No
1: R27–R32.
11. Innocenti P, Morrow EH (2010) The sexually antagonistic genes of drosophila
melanogaster. PLoS Biol 8: e1000335.
12. Zechner U, Wilda M, Kehrer-Sawatzki H, Vogel W, Fundele R, et al. (2001) A high density of x-linked genes for general cognitive ability: a run-away process shaping human
evolution? Trends Genet 17: 697–701.
13. Dobzhansky T (1936) Studies on hybrid sterility. ii. localization of sterility factors in
drosophila pseudoobscura hybrids. Genetics 21: 113–135.
14. Templeton AR (1977) Analysis of head shape differences between two interfertile
species of hawaiian drosophila. Evolution 31: 630-641.

23

15. Coyne JA, Charlesworth B (1986) Location of an x-linked factor causing sterility in male
hybrids of drosophila simulans and d. mauritiana. Heredity (Edinb) 57: 243–246.
16. Lu J, Wu CI (2005) Weak selection revealed by the whole-genome comparison of the x
chromosome and autosomes of human and chimpanzee. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102:
4063–4067.
17. Consortium CSA (2005) Initial sequence of the chimpanzee genome and comparison
with the human genome. Nature 437: 69–87.
18. Hvilsom C, Qian Y, Bataillon T, Li Y, Mailund T, et al. (2012) Extensive x-linked adaptive evolution in central chimpanzees. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109: 2054–2059.
19. Betancourt AJ, Presgraves DC, Swanson WJ (2002) A test for faster x evolution in
drosophila. Mol Biol Evol 19: 1816–1819.
20. Thornton K, Bachtrog D, Andolfatto P (2006) X chromosomes and autosomes evolve at
similar rates in drosophila: no evidence for faster-x protein evolution. Genome Res 16:
498–504.
21. Connallon T (2007) Adaptive protein evolution of x-linked and autosomal genes in
drosophila: implications for faster-x hypotheses. Mol Biol Evol 24: 2566–2572.
22. Thornton K, Long M (2002) Rapid divergence of gene duplicates on the drosophila
melanogaster x chromosome. Mol Biol Evol 19: 918–925.
23. Counterman BA, Ortz-Barrientos D, Noor MAF (2004) Using comparative genomic data
to test for fast-x evolution. Evolution 58: 656–660.
24. Thornton K, Long M (2005) Excess of amino acid substitutions relative to polymorphism
between x-linked duplications in drosophila melanogaster. Mol Biol Evol 22: 273–284.
25. Hu TT, Eisen MB, Thornton KR, Andolfatto P (2012) A second generation assembly of
the drosophila simulans genome provides new insights into patterns of lineage-specific
divergence. Genome Res .
26. Bachtrog D, Jensen JD, Zhang Z (2009) Accelerated adaptive evolution on a newly
formed x chromosome. PLoS Biol 7: e82.
27. Jaquiery J, Stoeckel S, Rispe C, Mieuzet L, Legeai F, et al. (2012) Accelerated evolution
of sex chromosomes in aphids, an x0 system. Mol Biol Evol 29: 837–847.
28. Mank JE, Axelsson E, Ellegren H (2007) Fast-x on the z: rapid evolution of sex-linked
genes in birds. Genome Res 17: 618–624.

24

29. Andolfatto P (2005) Adaptive evolution of non-coding dna in drosophila. Nature 437:
1149–1152.
30. Kalinka AT, Varga KM, Gerrard DT, Preibisch S, Corcoran DL, et al. (2010) Gene expression divergence recapitulates the developmental hourglass model. Nature 468: 811–
814.
31. Zhang Y, Sturgill D, Parisi M, Kumar S, Oliver B (2007) Constraint and turnover in
sex-biased gene expression in the genus drosophila. Nature 450: 233–237.
32. Ayroles JF, Carbone MA, Stone EA, Jordan KW, Lyman RF, et al. (2009) Systems genetics of complex traits in drosophila melanogaster. Nat Genet 41: 299–307.
33. Mackay TFC, Richards S, Stone EA, Barbadilla A, Ayroles JF, et al. (2012) The
drosophila melanogaster genetic reference panel. Nature 482: 173–178.
34. Vicoso B, Charlesworth B (2009) Effective population size and the faster-x effect: an
extended model. Evolution 63: 2413–2426.
35. Rifkin SA, Houle D, Kim J, White KP (2005) A mutation accumulation assay reveals a
broad capacity for rapid evolution of gene expression. Nature 438: 220–223.
36. Houle D, Morikawa B, Lynch M (1996) Comparing mutational variabilities. Genetics
143: 1467–1483.
37. Mikhaylova LM, Nurminsky DI (2011) Lack of global meiotic sex chromosome inactivation, and paucity of tissue-specific gene expression on the drosophila x chromosome.
BMC Biol 9: 29.
38. Tomancak P, Berman BP, Beaton A, Weiszmann R, Kwan E, et al. (2007) Global analysis
of patterns of gene expression during drosophila embryogenesis. Genome Biol 8: R145.
39. Franke A, Dernburg A, Bashaw GJ, Baker BS (1996) Evidence that msl-mediated dosage
compensation in drosophila begins at blastoderm. Development 122: 2751–2760.
40. Lott SE, Villalta JE, Schroth GP, Luo S, Tonkin LA, et al. (2011) Noncanonical compensation of zygotic x transcription in early drosophila melanogaster development revealed
through single-embryo rna-seq. PLoS Biol 9: e1000590.
41. Huang W, Richards S, Carbone MA, Zhu D, Anholt RRH, et al. (2012) Epistasis dominates the genetic architecture of drosophila quantitative traits. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
109: 15553–15559.
42. Connallon T, Clark AG (2010) Sex linkage, sex-specific selection, and the role of recombination in the evolution of sexually dimorphic gene expression. Evolution 64: 3417–
3442.
25

43. Llopart A (2012) The rapid evolution of x-linked male-biased gene expression and the
large-x effect in drosophila yakuba, d. santomea and their hybrids. Mol Biol Evol 29:
3873-3886.
44. Brawand D, Soumillon M, Necsulea A, Julien P, Csrdi G, et al. (2011) The evolution of
gene expression levels in mammalian organs. Nature 478: 343–348.
45. Good JM, Giger T, Dean MD, Nachman MW (2010) Widespread over-expression of the
x chromosome in sterile fhybrid mice. PLoS Genet 6.
46. Meisel RP, Malone JH, Clark AG (2012) Faster-x evolution of gene expression in
drosophila. PLoS Genet 8: e1003013.
47. Singh ND, Macpherson JM, Jensen JD, Petrov DA (2007) Similar levels of x-linked
and autosomal nucleotide variation in african and non-african populations of drosophila
melanogaster. BMC Evol Biol 7: 202.
48. Singh ND, Davis JC, Petrov DA (2005) X-linked genes evolve higher codon bias in
drosophila and caenorhabditis. Genetics 171: 145–155.
49. Singh ND, Larracuente AM, Clark AG (2008) Contrasting the efficacy of selection on
the x and autosomes in drosophila. Mol Biol Evol 25: 454–467.
50. Vicoso B, Haddrill PR, Charlesworth B (2008) A multispecies approach for comparing
sequence evolution of x-linked and autosomal sites in drosophila. Genet Res (Camb) 90:
421–431.
51. Takahashi KH, Tanaka K, Itoh M, Takano-Shimizu T (2009) Reduced x-linked rare polymorphism in males in comparison to females of drosophila melanogaster. J Hered 100:
97–105.
52. Campos JL, Charlesworth B, Haddrill PR (2012) Molecular evolution in nonrecombining
regions of the drosophila melanogaster genome. Genome Biol Evol 4: 278–288.
53. Andolfatto P, Wong KM, Bachtrog D (2011) Effective population size and the efficacy
of selection on the x chromosomes of two closely related drosophila species. Genome
Biol Evol 3: 114–128.
54. Wittkopp PJ, Haerum BK, Clark AG (2004) Evolutionary changes in cis and trans gene
regulation. Nature 430: 85–88.
55. Lemos B, Araripe LO, Fontanillas P, Hartl DL (2008) Dominance and the evolutionary
accumulation of cis- and trans-effects on gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
105: 14471–14476.

26

56. Wittkopp PJ, Haerum BK, Clark AG (2008) Regulatory changes underlying expression
differences within and between drosophila species. Nat Genet 40: 346–350.
57. Wang HY, Fu Y, McPeek MS, Lu X, Nuzhdin S, et al. (2008) Complex genetic interactions underlying expression differences between drosophila races: analysis of chromosome substitutions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105: 6362–6367.
58. Wittkopp PJ, Haerum BK, Clark AG (2008) Independent effects of cis- and transregulatory variation on gene expression in drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 178: 1831–
1835.
59. McManus CJ, Coolon JD, Duff MO, Eipper-Mains J, Graveley BR, et al. (2010) Regulatory divergence in drosophila revealed by mrna-seq. Genome Res 20: 816–825.
60. Graze RM, McIntyre LM, Main BJ, Wayne ML, Nuzhdin SV (2009) Regulatory divergence in drosophila melanogaster and d. simulans, a genomewide analysis of allelespecific expression. Genetics 183: 547–61, 1SI-21SI.
61. Lu X, Shapiro JA, Ting CT, Li Y, Li C, et al. (2010) Genome-wide misexpression of
x-linked versus autosomal genes associated with hybrid male sterility. Genome Res 20:
1097–1102.
62. Stern DL (2000) Evolutionary developmental biology and the problem of variation. Evolution 54: 1079–1091.
63. Prud’homme B, Gompel N, Carroll SB (2007) Emerging principles of regulatory evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 Suppl 1: 8605–8612.
64. Wray GA (2007) The evolutionary significance of cis-regulatory mutations. Nat Rev
Genet 8: 206–216.
65. Rebeiz M, Pool JE, Kassner VA, Aquadro CF, Carroll SB (2009) Stepwise modification
of a modular enhancer underlies adaptation in a drosophila population. Science 326:
1663–1667.
66. Peter IS, Davidson EH (2011) Evolution of gene regulatory networks controlling body
plan development. Cell 144: 970–985.
67. Burke MK, Dunham JP, Shahrestani P, Thornton KR, Rose MR, et al. (2010) Genomewide analysis of a long-term evolution experiment with drosophila. Nature 467: 587–
590.
68. Orr HA, Betancourt AJ (2001) Haldane’s sieve and adaptation from the standing genetic
variation. Genetics 157: 875–884.

27

69. Sellis D, Callahan BJ, Petrov DA, Messer PW (2011) Heterozygote advantage as a natural consequence of adaptation in diploids. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108: 20666–20671.
70. Waddington CH (1942) Canalization of development and the inheritance of acquired
characters. Nature 150: 563-565.
71. Fisher RA (1928) The possible modification of the response of the wild type to recurrent
mutations. Am Nat 62: 115-126.
72. Bourguet D (1999) The evolution of dominance. Heredity 83: 1-4.
73. Proulx SR, Phillips PC (2005) The opportunity for canalization and the evolution of
genetic networks. Am Nat 165: 147–162.
74. Billiard S, Castric V (2011) Evidence for fisher’s dominance theory: how many ’special
cases’? Trends Genet 27: 441–445.
75. Wagner A (2008) Robustness and evolvability: a paradox resolved. Proc Biol Sci 275:
91–100.
76. Masel J, Trotter MV (2010) Robustness and evolvability. Trends Genet 26: 406–414.
77. Draghi JA, Parsons TL, Wagner GP, Plotkin JB (2010) Mutational robustness can facilitate adaptation. Nature 463: 353–355.
78. Kerr MK, Martin M, Churchill GA (2000) Analysis of variance for gene expression
microarray data. J Comput Biol 7: 819–837.
79. Smyth GK (2005) Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Solutions using R and
Bioconductor, Springer, chapter Limma: linear models for microarray data. pp. 397420.
80. Felsenstein J (1989) Phylip - phylogeny inference package (version 3.2). Cladistics 5:
164-166.
81. Markow TA, O’Grady PM (2007) Drosophila biology in the genomic age. Genetics 177:
1269–1276.
82. R Development Core Team (2012) R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL http:
//www.R-project.org/. ISBN 3-900051-07-0.
83. Ranz JM, Castillo-Davis CI, Meiklejohn CD, Hartl DL (2003) Sex-dependent gene expression and evolution of the drosophila transcriptome. Science 300: 1742–1745.

28

84. Meiklejohn CD, Parsch J, Ranz JM, Hartl DL (2003) Rapid evolution of male-biased
gene expression in drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100: 9894–9899.
85. Zeileis A, Meyer D, Hornik K (2007) Residual-based shadings for visualizing (conditional) independence. J Comp Graph Stat 16: 507-525.
86. Alexa A, Rahnenfhrer J, Lengauer T (2006) Improved scoring of functional groups from
gene expression data by decorrelating go graph structure. Bioinformatics 22: 1600–
1607.
87. Grossmann S, Bauer S, Robinson PN, Vingron M (2007) Improved detection of overrepresentation of gene-ontology annotations with parent child analysis. Bioinformatics 23:
3024–3031.
88. Pollard KS, Gilbert HN, Ge Y, S T, Dudoit S (2003) multtest: Resampling-based multiple
hypothesis testing. Technical report, R package version 2.8.0.
89. Robertson A (1966) A mathematical model of the culling process in dairy cattle. Anim
Prod 8: 95-108.
90. Price GR (1970) Selection and covariance. Nature 227: 520–521.
91. Yule GU (1903) Notes on the theory of association of attributes in statistics. Biometrika
2: 121-134.
92. Simpson EH (1951) The interpretation of interaction in contingency tables. J Roy Statist
Soc B 13: 238-241.
93. Blyth CR (1972) On simpson’s paradox and the sure-thing principle. J of the American
Statistical Association 67: 364-366.
94. Wagner CH (1982) Simpson’s paradox in real life. The American Statistician 36: 46-48.
95. Wilcox AJ (2001) On the importance–and the unimportance–of birthweight. Int J Epidemiol 30: 1233–1241.

29

Figures
Embryos
Species

Log Fold Change

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5

4
3
2
0

1

Divergence

Strains

B

5

A

2L

2R
3L
3R
Chromosome

2L

X

2R
3L
3R
Chromosome

X

D
35

C

15

20

25

30

2L
2R
3L
3R
X

1.6

0

0

5

2

10

Density

6
4

Density

8

2L
2R
3L
3R
X

1.8

2.0

2.2

2.4

2.6

1.25

Bootstrapped Mean Divergence

1.30

1.35 1.40

1.45

1.50

Bootstrapped Mean Log Fold Change

Figure 1. Gene expression divergence is higher on the X chromosome in Drosophila
embryos and lower in D. melanogaster strains.
The distributions of per gene expression divergence between Drosophila species separated
onto each chromosome for A, embryos, and B, inbred strains of D. melanogaster. Divergence
is measured per gene as the summed branch lengths for each gene tree for between-species
data, and as mean log fold change for inbred strains as described in the Methods. Boxes show
the upper and lower quartiles together with the median, error bars encompass data within 1.5
times the inter-quartile range, and blue circles indicate the means. Panels C and D show, for
embryos and strains respectively, the distribution of 10,000 bootstrapped mean divergences for
each chromosome using frequency polygons.

30

3R

20

1.20

1.0
0.8

X

60
50

2L
2R
3L
3R
X

0.40

1.25

1.0

0.55

1.0

1.5

Strains

0.0

0.5

0.50

0.5

2.0

Mean Log Fold Change

2.5

0.45

Bootstrapped Mean Log Fold Change

F

Species

1.5

Divergence

3R

0
1.15

Bootstrapped Mean Divergence

2L

2R

3L

3R

Chromosome

30

G

X

2L

H

3L

3R

Chromosome

X

2L
2R
3L
3R
X

30
0

0

5

10

10

20

15

20

2R

40

2L
2R
3L
3R
X

25

FEMALES

3L

Chromosome

10

10
5
0
1.10

E

2R

20

15

Density

Density

2L
2R
3L
3R
X

0.6

2L

D

30

X

0.4

Mean Log Fold Change
3L

Chromosome

0.2

2.0
1.5

Divergence

1.0
0.5
0.0

2R

25

MALES

2L

C

Strains

40

2.5

B

30

Species

A

1.05

1.10

1.15

1.20

0.50

0.55

0.60

0.65

0.70

Bootstrapped Mean Log Fold Change

Bootstrapped Mean Divergence

Figure 2. Gene expression divergence is not higher on the X chromosome in Drosophila
adults but is lower in D. melanogaster adult strains.
The distributions of per gene expression divergence between Drosophila species separated
onto each chromosome for A, adult males, B, inbred adult male strains of D. melanogaster, E,
adult females, and F, inbred adult male strains of D. melanogaster. Divergence is measured
per gene as the summed branch lengths for each gene tree for between-species data, and as
mean log fold change for inbred strains as described in the Methods. Boxes show the upper
and lower quartiles together with the median, error bars encompass data within 1.5 times the
inter-quartile range, and blue circles indicate the means. Panels C, D, G, and H show, for adult
males, inbred adult strains, adult females, and inbred adult female strains respectively, the
distribution of 10,000 bootstrapped mean divergences for each chromosome using frequency
polygons.

31

25
15
0

5

10

Density

20

t1
t2
t3
t4
t5
t6
t7
t8
AM
AF

0.9

1.0

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

Bootstrapped Mean X/A Divergence Ratio

Figure 3. The X chromosome exhibits an excess of divergence throughout
exmbryogenesis.
Bootstrapped mean X/A divergence ratios for each time point throughout embryogenesis.
Genes were resampled 10,000 times on each chromosome and the X/A ratio was scored for
each time point separately. Bootstrapped distributions are shown as frequency polygons.
Dashed green and black lines represent adult males (AM) and adult females (AF) respectively,
and the vertical dashed red line marks an X/A ratio of 1.

32

A

B

0.3
0.1

0.2

Divergence

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.0

0.0

0.1

Divergence

Adults
0.4

Embryos

2L

2R

3L

3R

X

2L

Chromosome

2R

3L

3R

X

Chromosome

Figure 4. Expression divergence is higher for the ancestral branch of the neo-X (Muller
element D).
A, Per-gene, per-chromosome distributions of the length of the ancestral branch leading to the
obscura sub-group (D. persimilis and D. pseudoobscura; see Figure S1) in the embryonic data
divided by the sum of all branch lengths (3L is the neo-X chromosome in the obscura
sub-group). B, Per-gene, per-chromosome distributions of the length of the branch leading to
D. pseudoobscura in the adult data divided by the sum of all branch lengths.

33

Late Larva

Pre-pupa

3R

X

Mutational Heritability
Zero

2L

Non-Zero

Pearson
Residuals:
2.59
2.00

2R
3L
3R
X

4.0e-05

D

0.00

-2.00

2L

2R

2L

-3.68

P-value =
5.7 x 10-7

3L

3R

Chromosome

X

Mutational Heritability
Zero

Chromosome

C

Chromosome

3L

Chromosome

0.0e+00

2R

2.0e-05

Mutational Heritability

0.0e+00

Mutational Heritability

2L

6.0e-05

B

2.0e-05 4.0e-05 6.0e-05 8.0e-05

A

Non-Zero Pearson

Residuals:
2.35
2.00

2R
3L
3R
X

0.00

-2.00

-3.59

P-value =
6.5 x 10-6

Figure 5. Gene expression mutational heritabilities are lower for the Drosophila X
chromosome.
Gene expression mutational heritabilities, estimated from mutation accumulation lines of D.
melanogaster [35], separated onto chromosomes. Genes with measurable mutational
heritabilities are shown for the late larva (A) and the pre-pupa (B). In C and D genes are
categorized as displaying zero or non-zero mutational heritabilities for late larva and pre-pupa
respectively and depicted using mosaic plots where the area in the rectangles is proportional to
the number in that category combination. Pearson residual shading is used to depict deviations
from null expectations – blue (excess) and red (paucity) colours indicate deviations from the
expectation under the null hypothesis that the two variables, mutational heritability and
chromosome, are independent [85]. P -values refer to the probability of independence
(Chi-squared test).
34

40
30

X
X
X
X

20

∆˜ P =

∆P
P ( 1− P )

0

10

∆˜ P X
∆˜ P A

: X ÷ A : A, R = 0.1
:A÷ A :A
: A ÷ A : A, h = 0
÷ A

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

P
Figure 6. The faster-X effect is greatest when beneficially-interacting loci are linked on
the same chromosome.
The ratio of selection gradients for X-linked models versus their equivalent autosomal cases as
a function of allele frequency. Blue points represent the case where both loci are linked on the
same chromosome, orange and green points represent the case where the loci are on different
chromosomes, and the red points are for the one-locus scenario. Unless otherwise stated in the
legend, recombination rates, R, are equal to 0.5 (free recombination) and the dominance
coefficient, h, is 0.01 (h = 0 is close to identical to h = 0.01 in the one-locus case and hence is
not shown). The dashed line indicates a ratio of 1.
35

A

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

Correlation
(Spearman’s ρ)

0.5

an-me

an-pr

an-ps

an-si

an-vi

me-pr

me-ps

me-si

me-vi

pr-ps

pr-si

pr-vi

ps-si

ps-vi

si-vi

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

2L 2R 3L 3R X

2L 2R 3L 3R X

2L 2R 3L 3R X

2L 2R 3L 3R X

2L 2R 3L 3R X

Chromosome

B
0.12
0.10

an-me

an-pr

an-ps

an-si

an-vi

me-pr

me-ps

me-si

me-vi

pr-ps

pr-si

pr-vi

ps-si

ps-vi

si-vi

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

Distance
(Canberra)

0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

2L 2R 3L 3R X

2L 2R 3L 3R X

2L 2R 3L 3R X

2L 2R 3L 3R X

2L 2R 3L 3R X

Chromosome

Figure 7. Divergence on the X in embryos is greater using both Spearman’s ρ and the
Canberra distance.
Bootstrapped distributions of A, Spearman’s ρ (divergence is 1 − ρ) and B, the mean Canberra
distance across chromosomes in Drosophila embryos for all pair-wise species comparisons.
36

Females

Males

A

Correlation (Spearman’s ρ)
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

an-me

me-ya

mo-vi

ps-vi

vi-ya

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

an-me

me-ya

mo-vi

ps-vi

vi-ya

2L 2R 3L 3R X

2L 2R 3L 3R X

B

2L 2R 3L 3R X

2L 2R 3L 3R X

Distance (Canberra)
0.08

Males

2L 2R 3L 3R X

0.07

an-me

me-ya

mo-vi

ps-vi

vi-ya

an-me

me-ya

mo-vi

ps-vi

vi-ya

0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

Females

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

2L 2R 3L 3R X

2L 2R 3L 3R X

2L 2R 3L 3R X

2L 2R 3L 3R X

2L 2R 3L 3R X

Figure 8. Divergence on the X in adults is greater using Spearman’s ρ, but not the
Canberra distance.
Bootstrapped distributions of A, Spearman’s ρ (divergence is 1 − ρ) and B, the mean Canberra
distance across chromosomes in Drosophila males and females for a selection of pair-wise
species comparisons (all pair-wise comparisons are shown in Figures S8,S9).

37

Supplementary Figures

Adults

Embryos
D. melanogaster

X
Autosomes

D. simulans

D. melanogaster
D. simulans
D. yakuba

D. ananassae

D. ananassae
D. persimilis
D. pseudoobscura
D. pseudoobscura

D. mojavensis

D. virilis

D. virilis

Supplementary Figure 1. Phylogenies of the species analyzed with the relative mean lengths
of each branch for genes on the X vs genes on the autosomes depicted in blue and red
respectively. Bold branches are significantly longer for genes on the X chromosome based on
10,000 bootstrap replicates at the 5% level.

38

Males
Male-biased

1.5

Divergence

1.0

1.5
0.5

0.5

1.0

Divergence

2.0

2.0

2.5

3.0

2.5

Female-biased

2L

2R

3L

3R

X

2L

2R

Chromosome

3L

3R

X

Chromosome

Females
Male-biased

1.5

Divergence

0.0

0.5

0.5

1.0

1.0

Divergence

1.5

2.0

2.0

2.5

Female-biased

2L

2R

3L

3R

X

2L

Chromosome

2R

3L

3R

X

Chromosome

Supplementary Figure 2. Divergence of gene expression across chromosomes in both adult
males and females for genes with sex-biased expression patterns.

39

Embryos

Adults

B

3.5

A

1.4

1.6

Autosomes
X

0.8

1.5

1.0

1.2

Bootstrapped Divergence

3.0
2.5
2.0

Bootstrapped Divergence

Autosomes
X

}

11

12

13

8

9

10

11

}

}

10

}

}

9

}

}

8

}

}

7

}

}

}
6

}

}
5

12

Mean Expression Level

Mean Expression Level

Supplementary Figure 3. Embryonic expression divergence on the X is not driven by
extreme expression levels.
Bootstrapped divergence measures generated by resampling genes according to their
expression levels. Genes were resampled per chromosome using 10,000 bootstrap replicates
for both embryos, A, and adults, B. There are more expression levels sampled for embryos
because they have a broader gene expression level distribution than the adults.

40

3R

X

2L

Down
Expression

3R

X

Up

0.000

Chromosome
3L

2R

3R

X

Down
0.000

2L

Pearson
residuals:
0.494

Chromosome
3L

2R

3R

X
Pearson
residuals:
0.456

0.000

0.000

Up

−0.930
p−value =
0.2427

−0.986
p−value =
0.38826

2L

2R

Chromosome
3L

3R

−0.597
p−value =
0.75273

2L

X

2R

Chromosome
3L

3R

2L

Pearson
residuals:
0.692

Chromosome
3L

2R

3R

−0.469
p−value =
0.95328

X
2L

Pearson
residuals:
0.663

2R

Chromosome
3L

3R

X
Pearson
residuals:
0.640

Down

Down
Expression

Down

Down

0.000

0.000

Up

0.000

Up

0.000

Up

Up

Expression

−0.483
p−value =
0.9019

X

Pearson
residuals:
0.344

mel

2L

Pearson
residuals:
0.586

Expression

0.000

Chromosome
3L

2R

Up

Down
Expression

Chromosome
3L

Pearson
residuals:
0.987

Up

ana

2R

Down

2L

Pearson
residuals:
0.921

Expression

X

vir

Expression

3R

Down

Chromosome
3L

sim

Expression

2R

pse

Up

2L

per

Expression

mel

−0.667
p−value =
0.78471

−0.346
p−value =
0.94584

2L

2R

Chromosome
3L

3R

−0.783
p−value =
0.78522

X

2L

Chromosome
3L

3R

X

2L

Pearson
residuals:
0.754

2R

Chromosome
3L

3R

X
Pearson
residuals:
0.785

Down

0.000

Up

Up

0.000

Expression

Expression

Expression

0.000

Up

per

2R

Down

Down

Pearson
residuals:
0.532

−0.636
p−value =
0.57645

−0.522
p−value =
0.94839

−0.718
p−value =
0.74141

2L

2R

Chromosome
3L

3R

−0.786
p−value =
0.71841

X
2L

Pearson
residuals:
0.619

Chromosome
3L

3R

X

Expression

Down

Down

Pearson
residuals:
1.06

0.000

0.00

Up

Up

Expression

pse

2R

−0.571
p−value =
0.89171

−1.07
p−value =
0.29202

2L

2R

Chromosome
3L

3R

X

Expression

Down

Pearson
residuals:
0.915

0.000

Up

sim

−0.847
p−value =
0.65307

Supplementary Figure 4. Mosaic plots for all pair-wise species comparisons of normalized
gene expression categorised as up or down relative to one of the species. Mosaic plots
visualize categorical data (contingency table) using rectangles that are proportional to the
number of counts in each row-column combination, and highlight in red variable combinations
that have less than expected numbers and in blue those that have more than expected based on
Pearson residuals [85]. P -values are based on Chi-squared tests, which test whether the two
main variables, Expression and Chromosome, are independent.

41

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

Divergence

●

2L

2R

●

●

0.0

0.1

0.2

●
●

3L

3R

X

Chromosome

Supplementary Figure 5. The lengths of the summed terminal branches leading to D.
persimilis and D. pseudoobscura as a fraction of the total branch length for Drosophila
embryos.

42

♂=0)

0

1.00

1.02

10

∆˜ P A

1.04

20

∆˜ P A (R

1.06

1.08

1.10

40
30
∆˜ P X
∆˜ P A

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

P

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

P

Supplementary Figure 6. Selection gradient ratios when there is no recombination between
homologous pairs of male autosomes. The left panel shows the ratio when both loci are
X-linked versus both loci being linked on the same autosome but with no male recombination.
The right panel shows the ratio for autosomes when there is no recombination in males versus
the case when there is. Parameter values: recombination rates, R, are equal to 0.5 (free
recombination) and the dominance coefficient, h, is 0.01. The dashed line indicates a ratio of 1.

43

Mel-sim male-bias in
Females

1.5
1.0

1.5

0.0

0.5

0.5

1.0

Divergence

2.0

2.0

2.5

2.5

3.0

Mel-sim male-bias in
Males

2L

2R

3L

3R

X

2L

2R

3L

3R

X

Chromosome

Supplementary Figure 7. Divergence of gene expression across chromosomes in both adult
males and females for 656 genes with male-biased expression in either D. melanogaster or D.
simulans.

44

Correlation (Spearman’s ρ)
Males
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

an-me

an-mo

an-ps

an-si

an-vi

an-ya

me-mo

me-ps

me-si

me-vi
2L 2R 3L 3R X

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

Females

me-ya

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

an-me

me-ya

mo-ps

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

an-mo

mo-ps

mo-si

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

an-ps

mo-si

mo-vi

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

an-si

mo-vi

mo-ya

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

an-vi

mo-ya

ps-si

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

an-ya

ps-si

ps-vi

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

me-mo

ps-vi

ps-ya

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

me-ps

ps-ya

si-vi

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

me-si

si-vi

si-ya

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

me-vi

si-ya

2L 2R 3L 3R X 0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

vi-ya
2L 2R 3L 3R X

45

vi-ya
2L 2R 3L 3R X

Supplementary Figure 8. Bootstrapped (10,000 replicates) Spearman’s ρ correlation
coefficients for adult males and females for all pair-wise species comparisons.

Distance (Canberra)
Males

Females

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

an-me

me-ya

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

an-me

me-ya

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

an-mo

mo-ps

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

an-mo

mo-ps

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

an-ps

mo-si

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

an-ps

mo-si

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

an-si

mo-vi

an-si

mo-vi

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

mo-ya
an-vi
an-ya

ps-si

me-mo

ps-vi

me-ps

ps-ya

0.052
0.050

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

si-vi

0.048

me-si

0.046

me-vi

2L 2R 3L 3R X

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

si-ya

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

mo-ya
an-vi
an-ya

ps-si

me-mo

ps-vi

me-ps

ps-ya

0.052

me-si

2L 2R 3L 3R X

0.048
0.046

me-vi

2L 2R 3L 3R X

vi-ya

si-vi

0.050

si-ya

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03

vi-ya

2L 2R 3L 3R X

Supplementary Figure 9. Bootstrapped (10,000 replicates) Mean Canberra distances for
adult males and females for all pair-wise species comparisons.
46

Embryo

Adult

Expression

Species 1

Species 2

ρ<0

ρ>0

Species 1
Species 2
gene

A

B

A

B

Supplementary Figure 10. A schematic depicting gene expression in two genes showing why
Spearman’s ρ would produce a positive correlation despite large differences in expression level
and a negative correlation when expression co-ordination between genes is diminished
regardless of how much absolute gene expression levels have changed.

47

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

Bootstrapped Correlation of Gene Expression

Embryos

Females

Males

Supplementary Figure 11. All bootstrapped Spearman’s ρ correlations across all
chromosomes for embryos and adult males and females.

48

t2

t3

t4
700
600
500
400

Frequency

800

800

600
Frequency

Frequency
15

200
0
5

Log Expression

15

t8

200
10

10
Log Expression

0
5

300

5

600

600
200

400

Frequency

15

t7

0
15

10
Log Expression

800

800
600
400
200

10
Log Expression

200
5

t6

0

5

100

15

Log Expression

t5

Frequency

10

0

0
5

400

15

Log Expression

400

10

400

Frequency

200
100

200
100
0

0

5

300

500
400

Frequency

300

600
400
200

Frequency

500

600

600

800

700

700

t1

10
Log Expression

15

20

5

10

15

Log Expression

Supplementary Figure 12. The distribution of gene expression levels during embryogenesis
of D. melanogaster showing that an initially bimodal distribution, where the lower mode
represents unexpressed zygotic genes, becomes a unimodal distribution through time as the
zygotic genome is activated.

49

12
8
6

D. ananassae

4

Log2 Expression

10

D. virilis

0

2

Vinc (X-linked)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Time

Supplementary Figure 13. Log2 gene expression time course for the X-linked gene Vinculin
(Vinc) for D. ananassae and D. virilis showing divergence across the whole time course.

50

Embryos

1.14
1.12
1.10

Mean Re−sampled Divergence

1.6

1.06

1.08

2.0
1.8

Mean Re−sampled Divergence

2.2

1.16

Adults

2L

2R

3L

3R

2L

Chromosome

2R

3L

3R

Chromosome

Supplementary Figure 14. The distributions of resampled mean divergences for each
autosome with the mean of the X chromosome indicated by a dashed red line for embryos and
adults. Autosomal genes were resampled so that they matched the number of genes on the X
chromosome and in each of 10,000 resamples the mean divergence per chromosome was
recorded.

51

2.5
2.0
1.5
0.0

0.5

1.0

Divergence

Unbiased

Female

Male

Sex−biased expression

Supplementary Figure 15. Divergence of gene expression in adult males for genes that show
unbiased, male-biased, and female-biased expression patterns.

52

2.5
2.0
1.5
0.0

0.5

1.0

Divergence

Unbiased

Female

Male

Sex−biased expression

Supplementary Figure 16. Divergence of gene expression in adult females for genes that
show unbiased, male-biased, and female-biased expression patterns.

53

2.5
2.0
1.5
0.0

0.5

1.0

Divergence

All

Mel−Sim Male Biased

Supplementary Figure 17. Divergence of gene expression in adult males for 656 genes with
male-biased expression in either D. melanogaster or D. simulans relative to all genes in the
dataset.

54

Adults

q

q

q

q

0

q
q

q

q

q

−2

−1

−1

q

Normalised expression level

0

Normalised expression level

1

1

2

Embryos

2L

2R

3L

3R

X

2L

Chromosome

2R

3L

3R

X

Chromosome

Supplementary Figure 18. Gene expression level by chromosome for embryos and adults in
the Drosophila data sets. Expression level is shown as the deviation of each gene’s mean log2
expression level from the global mean.

55

Adults

0

T−statistic

−3

−2

−2

−1

0

T−statistic

1

2

2

4

3

Embryos

0

10

20

30

40

50

0

60

20

40

60

80

100

120

Ranked Expression Level (low to high)

Ranked Expression Level (low to high)

Supplementary Figure 19. The relationship between expression level and divergence for
embryos and adults in the Drosophila data sets. Genes are ranked by expression, from lowest
to highest, binned into groups of 50, and their mean divergence deviation from the global mean
(log divergence) is shown as a T-statistic, with significant values highlighted in red. A LOESS
curve is fitted to the data.

56

2L

2R

Chromosome
3L

3R

X

Expression

Down

Pearson
residuals:
0.532

Up

0.000

−0.522
p−value =
0.94839

Supplementary Figure 20. Mosaic plots for the D. persimilis-D. pseudoobscura species
comparison of normalized gene expression categorised as up or down relative to one of the
species. Mosaic plots visualize categorical data (contingency table) using rectangles that are
proportional to the number of counts in each row-column combination, and highlight in red
variable combinations that have less than expected numbers and in blue those that have more
than expected based on Pearson residuals [85]. P -values are based on Chi-squared tests, which
test whether the two main variables, Expression and Chromosome, are independent.

57

1.0
0.8
0.6

Divergence

0.4

●
●
●

●

2L

2R

3L

0.0

0.2

●

3R

X

Chromosome

Supplementary Figure 21. Gene expression divergence per chromosome along the branches
leading to D. persimilis and D. pseudoobscura.

58

2R

3L

X

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

1.3
0.9

0.9

0.90

0.95

1.0

1.00

1.0
0

1.1

1.10
1.05

1.1

0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
100

1.2

1.15

0.95

1.2

1.20

1.00

1.20
1.15
1.10
1.05
1.00
0.95
0.90

80

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

1.02

1.00

1.00

1.02

0.96

1.00

0.98

0.95

0.94

0.98

0.90

0.94

1.00

0.96

1.05

0.98

1.10

1.15

1.00

1.20

1.02

1.04

1.04

1.25

60

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

1.04

0

1.02

1.20

1.10

1.01
0.95

0.96

0.95

0.96

0.95

1.00

0.97

0.98

1.05

1.00

0.98

1.10

0.99

1.00

1.05

1.15

1.00

1.00

Ratio of Chromosomal Divergence

40

0.85

Adult
(Females):

20

0.95

Adult
(Males):

0

0.90

Embryos:

3R
1.25

2L

Ranked Divergence
(percentile of chromosomal divergence
distribution)

Supplementary Figure 22. Fast-evolving genes tend to diverge more on the X in embryos
and adult males.
The mean ratio of chromosomal divergence to divergence in the rest of the genome. Mean
divergence is plotted for genes belonging to each percentile of a particular chromosome’s
divergence distribution (separately for 2L, 2R, etc) relative to genes in the same percentile of
the divergence distribution of the the rest of the genome (all other chromosomes). The results
show that, for the X chromosome, the excess of X/A divergence is higher for faster-evolving
genes in both embryos and adult males. Lines are LOESS fits to the data and dashed lines
indicate ratios of 1.

59

15
10

Log Expression

●

●

●

5

●

All

Two

Six

Six−Eight

Gene group

Supplementary Figure 23. Log expression distributions for gene sets excluded for being
non-expressed in at least two species in at least one time point (“Two”), in at least six species in
at least one time point (“Six”), and in all species at all time points (“Six-Eight”). See Methods.

60

Six

Six-Eight

3

Divergence

2

3

Divergence
2L

2R

3L

3R

0

0

0

1

1

1

2

2

Divergence

3

4

4

5

4

5

Two

2L

X

2R

3L

3R

X

2L

2R

Chromosome

3L

3R

X

Chromosome

8

10

Chromosome

Density

4

4

0

0

0

2

2

2

4

Density

Density

6

6

6

8

2L
2R
3L
3R
X

8

2L
2R
3L
3R
X

2L
2R
3L
3R
X

1.4

1.6

1.8

2.0

Bootstrapped Mean Divergence

2.2

1.6

1.8

2.0

2.2

2.4

Bootstrapped Mean Divergence

2.6

1.6

1.8

2.0

2.2

2.4

2.6

Bootstrapped Mean Divergence

Supplementary Figure 24. Gene expression divergence on the X chromosome relative to the
autosomes for sets of genes with groups of non-expressed genes removed using various
different criteria: non-expressed in at least two species in at least one time point (“Two”),
non-expressed in at least six species in at least one time point (“Six”), and non-expressed in all
species at all time points (“Six-Eight”). See Methods.

61

ρTOTAL = -0.42
ρA = 0.50
ρB = 0.66

45
30

35

40

Variable 2

50

55

ρA:B = -0.96
ρB:A = -0.95

5

10

15

20

Variable 1

Supplementary Figure 25. Simulated bivariate data illustrating the Yule-Simpson
effect [91–95] when correlating subsets that belong to a larger aggregate. The red and blue
points represent two subsets within the total population which display positive correlations
when correlated as subsets (unbroken lines) yet a negative correlation when taken as a total
population (dashed line). When we use a relativised Spearman’s correlation (see Methods),
however, we find that these subsets display negative correlations relative to each other thereby
explaining why there is a negative correlation for the total population.

62

Embryos

Adult Males

Adult Females

0.8
0.7

Correlation

0.6

0.8
0.7

Correlation

0.6

0.90
0.85

2L

2L−r

2R

2R−r

3L

3L−r

3R

Chromosome

3R−r

X

X−r

0.5

0.75

0.5

0.80

Correlation

0.95

**

2L

2L−r

2R

2R−r

3L

3L−r

3R

Chromosome

3R−r

X

X−r

2L

2L−r

2R

2R−r

3L

3L−r

3R

3R−r

X

X−r

Chromosome

Supplementary Figure 26. Distributions of pairwise species chromosome correlations for
embryos, adult males, and adult females. In light blue are the distributions of a relativised
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (see Methods). The suffix “ r” indicates that these are
the relative correlation coefficients for a particular chromosome in relation to the other
chromosomes.

63

Supplementary Tables
Supplementary Table 1. The chromosomal distribution of genes in the expression
datasets
Stage
Embryos
Embryos
Adults
Adults

Comparison
species
strains
species
strains

2L
579
2267
1214
1694

2R
651
2521
1360
1843

3L
677
2437
1215
1721

3R
798
3005
1662
2217

X
314
1998
881
1275

Total
3019
12228
6332
8750

Supplementary Table 2. Contrasts for Drosophila embryo species comparisons
Contrast
Aut-X
2L-X
2R-X
3L-X
3R-X
2L-2R
2L-3L
2L-3R
2R-3L
2R-3R
3L-3R

Mean 1st
1.912150
1.906623
1.808078
1.951095
1.963467
1.906623
1.906623
1.906623
1.808078
1.808078
1.951095

Mean 2nd
2.312695
2.312695
2.312695
2.312695
2.312695
1.808078
1.951095
1.963467
1.951095
1.963467
1.963467

W-stat
331955.5
74430
79352
89006
104232.5
196983.5
193720
227856
208468
244404
269368

P -value
2.19 x 10−7
3.8 x 10−6
8.8 x 10−9
1.8 x 10−5
6.3 x 10−6
0.171
0.723
0.664
0.089
0.053
0.926

Padj -value
1.9 x 10−5
8.8 x 10−8
4.7 x 10−5
2.1 x 10−5
0.244
0.803
0.803
0.148
0.106
0.926

Aut - all autosomes. W - Wilcoxon rank sum test statistic. P-values adjusted according to
Benjamini-Hochberg correction.

64

Supplementary Table 3. Contrasts for D. melanogaster embryo strain comparisons
Contrast
Aut-X
2L-X
2R-X
3L-X
3R-X
2L-2R
2L-3L
2L-3R
2R-3L
2R-3R
3L-3R

Mean 1st
1.400482
1.411071
1.395688
1.422667
1.380755
1.411071
1.411071
1.411071
1.395688
1.395688
1.422667

Mean 2nd
1.287024
1.287024
1.287024
1.287024
1.287024
1.395688
1.422667
1.380755
1.422667
1.380755
1.380755

W-stat
11273798
2496381
2731109
2667918
3205879
2905198
2771018
3514421
3032346
3844265
3764470

P -value
1.16 x 10−9
7.8 x 10−9
1.1 x 10−6
3.8 x 10−9
4.6 x 10−5
0.318
0.852
0.048
0.433
0.339
0.074

Padj -value
7.8 x 10−8
3.5 x 10−6
1.9 x 10−7
1.2 x 10−4
0.424
0.852
0.096
0.481
0.424
0.123

Aut - all autosomes. W - Wilcoxon rank sum test statistic. P-values adjusted according to
Benjamini-Hochberg correction.

65

Supplementary Table 4. Contrasts for Drosophila adult female species comparisons
Contrast
Aut-X
2L-X
2R-X
3L-X
3R-X
2L-2R
2L-3L
2L-3R
2R-3L
2R-3R
3L-3R

Mean 1st
1.128154
1.118199
1.127064
1.141319
1.126056
1.118199
1.118199
1.118199
1.127064
1.127064
1.141319

Mean 2nd
1.129415
1.129415
1.129415
1.129415
1.129415
1.127064
1.141319
1.126056
1.141319
1.126056
1.126056

W-stat
2409026
528305.5
599021
543405.5
729981
815877.5
717046
999595.5
812860.5
1133633
1028575

P -value
0.994
0.636
0.997
0.549
0.904
0.609
0.237
0.675
0.479
0.884
0.390

Padj -value
-

Aut - all autosomes. W - Wilcoxon rank sum test statistic. P-values adjusted according to
Benjamini-Hochberg correction.

66

Supplementary Table 5. Contrasts for Drosophila adult male species comparisons
Contrast
Aut-X
2L-X
2R-X
3L-X
3R-X
2L-2R
2L-3L
2L-3R
2R-3L
2R-3R
3L-3R

Mean 1st
1.168791
1.170921
1.159897
1.172074
1.169593
1.170921
1.170921
1.170921
1.159897
1.159897
1.1195

Mean 2nd
1.184388
1.184388
1.184388
1.184388
1.184388
1.159897
1.172074
1.169593
1.172074
1.169593
1.169593

W-stat
2361976
525043.5
584673
525263
717711.5
830314
738058
1011397
822211.5
1125957
1011382

P -value
0.3552
0.477
0.336
0.467
0.413
0.800
0.975
0.907
0.832
0.860
0.938

Padj -value
-

Aut - all autosomes. W - Wilcoxon rank sum test statistic. P-values adjusted according to
Benjamini-Hochberg correction.

67

Supplementary Table 6. Contrasts for D. melanogaster female adult strain comparisons
Contrast
Aut-X
2L-X
2R-X
3L-X
3R-X
2L-2R
2L-3L
2L-3R
2R-3L
2R-3R
3L-3R

Mean 1st
0.6113846
0.6399925
0.6033502
0.6187143
0.5943979
0.6399925
0.6399925
0.6399925
0.6033502
0.6033502
0.6187143

Mean 2nd
0.5431882
0.5431882
0.5431882
0.5431882
0.5431882
0.6033502
0.6187143
0.5943979
0.6187143
0.5943979
0.5943979

W-stat
5192587
1219771
1244176
1189794
1494048
1663789
1520440
2010076
1548129
2049155
1959594

P -value
7.28 x 10−6
1.46 x 10−9
0.0051
3.78 x 10−5
0.0025
7.1 x 10−4
0.029
1.6 x 10−4
0.219
0.868
0.143

Padj -value
1.68 x 10−8
0.0078
0.00020
0.0046
0.0046
0.040
0.0019
0.240
0.868
0.175

Aut - all autosomes. W - Wilcoxon rank sum test statistic. P-values adjusted according to
Benjamini-Hochberg correction.

68

Supplementary Table 7. Contrasts for D. melanogaster male adult strain comparisons
Contrast
Aut-X
2L-X
2R-X
3L-X
3R-X
2L-2R
2L-3L
2L-3R
2R-3L
2R-3R
3L-3R

Mean 1st
0.4768255
0.4877695
0.4705672
0.4884414
0.467385
0.4877695
0.4877695
0.4877695
0.4705672
0.4705672
0.4884414

Mean 2nd
0.4189356
0.4189356
0.4189356
0.4189356
0.4189356
0.4705672
0.4884414
0.467385
0.4884414
0.467385
0.467385

W-stat
5359535
1249111
1281926
1255394
1526993
1657322
1473490
2013942
1505481
2064474
2025011

P -value
9.89 x 10−11
2.52 x 10−13
1.49 x 10−5
1.38 x 10−11
7.42 x 10−5
0.0015
0.583
9.99 x 10−5
0.0088
0.563
9.20 x 10−4

Padj -value
2.56 x 10−12
4.97 x 10−5
6.89 x 10−11
1.86 x 10−4
0.0021
0.583
2.00 x 10−4
0.011
0.583
0.0015

Aut - all autosomes. W - Wilcoxon rank sum test statistic. P-values adjusted according to
Benjamini-Hochberg correction.

69

Supplementary Table 8. Contrasts for Drosophila embryos for a common set of 2072
genes and 5 species.
Contrast
2L-X
2R-X
3L-X
3R-X
2L-2R
2L-3L
2L-3R
2R-3L
2R-3R
3L-3R

Mean 1st
1.767753
1.647628
1.759429
1.736327
1.767753
1.767753
1.767753
1.647628
1.647628
1.759429

Mean 2nd
2.023779
2.023779
2.023779
2.023779
1.647628
1.759429
1.736327
1.759429
1.736327
1.736327

W-stat
39029
39580
40418
51914.5
99783
89248
119319
91380
121461.5
123275

P -value
0.009315
5.4 x 10−5
0.004624
8.5 x 10−4
0.02553
0.3774
0.2105
0.06257
0.09044
0.3443

Padj -value
0.0232
5.4 x 10−4
0.0154
0.0042
0.051
0.377
0.263
0.104
0.129
0.377

W - Wilcoxon rank sum test statistic. P-values adjusted according to Benjamini-Hochberg
correction.

70

Supplementary Table 9. Contrasts for Drosophila adults for a common set of 2072 genes
and 5 species.
Contrast
2L-X
2R-X
3L-X
3R-X
2L-2R
2L-3L
2L-3R
2R-3L
2R-3R
3L-3R

Mean 1st
0.9187558
0.90749
0.9049189
0.9461049
0.9187558
0.9187558
0.9187558
0.90749
0.90749
0.9049189

Mean 2nd
0.9741846
0.9741846
0.9741846
0.9741846
0.90749
0.9049189
0.9461049
0.9049189
0.9461049
0.9461049

W-stat
40504.5
44751.5
41350
57753.5
92572
90367.5
112693
99597
124054
115402

P -value
0.04798
0.04946
0.01444
0.1443
0.4904
0.2641
0.2353
0.2614
0.2174
0.08814

Padj -value
0.164
0.164
0.144
0.288
0.490
0.293
0.293
0.293
0.293
0.220

W - Wilcoxon rank sum test statistic. P-values adjusted according to Benjamini-Hochberg
correction.

71

Supplementary Table 10. Characterisation of genes with a percentile X/A divergence
ratio greater than 1.015 in adult males.
ID
GO:0007538
GO:0019748
GO:0030534
GO:0007362
GO:0046152

Term
primary sex determination
secondary metabolic process
adult behavior
terminal region determination
ommochrome metabolic process

#
11
24
34
10
13

Sig.
5
7
7
3
4

Exp.
0.6
1.32
1.86
0.5
0.71

P -value
8.9 x 10−5
1.6 x 10−4
6.2 x 10−4
0.0062
0.0076

Padj -value
0.312
0.312
0.625
0.625
1.0

Enrichment is based on the ‘parent-child’ algorithm in the topGO R package and Fisher’s
exact test applied to 352 genes that have an X/A percentile divergence ratio of > 1.015 against
the background of the genes in the dataset. # - total number of genes with this annotation in the
dataset. Sig. - significant, Exp. - expected. Padj -value - adjusted according to the
Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate.

72

Supplementary Table 11. Characterisation of the embryonic expression patterns of genes
residing on the X chromosome in Drosophila.
Test

ID
254
Under 273
222
493
Over
346
580

Term
cellular blastoderm
visual anlage
visual primordium
no staining (stage 5)
muscle system primordium
apically cleared

#
3039
100
88
2773
670
74

Sig.
418
7
6
471
109
19

Exp.
477.37
15.71
13.82
435.58
105.24
11.62

P -value
2.6 x 10−7
0.017
0.022
0.00029
0.00392
0.01309

Padj -value
9.5 x 10−5
1.0
1.0
0.10643
0.71392
1.0

Enrichment is based on the ‘parent-child’ algorithm in the topGO R package and Fisher’s
exact test applied to 2228 genes that reside on the X chromosome in Drosophila, and
enrichment is relative to the whole genome. Terms with uncorrected P-values below 0.05 are
shown. # - total number of genes with this annotation in the dataset. Sig. - significant, Exp. expected. Padj -value - adjusted according to the Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate.

73

Supplementary Table 12. Fitnesses in a diploid two-locus epistatic model with X-linkage.

TC
Tc
♀
tC
tc

TC
1
1
1
1 + h2 s

♂
Tc
tC
tc
00
h
1
1
1 + 2s
1
h
1
1 + 2 s 1 + hs
1
1 + h2 s
1
1 + hs
1
1 + hs 1 + hs 1 + s 1 + s

Fitnesses of different male-female gametic combinations when both the loci are located on the X
chromosome. T/t - trans-acting gene; C/c - cis-acting locus; 00 - indicates a male gamete carrying a Y
chromosome; s - selection coefficient; h - dominance coefficient.

74

Supplementary Table 13. Fitnesses in a diploid two-locus epistatic model.

TC
TC
1
Tc
1
♀
tC
1
tc 1 + h2 s

♂
Tc
tC
tc
T0
t0
h
1
1
1 + 2s
1
1
h
1
1 + 2 s 1 + hs
1
1 + hs
1 + h2 s
1
1 + hs
1
1
1 + hs 1 + hs 1 + s 1 + hs 1 + s

Fitnesses of different male-female gametic combinations when there is a beneficial partially recessive
interaction between an autosomal allele and an X-linked allele (males are the heterogametic sex). T/t trans-acting autosomal gene; C/c - cis-acting X-linked locus; 0 - indicates a male gamete carrying a Y
chromosome; s - selection coefficient; h - dominance coefficient.

75

