Modelling Inter-species Molecular Crosstalks in Three
Host-Parasite Systems by Expansion of their Sparse
Information Space
Paurush Praveen1,2, Erfan Younesi 1,2, Martin Hofmann-Apitius 1,2§
1

Bonn-Aachen International Center for Information Technology, University of Bonn,

Bonn, Germany
2

Department of Bioinformatics, Fraunhofer Institute for Algorithms and Scientific

Computing, Sankt Augustin, Germany

§

Corresponding author

Email addresses:
PP: praveen@bit.uni-bonn.de
EY: eyounesi@scai.fraunhofer.de
MHA: mhofmann-apitius@scai.fraunhofer.de

-1-

Abstract
Background

Parasitic diseases infect and kill many humans as well as domestic livestock around
the globe, especially in the tropical countries. The emergence of cross-species
interactions at the protein level is a part of molecular mechanisms that lead to such
diseases. Comprehensive modelling can capture such interactions and could be useful
to understand the pathophysiology of parasitic diseases and assist in identifying novel
drug targets.
Results

Using a combination of databases, text mining, and predictive methods, we expanded
the sparse space of protein-protein interactions in three parasitic diseases, namely
malaria, sleeping sickness and cattle theileriosis. Analysis of the host-parasite
interface in these three network models revealed significant similarities in molecular
mechanisms underlying host’s invasion, immunomodulation, and energy metabolism.
The models not only contained the majority of well-known interactions, but also
suggested new possible pathways in the inter-species protein interaction maps.
Enrichment of these maps with drug-target information showed a plethora of
druggable space to be explored, and led to the proposal of two new targets for each
malaria and trypanosoma model.
Conclusions

It is demonstrated that, in the absence of sufficient experimental data, text-mining and
predictive methods can successfully contribute to the expansion of the sparse
biological information space, which in turn may lead to proposal of novel hypotheses
and suggestions for future experiments.

-2-

Background
Evolutionarily, parasites have the advantage to be locally adapted to the hosts system.
Regardless of being generalist or specialist, parasites need to cross host species
barriers [1]. Although it is well known that the host-parasite relationship is based on
intimate interactions between the two species at the molecular level, the question is
how many divergent and similar strategies at the molecular level have been developed
by parasites to invade the host. As such, a holistic view of these interactions might
reveal various aspects of the disease mechanism in the form of an interaction map.
Under real world conditions, the host-parasite systems involve many cross-species
molecular interactions as seen in case of bacterial and viral infections [2,3]; however,
the focal point of most studies has been confined to specific singleton interactions due
to the complexity of the multi-components involved. Although single-species
interactome maps for parasitic organisms such as Helicobacter pylori [4] ,
Plasmodium falciparum [5] and Trypanosoma cruzi [6] have been reported, less
attention has been paid to the interactomes involving more than one proteome
simultaneously. So far, major works in the field of host-parasite interaction belong to
human-virus systems (e.g. a model for the human and herpes virus interactions at
protein level [7]; development of a knowledgebase, namely VirHostNet containing
virus and host interactions [8,9]; the HIV-1 human protein interaction database at the
National Library of Medicine [10]) and to a limited extent to human-bacterial systems
like Helicobacters or Staphylococcus. In an attempt to obtain the first landscape of
human proteins interacting with viruses and bacterial pathogens, Dyer et al. (2008)
used an integrative approach and constructed human-pathogen protein-protein
interactions (PPI), generating the global view of infection strategies used by viruses
and bacteria [11].

-3-

Unfortunately, similar interaction data do not yet exist for a wide range of parasitic
infections; therefore, some alternative efforts are required to expand the information
space for such interactomes. Protein interaction prediction, data- and text-mining
techniques can be used to formulate a more sophisticated methodology for this
purpose. These methods can achieve a higher degree of completeness and hence “real
world relevance”. For example, Rao and coworkers (2010) combined host and
parasite PPI data, extracted by text mining of cerebral malaria-specific literature, with
data from a number of predicted datasets and annotated the final interactome with
Gene Ontology terms [12] .
Congregating data from different resources to expand the information space around
these parasitic diseases is, however, a non-trivial task due to limited data availability.
In the current work, we apply state-of-the-art text-mining technologies to biomedical
literature [13,14] with the aim of expanding the interactome information space based
on co-citation or other methods [15] together with PPI prediction approaches to
explore the resultant space for the enrichment of disease mechanisms and
pharmacological space around three protozoan diseases i.e. malaria, Human African
Trypanosomiasis (HAT) and east coast fever. The purpose behind the selection of
these three different systems was two-fold: to test the applicability of our approach to
different combinations of host and parasite interactions, and to compare the early
mechanisms of infection in these host-parasite systems.
Finally, we present new hypotheses on the pathology of the three systems and propose
novel potential drug targets for malaria and for the HAT disease.

Results and Discussion
We describe the host-parasite system as three-component machinery: the host
interacting component, the parasite interacting component, and the host-parasite
-4-

interacting complex creating an interspecies contact interface in the interaction map.
To construct protein-protein interaction networks for such a system, it is necessary to
obtain PPI data. Data on interspecies interaction are very sparse in existing databases.
To compensate for the limited availability of information on protein-protein
interactions between host and parasite, we used protein interaction prediction
algorithms and text-mining methods to enrich the sparse PPI information space
retrieved from protein interaction databases for all three parasites (Table 1). In fact,
host-parasite complex (interface) interactions were available only for PlasmodiumHuman from a published study [16].
Based on the data retrieved and prepared from databases, interaction prediction
methods or text-mining, host-parasite protein interaction networks were created for all
three parasitic systems (see Methods for details on prediction methodologies used).
The network models generated by our workflow display the properties of biological
networks in terms of clustering coefficient and small world property compared to
random networks [17] (Table 2).
In the following, network models generated for specific host-parasite combinations
are described and each network model is assessed by comparison to a set of known
host and parasite interactions taken from the existing bibliome.

Plasmodium falciparum - Homo sapiens Network Model

This model describes aspects of the pathophysiology of malaria. The hallmark of the
malaria disease is the degradation of hemoglobin (iron-containing oxygen-transport
metalloprotein in the erythrocytes). The host hemoglobin is degraded by the parasite
in the trophozoite stage of its life cycle.

-5-

The data for the inter-species (Human- Plasmodium falciparum) interactions came
from three different resources as described in Table 1. It should be noted that these
interactions are disjoint and do not overlap.
Validating the network model: In order to check the conformity of the network model
with the established knowledge, we extracted biological entities and pathways, shown
to be involved in the parasitosis of malaria, from publications and compared them to
our network. We were able to recover several known genes/proteins and pathways
from the network model (Table 3; Additional file 1). Although this analysis was not
exhaustive, the identification of a significant number of pathways in the network
provides suggestive evidence that our network model comprises the majority of
relevant interactions.
Biological enrichment and inference of new knowledge: Gene Ontology (GO) as a
uniform knowledgebase is commonly used for gene function studies by means of GO
term enrichment analysis. Identification of overrepresented GO terms in the network
could help better understand the functional relevance of network elements or modules.
GO analysis was performed for the host and the parasite networks as described in the
Methods section (Additional file 2). The results of this analysis suggest that the
functional spectrum can be confined to three general activities:
1. Host penetration and invasion: The host nodes at the network were found to have a
fair overrepresentation of GO terms for vesicle and membrane-bound vesicle proteins
(p-value: 3.5151E-4). During invasion, these host proteins may help the parasite to
enter the host cell using the parasite apicomplex organelle [18,19]. Involvement of
COP proteins in the network as well as enrichment for vesicle transport proteins
(Protein piccolo, EEA1) implies dynamic cellular translocations. Interestingly, host
proteins for inter-species interactions were also found to be on the interface. These

-6-

proteins are involved in the processes by which one organism has an effect on another
organism of a different species e.g. cell to cell adhesion or signalosomes. Protein
kinases were also significantly enriched in the network (p-value: 2.1787 E-8 and
2.9590 E-8) indicating the existence of a substantial signalling component in the
interaction network.
2. Host immunosurveillance escape: Presence of zinc homeostasis, TNF signalling
and other cytokine pathways is evident in the network. Cytokines elicit inflammatory
response and other disease-related activities [20]. In the course of infection by
plasmodium parasites, the host cell is able to launch an immune response against the
parasitic proteins via processes of recognition, response and modulation
[21,22,23,24]. Figure 1a depicts network subgraphs showing the interactions between
host and parasite proteins that lead to lymphocyte activation.
3. Taking over the host metabolic pathways: Purine salvage pathways were also
detected to be significantly enriched in the network. The parasitic proteins interfere
with the purine-related pathways of the host. The interference aims to meet the
adenosine requirement of the parasite [25]. Purine salvage pathways in the intraerythrocytic malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum have been reviewed in terms of
metabolism within the infected erythrocytes [26,27].
Moreover, there is an interference of the parasite with the proteins associated with
spleen development. The spleen is the key site for removal of parasitized red blood
cells together with generation of immunity and production of new red blood cells
during malaria infection [28]. The ubiquitin system proteins detected in the model are
probably involved in proteolysis by covalently binding to the target proteins [29]. It
also contains interactions of parasite’s proteins (PFC0495w, PF14 0075, PF08 0108,
PF14 0281) with haemoglobin (Figure 1b). These proteins belong to the plasmepsin

-7-

family (aspartic acid proteases) which can degrade the host hemoglobin and release
toxic metabolites like hemozoin responsible for manifestation of the disease
symptoms [30]. Interestingly, these interactions come from the prediction approach
(prediction scores above 0.57) and their corresponding plasmepsin proteins show a
high degree of sequence and protease domain similarities to human cathepsins.
In the parasite side, apicoplast proteins are related to the host cell invasion. Rhoptry
proteins have roles in both biogenesis of rhoptry (a secretory organelle with enzymes
for penetration process) and host cell invasion. They participate in the synthesis of
fatty acids to enable the parasite to form the parasitophorous vacuole, imperative to a
successful invasion of the host cell [31]. The metabolism-related proteins interfere
with the host metabolic pathways such as energy metabolism and help the survival of
the parasite inside the host cell.
In summary, it appears that the network model of plasmodium-human interactions
represents the well-understood processes involved in host-parasite interaction with
good coverage. Prediction of interactions among plasmepsin proteins demonstrates
the applicability of the predicitve method for expansion of the information space by
PPI prediction algorithms.
Trypanosoma brucei - Homo sapiens Network Model

Trypanosoma brucei is responsible for the disease Human African Trypanosomiasis
(HAT) which causes sleeping sickness by invading the central nervous system. The
current model is an attempt to describe various aspects of this disease at the interface
of host-parasite protein interactions. For the network construction task, we found no
entries in public databases and thus it was imperative to obtain the modeling data
from text mining and prediction methods. The interface between the host and the

-8-

parasite consisted of 3368 interactions between 129 parasitic and ~2400 host proteins
in the network (Table 1).
Validating the network model: The validity of the network was checked against the
established knowledge by recovery of well-known nodes or pathways (Table 4). For
example, Variant Surface Antigen (VSG) leads the immune evasion system
[32,33,34]. The parasitosis is primarily associated with uncontrolled production of
strong regulators like TNF, causing immune suppression, anemia, organ lesions and
cachexia (weight loss, muscle atrophy, fatigue, weakness and anorexia). The VSG
acts as a TNF inducing factor. The cysteine peptidase also plays an important role in
the parasitosis by acting as immune depressant. The VSG also increases the levels of
interleukins that help parasites to pass through the blood-brain barrier and invoke
nerve tissue disorders and affect the circadian rhythm.
Biological enrichment and inference of new knowledge: Network annotation with the
GO terms for the host and pathogen proteins provided a clue on involvement of
interesting molecular crosstalks (Additional file 3). The interface network shows a
large amount of parasite proteins interacting with the host pathways for cell cycle,
apoptosis, signaling pathways and other important proteins like kinases. Proteinbinding proteins and kinases formed the largest interface network component. The
energy metabolism pathways were also found to be involved at the interface. The
network analysis suggests that the parasite is able to control the host energy pathways
for its own purposes. The immune system was well figured in the network, including
the Variant Surface Glycoprotein (VSG antigen) that drives the immune evasion
system [33,34]. The interaction between immunoglobin (IgM) and VSG was obtained
only from text mining. Not really surprising, T-cell and B-cell activation [35] and
regulation pathways were found to be influenced by the parasite. The variant surface

-9-

antigen was found to interact with “CD5L_HUMAN”, which is an IgM-associated
peptide and may play a role in the regulation of the host immune system (Figure 2).
Biologically, these interactions represent the parasitosis [36] and strong involvement
of the immune mechanism at an abstract level.
Interaction of parasite proteins with human BCL-2 and BCL-3 implies that, for
intracellular survival, the parasite must inhibit apoptosis of the infected cells.
Interaction with host cell receptors such as TNF receptor 5 and chemokine receptor is
apparently a successful strategy for penetrating the host cell machinery and immune
suppression by the parasite. It seems that the parasite exploits TGF-beta in the early
stages of infection to prepare the host cell for immune suppression [36,37]. Since the
STAT family of transcription factors activates expression of immune system genes in
human, interaction of trypanosoma proteins with human STAT proteins at the
crosstalk interface might represent another aspect of well-concerted
immunomodulatory actions taken by the parasite.

Theileria parva - Bos Taurus network model

This model describes the ‘East Coast Fever’ disease which occurs in an animal host
(i.e. cattle). The interaction network within the host (Bos taurus) was reconstructed in
a fashion similar to the previous two models. During the analysis, attention was paid
to the molecular crosstalk interface between the host and the parasite. The interface
network was obtained through applying prediction methods and text-mining
approaches as there were no database entries available for paired interactions between
Theileria and cattle. The interface had 20 nodes from the parasite and 37 nodes from
the host, forming 53 edges among them.
Validating the network model: The network model was validated by comparing its
components to the established knowledge from literature, and recovery of the well- 10 -

known proteins or signalling pathways from the network model (Table 5). For
example, Ubiquitin-like protease expression has been observed during infection by
Theileria annulata [38]. In T. parva infected T-cells, JNK and NF-κB are
constitutively activated, further inducing activation of the transcription factors AP-1
and ATF-2. These, together with NF-κB, regulate the transcription of a number of
genes that participate in the control of cellular proliferation and defence against
apoptosis. The GTPases (among them Ras, Rac, Rho and Cdc42) are activated by
different pathways, and also participate in the JNK activation pathway. The role of
Src-relating kinases, casein kinase II and the possible interference of the parasite with
many negative regulatory pathways can be observed in the model presented here. Two
classes of MAPK, namely the JNKs (jun-NH2-terminal kinases) and the p38 family,
mediate responses to cellular stress such as heat or osmotic shock, cellular injury, and
inflammation [39]. Src family kinases and casein kinase 2 have also been known to
play important roles in the pathology of the disease [40].
Biological enrichment and inference of new knowledge: Gene Ontology annotation of
the host-parasite network revealed several categories of biological processes
(Additional file 4) which are summarized as followings:
1. Penetration and cell trafficking: Functional enrichment of the interaction network at
the host side shows that apart from metabolic activities, many proteins with receptor
activity (P-value 7.67E-01) rank among the top 5 clusters. The receptor-mediated
zippering of the target cell can provide the parasite with the opportunity to enter the
host cell. Moreover, there are proteins in the network related to the membrane
organization especially membrane invagination and endocytosis (e.g. RABGEF and
NOSTRIN proteins) that are probably used in the process of cellular invasion by the
parasite [41,42]. The presence of COP proteins in the network with significant

- 11 -

annotation for transportation processes as well as Golgi-related complexes
involvement support the model inferences. The PIM (Poly Immuno-dominant
molecule) of Theileria which is part of the host-parasite interaction network may play
a role in the regulation of cell adhesion.
2. Intracellular signalling: The role of kinases is highlighted in the model with protein
kinase inhibitors and regulators (e.g. PKI, CSK and KAP). The abundance of
intracellular signalling proteins (10 nodes) indicates the interference of the parasite in
host intracellular processes.
3. Interference with the host cell cycle: The network was enriched for annotations of
the cell cycle regulation and mitotic process-related functions with the presence of the
proteins like JNK and RUBP. The TP01_0188 protein from Theileria was found to
interact with 4 different host proteins (Figure 3). The TFDP, RBBP4 and BRMS1 are
associated to cell division and apoptosis pathways whereas the CSE1L is responsible
for intracellular transport of proteins, especially protein import into nucleus. These
interactions indicate the interference of the parasite with the host apoptotic and cell
cycle pathways.
The parasite layer displays the cell cycle control and regulation proteins including
CDC2. This protein is involved in the process of cell division control but the network
does not show any direct relation of parasite’s CDC2 to any of the host proteins. This
protein has high sequence similarity (63.45%) to its host counterpart, CDK2. Both
proteins have very similar protein kinase domains. Based on this similarity, it may be
speculated that they might have some common interactions. Since none of databases
reports any direct interaction for CDK2 within the cattle as host, an analogy-based
approach might help to infer that the parasite’s CDC2 may have interactions similar to
the host CDK2. The cell division protein kinase is involved in many pathways via

- 12 -

phosphorylation/dephosphrylation steps. Curated interaction map of CDK2 in human
indicates that this protein may be involved in many cell division and proliferation
activities as demonstrated by the BioCarta pathways [43].
4. Evasion of immunosurveillance: The HSP (Heat Shock Protein) found in the
network can probably refer to its involvement in the immune system response and
evasion together with protection of the parasite during infection and inflammation
[44,45]. Moreover, the nitric oxide synthase activity of NOSTRIN comes into the
picture (P-value 1.4781E-2). The NOSTRIN pathway usually gets activated in the
host’s macrophages in response to the parasite infection [21]. Many of the parasite’s
metabolic proteins were also found to have interactions with similar proteins in the
host including ATP and other energy related pathways.
Characterization of bovine lymphosarcoma network model: Cattles infected by
Theileria parasite develop a disorder during a three- to four-week period that is
similar to lymphoma (cancer of lymphocytes or lymphatic system) in humans. An
interesting observation concerning the lymphosarcoma is that the parasite induces
transformation of lymphocytes which is a reversible phenomenon in nature, i.e.
lymphoma cells get back to their normal lymphocyte state when the parasite leaves
the cell or dies out [39]. Therefore, it is intriguing to investigate which molecular
mechanisms are used in the process of oncogenic transformation by the parasite and
whether the reversibility of this process can serve as a model for better understanding
of treatment strategies in human malignancies.
Here we characterize the network model of bovine lymphosarcoma and try to find
biological processes similar to the human lymphoma. The model highlights the role of
NF-kB under lymphosarcoma conditions in controlling the process of cell division
and survival. It is well established that NF-kB plays a role in down-regulation of

- 13 -

BCL-related genes in human [46]. An important observation in the model is the
interference of Theileria proteins with the Akt pathway where Ras genes (via kinase
cascades) are involved in the NFkB-IkB signalling, leading to taking control over the
regulation of BCL-related genes. Thus, at this level, the model and the current
knowledge in human lymphoma are in agreement and are both present a similar
scenario (Figure 4). A possible explanation for this event provided by our network
model is that the cell cycle or apoptosis pathways can be activated or deactivated
based on the presence or absence of the corresponding inhibiting or activating
enzymes which are directed by the parasite.
Accordingly, it can be hypothesized that when the parasite is inactive or dies, these
activating or deactivating interactions disappear and hence alterations in the network
signalling reverts, as there is no change at the gene level (i.e. permanent mutation) in
the host cell. Based on the model, we can hypothesize that possible interference of the
parasite signals with the Akt pathway and disruption of the NF kB - IF kB signaling
may lead to the down-regulation of the oncogenic BCR-ABL fused gene. However,
when the parasite is removed, probably the effects of this interference vanish and the
hijacked pathways revert to their normal functioning status. Therefore, manipulation
of suggested pathways in such a way that leads to restoration of the homeostasis in the
intracellular signaling network may open up new opportunities for remediation of
similar malignant disorders in human.

Host-parasite networks: a comparative view

Comparative study of host-parasite networks may reveal some interesting differences
and similarities in the way that parasites choose to invade the host. Entry,
multiplication, survival, and preservation of host function are of utmost importance to
the success of parasites. Although a true comparative analysis involves alignment of
- 14 -

networks, by only comparing the above-studied parasitic models at abstract level it
can be seen that these parasites adopt a broad range of strategies to survive in the
host’s hostile environment.
The striking commonality among all the three parasitic models is the ability of
parasites to pass through the barrier of host’s immune surveillance by adopting
different strategies such as immune system modification (Plasmodium), immune
suppression (Trypanosoma), and oncogenic transformation (Theileria). Together with
this, an activation of the nitric oxide pathway is observed as a common feature in all
the three systems; the NO pathway is known to interact with immune regulatory
mechanisms inside macrophages and other immune cells. Moreover, it has been
experimentally shown that NO plays an essential role in host survival during
Trypanosoma cruzi infection through suppression of the immune system [47]. Thus,
the pivotal role of the NO pathway in diverse parasitic pathogenesis might indicate
implications for therapeutical purposes.
Complementary to the NO pathway observation, the predominant interactions in the
parasite-host network models involve survival processes. In all three models,
significant metabolic interactions between parasite and host exists as parasites divert
nutrients towards their own demands by taking control over host energy metabolism.
Although a common underlying mechanism can be observed between the two
apicomplexans (Theileria parva and Plasmodium falciparum), the mode of their
parasitic action is different. Interactions involved in both cases affect many common
pathways including the NF-kB signaling, cellular protein kinases and calmodulin
pathways.
Taken together, the varied nature of the crosstalk that exists between these three hostparasite systems implies that molecular crosstalks between host and parasite are – not

- 15 -

surprisingly - potentially the result of the coevolution of host-parasite genotype
interactions [48], which increases the adaptation fitness and reduces the cross-species
barrier.

The drug space analysis and target discovery

The complete drug-protein network, generated by merging drug information into the
disease networks, provides an insight into the relations of the proteins with antiparasitic drugs as well as the shared drug space across the inter-species and intraspecies proteins. Some drugs were found to share the targets across the species
boundaries (e.g. Aspirin, Figure 5). Apparently the drug space for malaria as well as
trypanosomiasis is abundant and sparse since we did not find too many drug-protein
interactions. In comparison, the average pharmacological density in the proteome of
trypanosomiasis is pretty low (Figure 6).
In the available malaria parasite interactome about 89 proteins have been already
targeted by the available drugs. For Plasmodium, the number of druggable proteins is
estimated to be around 200 [49,50]. The remaining part of the parasite interactome is
either undruggable or unexplored. However, the case is a bit different for the
Trypanosoma interactome. Based on the drug-protein network, one can observe that
the druggable proteome of Trypanosoma compared to Plasmodium has a larger share
in its known interactome (~ 23%). From the viewpoint of druggability, both
interactomes have ample sparse space to explore. This sparse area can be analyzed
with model-driven approaches using rationales and features that define a druggable
protein, leading to therapeutic application of network biology in discovery of new
targets for these diseases. A large number of existing drugs were found to act on both

- 16 -

Plasmodium and Trypanosoma parasites, speaking for the existence of a shared drug
space between these models [51].
In order to prioritize possible drug target proteins in our host-parasite networks,
primary rationales were set and the following features were used for prioritization:
being parasitic-centric (network hubs), having low degree of similarity with host
proteins, avoiding the proteins at the host-parasite interface, protein structure
availability, and previous knowledge on druggability. Furthermore, these were
evaluated by means of parameters such as sequence properties and clustering with
existing drugs to find potential targets. Based on this method, it appears that
superoxide dismutase, falcipain 2, and thioredoxin have good potential to serve as
new drug targets in malaria, whereas in the case of trypanosomiasis, trans-sialidase
and thioredoxin are proposed as possible target candidates. Therefore, the network
approach not only allows for identification of target proteins similar to previously
targeted ones, but also provides information on novel targets that are not linked to any
known target.

Conclusions
In conclusion, this work presents a first step towards elucidation of molecular models
at the interface of parasite-host interaction using complementary methods, particularly
when sufficient experimental data is not available. The network modelling approach
has the advantage that the “known” or “understood” interactions and pathways can be
expanded by new knowledge, crosstalks can be evaluated, and new regulatory
components might be added and identified. Obviously, suggested models need to be
improved as new data becomes available; however, the immediate outcome of
network modeling approach is that it represents all the different facettes of the hostparasite interaction, going beyond the conventional “one parasite – one host”
- 17 -

paradigm. Similar to comparative genomics in which data scarcity was compensated
by orthology analysis, comparative network models might also provide a means for
better completeness of the current information space.

Methods
Creating Information Space

The first phase focuses on creating an information space by pooling in data from
different sources. At this point, the interaction data is retrieved using three different
approaches; first, experimental data are retrieved from the existing protein interaction
databases (BIND [52], DIP [53] , HPRD [54], MINT [55] and IntAct [56]) via the
interaction data integration system BIANA (Biologic Interactions and Network
Analysis), an interaction database integration tool that integrates protein-protein
interactions automatically across the above databases [57]. Second, extraction of
gene/protein named entities from the literature was implemented on MEDLINE
abstracts using a parasite-specific dictionary of protein names and their synonyms,
which was compiled during the work. The text mining tool used for this purpose was
ProMiner, a NER (Named Entity Recognition) tool [58], developed at the Fraunhofer
Institute for Algorithms and Scientific Computing (SCAI). ProMiner uses a rule &
dictionary based approach to recognize named entities in the text. The dictionary for
cattle (Bos taurus) was available from a collaborative work between Fraunhofer SCAI
and Department of Animal Science, University of Bonn, whereas the human
dictionary was already available in the pre-compiled form. The ProMiner software
was run over the MEDLINE abstracts with these dictionaries and results were
indexed. To handle the two-entity class problem (detecting co-occurring proteins from
two different organisms in an abstract) a Perl script was implemented to generate a list

- 18 -

of abstracts which had the entities for two different organisms together with the entity
name and the corresponding identifier. To avoid false positives, these abstracts were
manually checked and a co-citation list was thus retrieved.
To grow the data further, a workflow was implemented to predict interaction between
a pair of proteins across species based on three parameters: orthologue data,
interacting domains, and gene ontology. The workflow starts with finding the
orthologues of parasite proteins in the host. For this purpose, the In-Paranoid
approach [59] was used. The orthologues of parasite proteins in the host organism
were used to populate the initial interaction data. For each host orthologue, the
neighbouring interaction partners within the host are detected from interaction
databases, using them as seed nodes. Thus, a set of possible interaction partners for
parasite proteins inside a host proteome is generated. This population of data is then
enriched with the GO terms and PFAM domain IDs. The prediction program uses this
data to compute overall interaction score.
The prediction feature set consists of the GO term similarity associated to the
involved proteins A and B. The value is measured in terms of Jaccard Index (JI) as in
Eq (1). Thus in ontology space, the value shows the closeness of proteins in terms of
biological process, molecular function and cellular location. The values are
normalized between 0 and 1:

(1)

- 19 -

A Jaccard Index of 0 means larger distance whereas 1 implies maximum closeness in
ontology space.
Another feature is the interacting domain occurrence score (IDOS). The PFAM
domains of the participant proteins can give a set of permuted pairs of domains. These
pairs, when searched against a database of interacting domains, return occurrence or
non-occurrence in the database and can contribute to the probability of their
interaction. This occurrence score in Eq (2) can hence be used as a feature in terms of
its log values for uniform distribution of all the features. The dataset for interacting
domains was obtained from public databases viz. DOMINE [60]. The number of
occurrence of a domain pair in the database is searched and scored (0 for ‘found’ and
1 for ‘not found’) and the number of interactions for a domain is counted (IN). These
counts form the IDOS score. The score is normalized between 0 and 1 to avoid weight
influence on the overall score.
The overall prediction score is a linear combination of these parameters. The
constants are obtained from likelihood ratios for these features [61]. In this format of
equation new features can be easily included to optimize the scoring function.
Thus,

InteractionScore=(Lo×O+Lg×JI+Ld ×IDOS)
(2)
Where Lo, Lg and Ld represent the likelihood of interaction of proteins when the
features of orthology, ontologies and interacting domains are supporting the
interaction, where, O is the orthology score.
The likelihood computation is performed based on a gold standard set of true and
false interactions, obtained from the study of Patil and Nakamura [61]. The likelihood

- 20 -

ratio can be estimated using the Bayes rule as in Eq (3). All the parameter values are
normalized between 0 and 1 to avoid biasness in overall score.
L=

P ( features | True)
P ( features | False )

(3)
The high false positive rates, an inherent disadvantage of high throughput methods,
can be overcome by the use of learning model. To filter the interaction data, GO terms
and interacting domains were used as filtering features. WEKA platform was used for
ranking the experimental interactions in order of their real world possibilities through
learning-based classifiers [62]. A program to extract these features from the data set
and write them in WEKA readable ARFF format was implemented. The data was then
filtered using learning classifiers, namely Decision trees, Bayesian Networks,
Random Forest, and SVM. Training the learning model was performed on 4916 true
interactions and 4226 false interactions with 10-fold cross-validation followed by a
test on 170 interactions (92 True and 78 False interactions). The interaction with
majority votes from different classifiers was accepted as a true one.
All the generated data was then normalized and merged to generate the complete set
of interactions in the system under study.

Authors' contributions
PP designed the research, developed the computational method, analyzed data and
drafted the manuscript. EY contributed in network and data analysis and drafted the
manuscript. MHA conceived of the study, and participated in its design and
coordination. This work was supported by B-IT (Bonn-Aachen International Center
for Information Technology) foundation through funding of PP and EY.

- 21 -

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Dr. Vinod Kasam for his fruitful advice in developing rationales for
drug target discovery and Theo Mevissen for his support in text-mining.

References
1. Little TJ, Watt K, Ebert D: Parasite-host specificity: experimental studies
on the basis of parasite adaptation. Evolution 2006, 60:31-38
2. Kellam P: Host-pathogen studies in the post-genomic era. Genome Biol 1:
reviews1009.1–reviews1009.4
3. König R, Zhou Y, Elleder D, Diamond TL, Bonamy GMC, Irelan JT, Chiang
CY, Tu BP, De Jesus PD, Lilley CE, Seidel S, Opaluch AM, Caldwell JS,
Weitzman MD, Kuhen KL, Bandyopadhyay S, Ideker T, Orth AP, Miraglia
LJ, Bushman FD, Young JA, Chanda SK: Global Analysis of Host-Pathogen
Interactions that Regulate Early-Stage HIV-1 Replication. Cell 2008, 135:
49-60
4. Rain JC, Selig L, De Reuse H, Battaglia V, Reverdy C, Simon S, Lenzen G,
Petel F, Wojcik J, Schächter V, Chemama Y, Labigne A, Legrain P: The
protein-protein interaction map of Helicobacter pylori. Nature 2001, 409:
211-215
5. LaCount DJ, Vignali M, Chettier R, Phansalkar A, Bell R, Hesselberth JR,
Schoenfeld LW, Ota I, Sahasrabudhe S, Kurschner C, Fields S, Hughes RE: A
protein interaction network of malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.
Nature 2005, 438:103-107

- 22 -

6. Juri Ayub M, Smulski CR, Nyambega B, Bercovich N, Masiga D, Vazquez
MP, Aguilar CF, Levin MJ: Protein-protein interaction map of the
Trypanosoma cruzi ribosomal P protein complex. Gene 2005, 357:129-136
7. Uetz P, Dong YA, Zeretzke C, Atzler C, Baiker A, Berger B, Rajagopala SV,
Roupelieva M, Rose D, Fossum E, Haas J: Herpesviral protein networks
and their interaction with the human proteome. Science 2006, 311:239-242
8. Navratil V, de Chassey B, Meyniel L, Delmotte S, Gautier C, André P,
Lotteau V, Rabourdin-Combe C: VirHostNet: a knowledge base for the
management and the analysis of proteome-wide virus-host interaction
networks. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D661-668.
9. VirHostNet database [http://pbildb1.univ-lyon1.fr/virhostnet]
10. Ptak RG, Fu W, Sanders-Beer BE, Dickerson JE, Pinney JW, Robertson DL,
Rozanov MN, Katz KS, Maglott DR, Pruitt KD, Dieffenbach CW:
Cataloguing the HIV type 1 human protein interaction network. AIDS Res
Hum Retroviruses 2008, 24:1497-1502
11. Dyer MD, Murali TM, Sobral BW: The landscape of human proteins
interacting with viruses and other pathogens. PLoS Pathog 2008, 4:e32
12. Rao A, Kumar MK, Joseph T, Bulusu G: Cerebral malaria: insights from
host-parasite protein-protein interactions. Malar J 2010, 9:155
13. Orasan C: Patterns in scientific abstracts. In Proceedings of Corpus
Linguistics 2001 Conference. 29 March-2 April 2001; Lancaster. Edited by
rayson P, Wilson A, McEnry T, Hardie A, Khoja S: Lancaster University;
2001:433-443

- 23 -

14. Shah P, Perez-Iratxeta C, Bork P, Andrade M: Information extraction from
full text scientific articles: Where are the keywords? BMC Bioinformatics
2003, 4:20
15. Jenssen TK, Laegreid A, Komorowski J, Hovig E: A literature network of
human genes for high-throughput analysis of gene expression. Nat Genet
2001, 28:21-28
16. Vignali M, McKinlay A, LaCount DJ, Chettier R, Bell R, Sahasrabudhe S,
Hughes RE, Fields S: Interaction of an atypical Plasmodium falciparum
ETRAMP with human apolipoproteins. Malar J 2008, 7:211
17. Erdıs P, Rényi A: On random graphs I. Publ. Math. Debrecen 1959, 6:290–
297
18. Shnyrova AV, Ayllon J, Mikhalyov II, Villar E, Zimmerberg J, Frolov VA:
Vesicle formation by self-assembly of membrane-bound matrix proteins
into a fluidlike budding domain. J Cell Biol 2007, 179:627-633
19. Tobili Y S-Y: Molecular Factors Responsible for Host Cell Recognition
and Invasion in Plasmodium falciparum. J of Eurkaryot Microbiol 1992,
39:81-189
20. Clark I, Budd A, Alleva L, Cowden W: Human malarial disease: a
consequence of inflammatory cytokine release. Malaria J 2006, 5:85
21. Visser AE, Abraham A, Sakyi LJ, Brown CG, Preston PM: Nitric oxide
inhibits establishment of macroschizont-infected cell lines and is
produced by macrophages of calves undergoing bovine tropical
theileriosis or East Coast fever. Parasite Immunol 1995, 17:91-102.
22. Stevenson MM, Zavala F: Immunology of malaria infections. Parasite
Immunol 2006, 28:1-4

- 24 -

23. Tripet F: Ecological Immunology of mosquito-malaria interactions: Of
non-natural versus natural model systems and their inferences.
Parasitology 2009, 136:1935-42
24. Tripet F, Aboagye-Antwi F, Hurd H: Ecological immunology of mosquitomalaria interactions. Trends Parasitol 2008, 24:219-227
25. Madrid DC, Ting LM, Waller KL, Schramm VL, Kim K: Plasmodium
falciparum purine nucleoside phosphorylase is critical for viability of
malaria parasites. J Biol Chem 2008, 283:35899-35907
26. Baker DA, Kelly JM: Purine nucleotide cyclases in the malaria parasite.
Trends Parasitol 2004, 20:227-232
27. Downie MJ, Kirk K, Mamoun CB: Purine salvage pathways in the
intraerythrocytic malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Eukaryot Cell
2008, 7:1231-1237
28. Engwerda CR, Beattie L, Amante FH: The importance of the spleen in
malaria. Trends Parasitol 2005, 21:75-80.
29. Ben-Neriah Y: Regulatory functions of ubiquitination in the immune
system. Nat Immunol 2002, 3:20-26
30. Moore LR, Fujioka H, Williams PS, Chalmers JJ, Grimberg B, Zimmerman
PA, Zborowski M: Hemoglobin degradation in malaria-infected
erythrocytes determined from live cell magnetophoresis. FASEB J 2006,
20:747-749
31. Marechal E, Cesbron-Delauw MF: The apicoplast: a new member of the
plastid family. Trends Plant Sci 2001, 6:200-205

- 25 -

32. Camila CS, Graham HC, Ana Paula CAL, Jeremy CM: Role of the
Trypanosoma brucei natural cysteine peptidase inhibitor ICP in
differentiation and virulence. Mol Microbiol 2007, 66:991-1002
33. Dagenais TR, Freeman BE, Demick KP, Paulnock DM, Mansfield JM:
Processing and presentation of variant surface glycoprotein molecules to
T cells in African trypanosomiasis. J Immunol 2009, 183:3344-3355
34. Taylor JE, Rudenko G: Switching trypanosome coats: what's in the
wardrobe? Trends Genet 2006, 22:614-620
35. Radwanska M, Guirnalda P, De Trez C, Ryffel B, Black S, Magez S:
Trypanosomiasis-induced B cell apoptosis results in loss of protective
anti-parasite antibody responses and abolishment of vaccine-induced
memory responses. PLoS Pathog 2008, 4:e1000078
36. Antoine-Moussiaux N, Buscher P, Desmecht D: Host-parasite interactions
in trypanosomiasis: on the way to an antidisease strategy. Infect Immun
2009, 77:1276-1284
37. Wahl SM, Swisher J, McCartney-Francis N, Chen W: TGF-beta: the
perpetrator of immune suppression by regulatory T cells and suicidal T
cells. J Leukoc Biol 2004, 76:15-24
38. Chris ALO, Sue M, David GS, Emel O, Brian RS: Infection of bovine cells
by the protozoan parasite Theileria annulata modulates expression of the
ISGylation system. Cell Microbiol 2006, 8:276-288
39. Dirk AED, Paula CF, Volker TH: Theileria parva: taking control of host
cell proliferation and survival mechanisms. Cell Microbiol 2000, 2:91-99
40. Heussler DDaV: Transformation of leukocytes by Theileria parva and T.
Annulata. Ann Rev Microbiol 1999, 53:42

- 26 -

41. Billker O, Lourido S, Sibley LD: Calcium-Dependent Signaling and
Kinases in Apicomplexan Parasites. Cell Host Microbe 2009, 5:612-622
42. Fawcett DW, Doxsey S, Stagg DA, Young AS: The entry of sporozoites of
Theileria parva into bovine lymphocytes in vitro electron microscopic
observations. Eur J Cell Biol 1982, 27:10-21
43. BioCarta [http://www.biocarta.com]
44. Dobbin CA, Smith NC, Johnson AM: Heat shock protein 70 is a potential
virulence factor in murine toxoplasma infection via immunomodulation
of host NF-kappa B and nitric oxide. J Immunol 2002, 169:958-965
45. Kaufmann SHE: Heat-shock proteins: a missing link in the host-parasite
relationship? Med Microbio Immun 1990, 179:61-66
46. Dolcet X, Llobet D, Pallares J, Matias-Guiu X: NF-kB in development and
progression of human cancer. Virchows Archiv 2005, 446:475-482
47. Pavanelli WR, Silva JJN: The role of nitric oxide in immune response
against Trypanosoma cruzi infection. The Open Nitric Oxide Journal 2010,
2:1-6
48. Lambrechts L, Fellous S, Koella JC: Coevolutionary interactions between
host and parasite genotypes. Trends Parasitol 2006, 22:12-16
49. Mishra GR, Suresh M, Kumaran K, Kannabiran N, Suresh S, Bala P,
Shivakumar K, Anuradha N, Reddy R, Raghavan TM, Menon S, Hanumanthu
G, Gupta M, Upendran S, Gupta S, Mahesh M, Jacob B, Mathew P, Chatterjee
P, Arun KS, Sharma S, Chandrika KN, Deshpande N, Palvankar K,
Raghavnath R, Krishnakanth R, Karathia H, Rekha B, Nayak R, Vishnupriya
G, Kumar HGM, Nagini M, Sameer Kumar GS, Jose R, Deepthi P, Sujatha
Mohan S, Gandhi TKB, Harsha HC, Deshpande KS, Sarker M, Keshava

- 27 -

Prasad TS, Pandey A: Human protein reference database--2006 update.
Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:D411-414
50. Tekwani BL: Current antiparasitic drug targets and a paradigm shift in
discovery of new antiparasitic drugs and vaccines. Curr Drug Targets
2008, 9:921
51. Caffrey CR, Rohwer A, Oellien F, Marhöfer RJ, Braschi S, Oliveira G,
McKerrow JH, Selzer PM: A Comparative Chemogenomics Strategy to
Predict Potential Drug Targets in the Metazoan Pathogen, Schistosoma
mansoni. PLoS One 2009, 4:e4413
52. Bader GD, Betel D, Hogue CW: BIND: the Biomolecular Interaction
Network Database. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:248-250
53. Xenarios I, Salwinski L, Duan XJ, Higney P, Kim SM, Eisenberg D: DIP, the
Database of Interacting Proteins: a research tool for studying cellular
networks of protein interactions. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:303-305
54. Prasad TS, Kandasamy K, Pandey A: Human protein reference database
and human proteinpedia as discovery tools for systems biology. Methods
Mol Biol 2009, 577:67-79
55. Ceol A, Chatr Aryamontri A, Licata L, Peluso D, Briganti L, Perfetto L,
Castagnoli L, Cesareni G: MINT, the molecular interaction database: 2009
update. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 38:D532-9
56. Kerrien S, Alam-Faruque Y, Aranda B, Bancarz I, Bridge A, Derow C,
Dimmer E, Feuermann M, Friedrichsen A, Huntley R, Kohler C, Khadake J,
Leroy C, Liban A, Lieftink C, Montecchi-Palazzi L, Orchard S, Risse J, Robbe
K, Roechert B, Thorneycroft D, Zhang Y, Apweiler R, Hermjakob H: IntAct--

- 28 -

open source resource for molecular interaction data. Nucleic Acids Res
2007, 35:D561-565
57. Ramón A JG, Baldo O: Integration and Prediction of PPI Using Multiple
Resources from Public Databases. J Proteomics Bioinform 2008,1:166-187
58. Hanisch D, Fundel K, Mevissen HT, Zimmer R, Fluck J: ProMiner: rulebased protein and gene entity recognition. BMC Bioinformatics 2005,
6:(Suppl 1):S14
59. Berglund AC SE, Ostlund G, Sonnhammer ELL: InParanoid 6: eukaryotic
ortholog clusters with inparalogs. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:263-266
60. Raghavachari B, Tasneem A, Przytycka TM, Jothi R: DOMINE: a database
of protein domain interactions. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D656-661
61. Patil A, Nakamura H: Filtering high-throughput protein-protein
interaction data using a combination of genomic features. BMC
Bioinformatics 2005, 6:100
62. Frank E, Hall MA, Holmes G, Kirkby R, Pfahringer B, Witten IH: Weka: A
machine learning workbench for data mining. In: Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery Handbook: A Complete Guide for Practitioners and
Researchers. 1st Edition. Edited by Maimon O, Rokach L. Berlin: Springer;
2005:1305-1314

Figures
Figure 1 - Network models representing the crosstalk interactions between
Plasmodium and human cells and their biological implications

A. The sub-graph from the Plasmodium-Human network showing the lymphocyte
activation interactions.
- 29 -

B. Four parasite proteins interacting with the host protein of hemoglobin alpha
subunit. The parasite proteins belong to the protease family (red nodes
represent the parasite proteins and green ones represent the host proteins).
Figure 2 - Network models representing the immunomodulatory interactions of
parasite within host’s immune system

A. Subgraph showing various host proteins involved in different aspects of the
immune system activation. Host proteins responsible for leukocyte activation,
T and B cell activation, and provoking NK cells possibly interact with
trypanosoma proteins. Red nodes represent parasite and green ones represent
host proteins.
B. Subgraph showing the involvement of parasite VSG with IgM-related peptide
of the host. Red nodes represent the parasite proteins and green ones represent
the host proteins.
Figure 3 - Interaction subgraph in the east coast fever model.

The model illustrates the attempt of the parasite in controlling over the host’s cell
survival processes.
Figure 4 - Overall model for the interference of the Theleria parva in the Bos
taurus interaction system
Figure 5 - The ligand interactions of some drugs for malaria

The COX-1 of human interacts with Aspirin, and also with the parasite lactate
dehydrogenase
Figure 6 - Representation of druggable proteins in the proteome of parasites

A. plasmodium
B. trypanosoma
Figure 7 - High level work-flow diagram for the host-parasite interaction
network modeling

The workflow is segmented into the four phases; information space creation, filtering
& normalization, modeling and model analysis.

- 30 -

Tables
Table 1 - Number of interspecies protein interactions retrieved using different
methods for the three models

Data Source

Theileria-

Plasmodium-

Trypanosoma-

cattle

human

human

Database

0

455

0

Text mining co-citation (post-curation)

1

22

8

Prediction

47

833

3362

Table 2 - Clustering coefficients for the network models and their
corresponding randomized networks

System

Network

Randomized

Theileria-cattle

0.426

0.073

Plasmodium-human

0.02

0.001

Trypanosoma-human

0.291

0.002

Table 3 - Proteins and pathways attributed to the malaria disease in the
available literature

PMID

Organism

Proteins/pathways

Status in the network

19591795 Parasite

PfAMA_1

Present

19641203 Host

IFN, TNF, IL-2

Present

19380468 Host

TNF, IL-6

Present

15137943 Host and parasites

Protein kinase

Present

17029647 Host

Cytokine

Present

15988316 Host

Ubiquitin pathways

Present

18532880

- 31 -

Table 4 - Proteins and pathways attributed to the HAT disease in the available
literatute

PMID

Organism

Nodes/pathways

Status in network

PMC260043

Host

B cell and T cell activation

Present

PMC1364224 Host

IFN gamma

Present

PMC2707606 Host

NF-kB

Present

17944830

Parasite

VSG

Present

19818332

Host and parasite

Protein kinases

Present

11237819

Host

TNF

Present

Table 5 - Proteins and pathways attributed to the cattle’s east coast fever in
the available literature

PMID

Organism

Nodes/pathways

Status in network

16441438

Host

TashAT family

Present

11207566

Host and parasite

Protein kinases

Present

10347800

Host

PCD, TNF, NO pathways

Present

15245750

Host

IFK-B signalling pathway

Present

PMC2628565 Parasite

PIM’s role in cell adhesion Present

Additional files
Additional file 1 – The proportion of known as well as new pathways recovered
from the network model of plasmodium-human

Additional file 2 – GO analysis results for the host and parasite networks in the
interaction model of plasmodium-human

Additional file 3 – GO analysis results for the the host and parasite networks in
the interaction model of trypanosoma-human
Additional file 4 – GO analysis results for the the host and parasite networks in
the interaction model of theileria-cattle

- 32 -

Figure 3

Figure 4

Figure 5

Figure 6

Figure 7

