Microscopic Description of Entanglements in Polyethylene Networks and Melts:
Strong, Weak, Pairwise, and Collective Attributes
Stefanos D. Anogiannakis,† Christos Tzoumanekas,∗,†,‡ and Doros N. Theodorou†,‡
National Technical University of Athens, School of Chemical Engineering, Zografou Campus, GR-15780 Athens,
Greece, and Dutch Polymer Institute (DPI), P.O. Box 902, 5600 AX Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Received March 16, 2015; E-mail: tzoumanekas@gmail.com

arXiv:1212.1390v3 [cond-mat.soft] 30 Jan 2013

Abstract:

We present atomistic molecular dynamics simulations of two
Polyethylene systems where all entanglements are trapped: a perfect network, and a melt with grafted chain ends. We examine microscopically at what level topological constraints can be considered
as a collective entanglement effect, as in tube model theories, or as
certain pairwise uncrossability interactions, as in slip-link models.
A pairwise parameter, which varies between these limiting cases,
shows that, for the systems studied, the character of the entanglement environment is more pairwise than collective. We employ a
novel methodology, which analyzes entanglement constraints into
a complete set of pairwise interactions, similar to slip links. Entanglement confinement is assembled by a plethora of links, with
a spectrum of confinement strengths, from strong to weak. The
strength of interactions is quantified through a link ‘persistence’,
which is the fraction of time for which the links are active. By weighting links according to their strength, we show that confinement is
imposed mainly by the strong ones, and that the weak, trapped,
uncrossability interactions cannot contribute to the low frequency
modulus of an elastomer, or the plateau modulus of a melt. A selfconsistent scheme for mapping topological constraints to specific,
strong binary links, according to a given entanglement density, is
proposed and validated. Our results demonstrate that slip links can
be viewed as the strongest pairwise interactions of a collective entanglement environment. The methodology developed provides a
basis for bridging the gap between atomistic simulations and mesoscopic slip link models.

1

Introduction

In the molecular description of structure-property relations of polymer melts and networks, one of the fundamental concepts is chain
entanglement. When macromolecules interpenetrate, the term entanglements intends to describe interactions resulting from the un† National Technical University of Athens, School of Chemical Engineering,
Zografou Campus, GR-15780 Athens, Greece
‡ Dutch Polymer Institute (DPI), P.O. Box 902, 5600 AX Eindhoven, The
Netherlands

1

crossability of chains. In flexible polymer melts and rubbers these
interactions alter in a universal manner their dynamical, flow, and
deformation properties.
Molecular-based theories which aim to incorporate entanglements have first to define them. This task poses certain difficulties.
In mathematical terms, entanglement interactions originate from
topological constraints (TCs). Thus, in a many-chain theory, and
in order to derive entanglement effects from ‘first principles’, a rigorous description 1–3 invokes the use of topological invariants and
certain approximations to make the problem tractable. In such theories, however, the range of problems that can be studied is limited
by mathematical complexity.
In order to deal with entangled matter, several conceptual simplifications were introduced by Edwards, 4,5 de Gennes, 6,7 Doi and
Edwards, 8,9 and other pioneers in the field of polymer physics.
The crucial simplification was the description of entanglement
through a mean field and a single chain model. In tube model
theories 4,7,9,10 it is postulated that the entanglements generate a
confining, (quadratic) mean field potential, which restricts lateral
monomer fluctuations to a tube-like region surrounding each chain.
In a perfect network, the potential attracts the monomers toward
the centerline of the tube and chains are restricted to adopt conformations which are compatible with the tube constraint. In polymer
melts, this confinement is not permanent, but leads to reptation, 6 a
one-dimensional diffusion of the chain along the tube.
The axis of the tube plays the role of a coarse-grained representation of the real chain, and it is called the primitive path 5,8,9 (PP). It
has a random-walk like conformation, like the real chain, but with
a larger step length, which corresponds to the entanglement molar
mass, 9 Me . The latter is determined from the plateau modulus of
long chain polymer melts. The average tube diameter is not so welldefined; it is considered to be of the order 9 of magnitude of the PP
step length; it is often assumed that the two lengths are equal.
An alternative, discrete, localized version of the tube constraint
is utilized in models employing slip-links. 8,11–15 The tube is replaced by a set of slip links along the chain, which restrict lateral
motion but permit chain sliding through them. The real chain is
represented by the corresponding PP, which is a series of strands
of average molar mass Me connecting the links. The tube model
provides a basis for working out analytically the linear and nonlinear viscoelasticty of polymer melts 9,16–20 and networks 10,15,21–24
at a molecular level. Slip link models 19,20,24 also allow for analytical 8,11–13,15,25,26 or stochastic simulation 14,27–37 treatments with a
molecular representation, at the single or many-chain level.
The concepts conveyed by the tube and slip-link models provide
the prevailing microscopic view of entanglement. In stochastic simulations, the slip links are usually envisaged as binary entanglements, a form of discrete pairwise contacts which confine (link)
the motion of two neighboring chains. The tube constraint, on the
other hand, acts along the whole chain; locally, it is thought that
confinement is applied collectively by many overlapping surrounding chains, and not by specific pairwise interactions. Any gain or

loss in the local pairwise interaction density does not necessarily
affect the tube diameter or length, as it does the local entanglement
density of slip-link models 19 (see p 552 in ref 20).
A microscopic picture of entanglement is also suggested by scaling models relating the degree of entanglement to chemical structure. Notably, the most successful of them are based on similar 38–41
ideas. A good correlation with polymer melt data is provided by the
packing length 42 model, which is based on the conjecture of Lin, 43
and Kavassalis and Noolandi. 44,45 The conjecture is in support of
a collective 40,46 argument; an entanglement results from a fixed
number of polymer chains cohabiting the same volume. On the
other hand, the scaling model 38,47 of Colby and Rubinstein, which
is in agreement with data from solutions in a theta solvent, is in support of a pairwise 40,46 argument; a fixed number of binary contacts
between chains gives rise to an entanglement strand.
Despite the success of tube and slip-link models in describing the
linear (especially) and nonlinear rheology of polymer melts, as well
as rubber elasticity, the nature of entanglements remains elusive. It
would be desirable, therefore, to probe entanglements microscopically in order to correct, refine and support the perspective given
above with microscopic information. Simulation is probably the
method of choice, since we need access to some kind of topological information which is not directly accessible with spectroscopic
methods.
The question, then, is how to define entanglements in a set of
densely packed chain molecules. A unique definition might not
exist, but a certain microscopic description has to be invoked to address the above topics. In this direction, several attempts have been
made. Assuming that entanglements lead to persistent chain interactions, the detection of long-lived chain contacts 48–51 was the target of many simulations. Although it was found that such contacts
do exist, it is rather difficult to evolve this picture further. Additionally, the topological origin of entanglements is overlooked. It
becomes prominent, however, in studies 52–57 employing topological invariants. The latter can detect pairs of entangled and unentangled chains, and the ‘amount’ of winding between the chains.
We have to note that, for open chains, true invariants do not exist.
Moreover, the simplest invariant for closed chains, the Gauss linking number, can misclassify 2 topological constraints. In any case,
the provided information is at the global level of a chain. Though
very useful, it is not clear how to put it into the context of current
tube and slip-link model ideas. The latter require a somewhat localized description of entanglement, especially in connection with
constraint release (CR) processes. In this respect, the use of a local
topological measure may be more suitable.
Microscopic investigations of tube model ideas have greatly benefited from simulations which construct the PPs according to the
Edwards definition, 5 i.e., by holding chain ends fixed and removing all chain slack from the system. The first implementation 58,59
was by Everaers et al., but soon thereafter other methods for shrinking the chains in continuous 60,61 and lattice models 62,63 appeared.
There is strong evidence 61,64–68 that the PP Kuhn segment coming
out from these methods is in very good agreement with Me estimations from plateau modulus measurements. The PP representation
is also popular in slip-link simulations. Thus, it is hoped that these
coarse graining methods could serve as a bridge 69,70 between the
different levels of description.
The properties of PPs have been studied in several systems,
such as rubbers, 71 melts, nanocomposites, 72–76 grafted brushes, 77
glasses, 78 in equilibrium or under deformation 75 and flow. 79 Concepts and properties such as entanglement density scaling, 58,59,80
entanglement molecular weight, 58,61,64–67,81 CLF potential, 62,81
tube potential, 82 dilution exponent, 63 onset of entanglements, 83,84
and even the literal picture of a tube 85–89 enclosing a chain and the

2

associated tube survival probability, have been investigated. Despite the available microscopic information, the many chain nature
of entanglement remains unclear. A possible reason is that most
of the simulations follow tube model ideas and examine, with the
help of PPs, single chain properties. Nevertheless, it is the many
chain nature of entanglement which is elusive and is replaced by a
mean field. Therefore, rather than examining single chain properties, which are the result of tube confinement, we can try to analyze
the chain environment that gives rise to confinement. This is the
strategy followed here.
In order to make the problem tractable, we have only examined systems with trapped entanglements; a polyethylene (PE) melt
where all chain ends are grafted to other chains, and a perfect PE
network formed by connecting cross-links initially situated at the
sites of a diamond lattice. In this way, our results are free of complications related with CR processes. The latter can be addressed
after a suitable microscopic description of entanglement has been
given. In the overview of the paper given below, the terms tube
and tube constraint are used as generic terms for entanglement constraints, and are not specifically related to tube model ideas.
As probes of the entanglement environment, we have used the
PPs themselves. Exploiting the fact that they sample the uncrossability constraints of the surroundings, we show that, by mapping
short molecular dynamics (MD) trajectories to PP trajectories, it is
possible to detect all the pairwise chain interactions assembling the
tube constraint. To verify that these interactions result from true
topological constraints, we ensure that they satisfy a local topological criterion. The latter is based on the common idea of two concatenated rings that define a binary link. Therefore, entanglement
constraints are decomposed into a large set of local links, which is
more or less complete. Similar ideas have been explored, analytically, by Iwata and Ewards. 90,91
By construction (chain shrinking), all these links are sampled inside the pervaded volume of a chain. The mechanism by which
link sampling takes place is clarified in detail. While some of those
links are continuously present, many of them are intermittent or
‘blinking’ links. They are not sampled continuously over a specific
observation time. Less constraining (weak) links are sampled less
frequently. This leads to a distribution of linking times, and thus
the links assembling the tube constraint have a spectrum of confinement strengths, with maxima at the strong 92 and weak part of
the spectrum.
From this picture, we then develop a simple statistical model
and we introduce a pairwise parameter, that can quantify the pairwise versus collective character of mean-field type links representing many uncrossability interactions. With the help of these tools
we show quantitatively that;
• the entanglement environment consists of a plethora of pairwise interactions, so that it is inherently collective;
• there exist strong and weak pairwise uncrossability constraints;
• the majority of pairwise interactions are weak and confinement is mainly enforced by the strongest ones;
• weak topological interactions can be fully relaxed by stored
length fluctuations, and they do not contribute to the low frequency
storage modulus of an elastomer, or the plateau modulus of a melt;
• the average effect of the collective entanglement environment
is to confine a chain through a much smaller number of mean-field
type links, which have a dominant pairwise character;
• the pairwise parameter is chain length and entanglement density independent.
In order to be able to map the entanglement environment to specific pairwise interactions, we present a procedure for selecting the
strongest links according to a given link density. The procedure

introduces an auxiliary time scale which is self-consistently determined to be approximately one τe . It is shown that strong links have
the property that they are sampled at least once within this time interval. By following the space-time trajectories of selected links,
under equilibrium, deformation, or flow, we could obtain useful
mesoscopic information for the development of hierarchical sliplink, or single particle 93–95 simulation schemes. The mean square
displacement of selected links is presented in the appendices.
The PPs employed in our study have been generated by the
CReTA algorithm, 61 which applies a contour reduction (chain
shrinking) scheme. Different schemes, based on time averaging, 96,97 have been proposed. However, the presented results are
not based on specific properties of the PPs, except that they probe
pairwise uncrossability constraints in the pervaded volume of a
chain. Thus, our conclusions are fairly general and independent
of the particular scheme employed for obtaining the PPs.
In order to make the article more readable and focus on the analysis of entanglement constraints, many of our results are presented
in the Appendices. Our microscopic description is also supported
by several explanatory videos 98 provided with the Supporting Information for this article.

2

Systems Studied

The systems analyzed are a PE network "rubber" and an end-grafted
PE melt (see next section). The rubber system contains 64 tetrafunctional cross-links and 128 chains. The cross-links are initially
situated at the sites of a diamond lattice and all chains are attached
to cross-links at both ends. Thus, the network is perfect (absence
of pendant chains, chain loops, etc.). Each chain consists of 201
united atoms, not counting the cross-links at its two ends.
The melt system consists of 16 linear chains of 500 united atoms
each. In order to examine the chain length dependence of some
of our results, we also analyzed a melt with eight chains and double the chain length, i.e., of 1000 united atoms. The entanglement
density of these melt configurations is approximately the same.
Whenever required, these systems will be denoted by (C500) and
(C1000), but in general, our analysis will focus on the (C500) system.
The simulations were performed in the NPT ensemble, at temperature 450 K, pressure 1 Atm, by employing the united atom
TraPPE 99,100 force field and 3D periodic boundary conditions.
United atom beads correspond to CH2 methylene units, except
chain ends, trifunctional, and tetrafunctional cross-links, which correspond to CH3 , CH units, and carbon atoms, respectively.
The rubber was equilibrated by the gradual push-off 101 method,
discussed in Appendix I. The melt was equilibrated by standard
connectivity altering 102,103 Monte Carlo algorithms. The shortest
relaxation time related with the tube constraint, τe , is 1.3 ns for the
rubber, and 1.7 ns for the melt (C500). It was determined from
the first crossover time in the mean square displacement (msd) of
midchain monomers (Appendix II). The longest relaxation time of
each system, τR0 , is determined from the msd crossover to an invariant regime (absence of long-range diffusion), and is 9.8 ns for
the rubber and 11.5 ns for the melt (C500). The corresponding
crossover times for the (C1000) melt are 1.6 and 19.4 ns. Details
about the dynamics and the equilibration of the systems will appear
elsewhere. 104,105
Both systems share, approximately, the same density, 106,107 ρ '
0.78 g/cm3 , and characteristic ratio, C∞ . The latter is 8.5 for the
rubber and 8 for the (C500) melt. Volumetric, structural, 102,103 and
entanglement 61 properties of the melt system have been presented
elsewhere. They are in very good agreement with corresponding
experimental estimates. The rubber system is structurally similar

3

to the melt, except for entanglement properties. Its Me was estimated 61 from the Kuhn segment of the PPs, and is about half that
of the PE melt. The large entanglement density of the rubber is
also reflected 104 in a comparatively high, entanglement-dominated,
shear modulus for an elastomer, of 5.9 MPa. As is discussed in Appendix I, it is due to the short length of the precursor chains and the
artificial preparation conditions of the network.

3

Methodology

For both systems, we generated a molecular dynamics (MD) trajectory, which is of length 35τe for the rubber and approximately 50τe
for the melts, covering a few times the longest relaxation time of
each system. Our purpose is to use the trajectory as an ensemble of
states with invariant topology, representative of the entanglement
constraints in the system. This means that under thermal motion all
entanglements should remain trapped, a condition satisfied in the
perfect network but not in the melt, due to the free motion of chain
ends.
The melt topology can become invariant by introducing additional topological constraints. Our choice is to graft (bond) all
chain ends to their nearest united atom bead along a different nearby
chain. Thus, the melt system will be referred to as end-grafted
melt (EG-melt). Effectively, the EG-melt becomes a perfect trifunctional network with as many cross-links as chain ends. The initial
chains are grafted at both ends and have on average two randomly
placed cross-links along their length (from the grafted ends of other
chains).
In a MD simulation of this network, the conformations sampled
by grafted chains are restricted by the same topological constraints
present in the parent melt state, plus the constraints due to grafting. From such a network trajectory we store chain conformations
by excluding all bonds inserted to impose grafting, i.e., the network trajectory is mapped to a melt system, with virtually free
chain ends. Thus, starting from a melt configuration with a specific topology, we can generate thermally fluctuating chain conformations with approximately the same topology, by eliminating CR
through grafting.
Our results for the EG-melt refer to this ‘perturbed’ MD trajectory. The perturbation preserves the average PP contour length, but
it alters contour length fluctuations. Because of the presence of additional constraints, the grafted chains cannot sample certain Rouse
modes with long length scales. However, the short and medium
length scale modes, which are responsible for the sampling of the
enclosing tube, are adequately sampled. In this respect, at short
times, the dynamics of grafted chains are similar to those of melt
chains with free chain ends. For example, at short times, the mean
square displacement (see Appendix II) scales as t 0.5 and then displays a crossover to a regime scaling as t 0.28 , a crossover indicative
of tube confinement.

4

Reduction to Networks of Local Links

The generated MD trajectories were subjected to topological analysis, frame by frame, by using the CReTA 61 (Contour Reduction
Topological Analysis) algorithm. CReTA reduces a dense system
of polymer chains to the corresponding system of primitive paths
(PPs), constructed as the shortest paths 9 under the same ‘topological constraints’ (TCs) as the original chains. By fixing chain ends
in space and by prohibiting chain crossing, the contour lengths of
all chains are simultaneously minimized (shrunk), until they become piecewise linear objects coming together at the nodal points
of a network. During contour reduction, chain thickness is progres-

Network nodes, local links, and the topological criterion satisfied by local links. (a) PPs are composed of consecutive beads. Parts ABC
and abc, of chains α, β , respectively, constrain each other and are sketched
with a bead structure. All other parts are sketched with contour lines. The
beads which ‘carry’ a TC are colored gray. They mark the points along the
PPs where a suitably defined curvature 105 shows a local maximum. Each
TC bead is pairwise associated with a TC bead along the PP of a mutually
constrained chain. Thus, chain ends and TC bead pairs partition a chain
into consecutive strands. In order to decide if a TC bead pair defines a local
link we apply a topological criterion at the bead level. For each pair, such
as (B, b) between chains α, β , we construct the composite strands ABC and
abc. The ends of these strands are virtually connected, and then we check
if the strand ABC crosses the area enclosed by the virtual segment ac and
the beads along abc. Similarly, we examine if the strand abc crosses the
area enclosed by the virtual segment AC and the beads along ABC. In this
way, we examine twice if the ABC and abc rings concatenate. If at least
one of these checks is successful, the TC bead pair (B, b) is promoted to
a network node (local link), otherwise it is discarded. Nodal coordinates
are calculated from the vector average of the coordinates of each TC pair.
Hence, the configuration shown in (a) becomes the one shown in (b), and
the underlying topology is mapped to a network. Dynamical videos of such
networks, and realistic closeups on PP networks of a PE melt can be found
in the Supporting Information.
Figure 1.

sively reduced. Finally, the PPs become very thin objects consisting of fused beads which can be also mapped to the initial chain
monomers. Explanatory videos and other details can be found elsewhere. 61,98
Network nodes are placed where PPs are mutually blocked (entangled) and contour reduction can no longer proceed (see network
pictures in Supporting Information). They represent effective spatial localization points of the TCs, that each chain is subjected to.
They can also be envisaged as local links that have a physical resemblance to binary slip links. The details of mapping a system
of ‘tightened’ entangled curves, consisting of consecutive beads, as
our system of PPs here, to a network with point-like nodes and rectilinear edges, will be described elsewhere. 105 It will be shown that
the mapping is very stable with respect to changes in the free parameters involved. A short account of the mapping is given in Figure 1, and in Appendix III.

4

Figure 2. At times zero and ∆t, chain α is linked to a group of five and six
different chains, respectively. Since four of these chains are the same, the
overlap between these groups is zα (∆t)|zα (0) = 4. The cumulative number of different chains sampled by α within ∆t is Uα (∆t) = 7. By definition Uα (0) = zα (0). For the chain lengths studied, the probability that two
chains are entangled with more than one link, as chain α and chain 2 here,
is less than 10% (see Appendix IV). Thus, throughout the document we will
consider that, at any time t, the number of links of chain α is equal to the
number of linked chains zα (t).

5
5.1

Results and Discussion
Fluctuations in the Number of Local Links
and Linked Chains (LCs)

Here, we examine the tube constraint at the level of the surrounding
chains that create it. To this end, we define as zα (t) the number of
chains linked, instantaneously, to a specific chain α, at a specific
time t. As shown in Figure 2, all chains in this set are different.
That is, if at time t chain α is linked twice or more with chain β ,
at different places along their contours, then β counts as one chain
in zα (t), and vice versa. We will refer to this time-dependent set
as the mate chains, or Linked Chains (LCs) of α. If, due to periodic boundary conditions, α is also linked with different ‘images’
of β or of itself, then these images 108 are considered as different
chains in zα (t). Entanglements or knots of α with itself (same image) are not considered. For the chain lengths studied here their
occurrence is negligible. 59,61 We also note that zα (t) characterizes
a chain’s entanglement environment by keeping track of the identities of linked chains at time t, in a form suitable for comparisons at
different times.
In Appendix IV (Figure 16), we show that, when two chains are
linked, the probability that they are coupled with more than one
link is very small (less than 10%). Hence, the simplification of
dealing with linked chains instead of individual links is justified.
This choice has been made in order to facilitate the presentation
and the interpretation of our results. We could as well work with
individual links. Therefore, in the following sections we will use
interchangeably the terms local links and linked chains for zα (t),
though in our calculations hzα (t)i refers to LCs and not individual
links.
In Figure 3a we plot the distribution of zα (t) reduced by its equilibrium time average hzα (t)i. In contrast to what one would expect
for a system with solely trapped entanglements, zα (t) fluctuates
around a time average value. In a corresponding slip-link system,

zα (t) would be constant. This happens because each PP is a dynamically fluctuating object that samples its environment by colliding
with the contours of the surrounding PPs penetrating its pervaded
volume.
Such ‘collisions’ lead to the formation of local links which are
not permanent. Instead they are formed for certain times, i.e., they
exhibit various linking times. However, there also exist links which
restrict continuously two fluctuating PPs and exhibit a permanent
character. As a result, the instantaneous number of links sampled
by a PP, zα (t), fluctuates around an average value. In Appendices V
and VI, and in the videos provided with the Supporting Information,
this issue is discussed in more detail. In the inset to Figure 3a, we
also see that the amplitude of these fluctuations seems to be smaller
for long chains.
The chain average of zα (t) is defined as

z(t) =

1
Nch

Nch

∑ zα (t)

,

(1)

α=1

where Nch is the number of chains. In Figure 3b it is plotted
as a function of reduced time, t/τe . We see that for both systems
it is approximately constant. Its time average, hz(t)i, is 9.5 for
the rubber, and 14.6, 25.3 for the EG-melt (C500) and (C1000),
respectively. These values lead 109 to a rubber entanglement density
which is approximately twice that of the EG-melt.
The fluctuations around hz(t)i are much smaller for the rubber
because chain averaging is more effective in smoothing individual chain fluctuations. The rubber consists of eight (sixteen) times
more chains than the EG-melt (C500) and (C1000) systems, respectively. In a very large system, z(t) would appear as a thin horizontal
line, i.e., it would remain constant over time. Thus, despite the fluctuations in the number of links of individual chains, when viewing
the system as a single chain (through hz(t)i), we observe the behavior expected of a slip-link system.

5.2

Cumulative Number of Sampled links:
Complete Set

A

Because of the absence of CR, after a certain time the PP cannot
sample any new links in its surroundings. This fact is exploited in
order to gather all sampled links into a complete set of pairwise uncrossability interactions characterizing the entanglement environment.
To elucidate these ideas further, we introduce Uα (t), the cumulative number of different chains which have been linked to a given
chain, α, up to time t. All chains in Uα (t) are different. They were
not necessarily linked to α at all times between 0 and t. Some of
them may have been linked for a long (discontinuous or continuous) subinterval, some of them for just one instant, or for the whole
time t. As shown in Figure 2, Uα (t + ∆t) is larger than Uα (t) by
the number of mate chains which link to α, for the first time, at any
instant between t and t + ∆t.
An informative graph of Uα (t), together with individual ‘link
trajectories’, is shown in Figure 4. In this figure, the systems are
observed at equidistant time instants, spaced by 0.01 ns, over a total observation time (OT), T , which covers a few times the longest
relaxation time of each system. Specifically, T ' 35τe for the rubber, T ' 50τe for the EG-melts.
We see that some links ‘blink’. They are not present during the
entire OT. From the number of points in a trajectory we can estimate the corresponding linking time (LT), τ, i.e., the total time
during which a particular link was active. In order to analyze the
plethora of links we introduce the link persistence, τ̃ = τ/T , which

5

Figure 3. (a) Distribution of zα (t) reduced by the corresponding time average hzα (t)i (see text). Log-log coordinates in the inset. To obtain these
results, a separate distribution is constructed for each chain first and then an
average is taken over the distributions of all chains. This is done because
the entanglement environment (number of entanglements) and related fluctuations may be different for each chain. Thus, we consider each chain as a
subsystem, we analyze the fluctuations within each subsystem, and then we
average over the subsystems. This is necessary in order to map the fluctuations to a single chain model. (b) Average number of links per chain at time
t.

Lateral link sampling (LLS) mechanism by which PP sampling
of new links takes place in a spatially fixed tube. (a) The instantaneously
sampled PP segments are one above the other, at a small distance h. (b)
A small downward displacement of one node leads to a local link between
the two PPs. The reverse process is also possible. In reality (see Appendix
V), all nodes fluctuate due to the thermal motion of the real chains and the
associated redistribution of stored length. This leads to lateral PP fluctuations and to this kind of sampling. Therefore, such events are frequent.
Note that the strands in the figure are topologically constrained, whether
they form a link or not. When h is of the order of lateral PP fluctuations
they can become linked for certain time intervals. If the persistence, τ̃, of
such an occasionally formed link tends to zero, then the corresponding local
pairwise interaction can be considered as weak.
Figure 5.

Figure 4. Cumulative number of different links or linked chains (LCs),
Uα (t), sampled by a given chain α within observation time, T , as a function
of reduced time, t/τe . (a) EG-melt (C500), T ' 50τe . (b) Rubber, T ' 35τe .
Uα (t) is a stepwise, increasing, integer valued function, shown by a solid
line. Here, it enumerates with unique integer indices, i, cumulatively, the
links sampled by chain α, up to time t. When a link, i, is found to be paired
to α at time t, a point with coordinates (i,t) is plotted. Therefore, horizontal
lines, continuous or segmented, correspond to individual ‘link trajectories’,
as those denoted by m1, m2 and m3. The links sampled for the first time at
a time t 0 > 0 lack point entries for earlier times t < t 0 (link m3). For convenience, the links sampled at t = 0 are also plotted as a separate column
to the left of t = 0. By construction, the number of points in a t-column is
equal to zα (t), and Uα (0) = zα (0). The linking time (LT), τ, of a link, is
the total plotted length of the corresponding trajectory. The reduced linking
time, τ̃ = τ/T , is a T -independent quantity characterizing the ‘persistence’
of each link, with values 0 < τ̃ ≤ 1. In the videos provided as Supporting Information, intermittent link trajectories with τ̃ < 1, e.g., link m1, appear as
‘blinking’ links and they have various, intermediate confinement strengths.
Link trajectories with τ̃ ' 1, e.g., link m2, correspond to permanent, strong
links. There also exist links with τ̃ ' 0, e.g., link m3, which are very weak
links. Similar figures for other chains can be found in the Supporting Information.

is basically the reduced linking time of a link. As the observation time increases, τ becomes proportional to T , with a different
prefactor for each link (see Supporting Information). Thus, for adequately long OTs, as the ones utilized here, the τ̃’s are equilibrium
T -independent quantities that characterize the ‘persistence’ of link
trajectories with values 0 < τ̃ ≤ 1.
A subset of the links appears to be permanent, with τ̃ ' 1. Most
of the LCs sampled at t = 0 have this property. Instantaneous sampling at any t (a t-column in Figure 4), will have a large overlap
with this subset, which are basically strong links. This is evident
in individual t-columns, where most of the points are located on
horizontal lines originating at t = 0. Note that, by construction, the
number of points in a t-column is zα (t).
A striking feature of Figure 4 is that the majority of the Uα (T )
links have small, even vanishing τ̃’s. Moreover, the number of links
sampled over the whole OT, Uα (T ), is much larger than those sampled instantaneously, zα (t), at any time. Furthermore, after a certain time, t 0 , most of the links with appreciable τ̃ have been sampled. The links sampled for the first time at later times, t > t 0 ,
appear to have a τ̃ ' 0.
The sampling mechanism that generates blinking links is relatively simple, and is demonstrated in Figure 5. The driving force
for this mechanism are stored length fluctuations, as described in
detail in Appendix V. In order to avoid confusion with constraint
release (CR) mechanisms driven by chain end motion, we call this
mechanism lateral link sampling (LLS). However, upon nonlinear
deformation or flow, LLS could possibly act as a CR mechanism.
A similar mechanism was implemented 95,110,111 by Padding and
Briels to enforce chain uncrossability in a coarse grained model of
polyethylene.
The chain average of Uα (t) is defined as

U(t) =

1
Nch

Nch

∑ Ua (t)

,

(2)

α=1

and is shown in Figure 6. It is estimated by averaging over
multiple time origins, so that by construction U(0) = hz(t)i (since
Uα (0) = zα (0)). We see that U(t) increases rapidly and approaches
a plateau which is much larger than the average number of links
hz(t)i per chain (see Figure 3b). This is more evident in the EGmelt (C500); the longer chains and the wider tube of this system

6

Average number of di f f erent linked chains or links which
make the tube constraint up to time t. τe is 1.3 ns for the rubber and 1.7
ns for the EG-melt (C500).

Figure 6.

lead to a larger number of surrounding chains assembling the tube.
In this system, U(t) does not seem to level off. It increases slowly,
with a very small but nonzero decreasing rate. A true plateau with
a slightly larger value is expected to exist (fixed tubes), at some
longer t.
However, it is not required to sample this regime, since the links
sampled for the first time at such long times have a vanishing τ̃
(see Figure 4). Most probably, their sampling involves large, cooperative stored length fluctuations (Appendix V), which are not
frequent. 112 While these links are part of the entanglement environment of a chain, their confinement strength is negligible, and
they can be safely considered as weak.
Therefore, for the systems studied, and for all practical purposes,
we consider that an observation time of T ' 40 − 50τe is adequate
for sampling all pairwise interactions playing a significant role in
confinement. We also consider that the links contained in Uα (T )
form a complete set. This set applies to α the reputed tube constraint. The state of entanglement of α, described by zα (t), can be
projected, at any time, to the Uα (T ) links. Corresponding statements can also be made for U(T ), which views the system as a
single chain. In the next sections, we will refer to these complete
sets with the symbols Uα , U, defined as
Uα = Uα (T ) , U = U(T ).

(3)

These are adequate representations of the full sets Uα (∞), U(∞),
which may have contributions from additional weak links that can
be neglected.

5.3

Number and Weight Distribution of Link Persistences

We have seen that for the average single chain, the entanglement
environment consists of a complete set of U different links. Here,
we characterize this set through the distribution of the persistence
of links. In Figure 7a we present the normalized probability distribution, p(τ̃), discretized in intervals of ∆τ̃ = 0.1. The fraction
of the U links falling in each interval is p(τ̃)∆τ̃. We observe that
p(τ̃) has an absolute maximum at τ̃ ' 0, and a second maximum at
τ̃ ' 1. Hence, the majority of the U links are weak, and the average
link persistence, τ̃n , is quite small, namely, 0.30 for the rubber, and
0.24 for the EG-melt.
In the Supporting Information we present p(τ̃) for several increasing T , starting from T = τe . It is shown that for the observa7

(a) Normalized distribution of link persistences. Since all links
are equally weighted, this distribution corresponds to the number distribution of τ̃’s. (b) Normalized weight distribution of link peristences. Log-log
coordinates in the insets. The observation time, T , is 35τe for the rubber,
and 50τe for the EG-melt (C500).
Figure 7.

tion times discussed here the distribution becomes invariant. That
is, had we increased T , we would have obtained, practically, the
same distribution. This is a necessary condition in order to consider U = U(T ) as a complete set and T -independent. It is satisfied
when sampling the entanglement environment for long OTs, where
the linking time of any link becomes proportional to T , so that the
corresponding persistence, τ̃ = τ/T , acquires an equilibrium value.
Additionally, at long T ’s the weak links of the environment have
been adequately sampled.
In order to associate the persistence of a link with a confinement
strength, we have to note that in p(τ̃) all links are equally weighted.
Therefore, τ̃n corresponds to the number-average link persistence.
However, equal weighting hides the fact that the tube constraint is
applied mainly by links with τ̃ ' 1. In order to give greater importance to these links we need to estimate the weight average distribution of τ̃’s, w(τ̃), which is defined as
τ̃
p(τ̃) .
(4)
τ̃n
In this way, the link of a chain is weighted according to the ratio of
its persistence, over the sum of the persistencies of all links to this
chain. For a link between chains α, β , with persistence τ̃αβ , the
corresponding weight is
w(τ̃) =


wαβ τ̃αβ =

τ̃αβ
Uα

∑ τ̃αβ

=

τ̃αβ
hzα (t)i

(5)

β =1

and corresponds to the confinement strength of this link. The closer
τ̃ is to unity, the stronger the confinement provided by a link. Similarly, w(τ̃)d τ̃ is the fraction of confinement provided by the U links
having a persistence between τ̃ and τ̃ +d τ̃. Note that p(τ̃) and w(τ̃)
view the system as a single chain.
The normalized weight distribution w(τ̃) is shown in Figure 7b.

We see that confinement comes from, mainly, links with τ̃ ' 1.
However, the form of w(τ̃) does not allow for a separation of links
into strong and weak. This issue is discussed in detail in Section 5.7. The weight-average link persistence, τ̃w , is 0.76, for both
systems. It is much larger than τ̃n and it corresponds to the strength
weighted average persistence of links.
In order to clarify this section further, it is useful to make an
analogy with a corresponding slip-link system where all entanglements are trapped. In this case the links do not blink and all link
trajectories are continuous. Then, assuming Z links per chain, we
have z(t) = Z, at any t, and therefore U = hz(t)i = Z, for any observation time. For each link τ̃ = 1 (permanent links), which leads to
τ̃n = 1. Regarding p(τ̃)d τ̃, it would be zero for τ̃ 6= 1, and unity for
τ̃ = 1 (delta function at τ̃ = 1). Regarding w(τ̃), from Eq. (4) we
have w(τ̃) = p(τ̃), and thus, τ̃w = τ̃n = 1. Concerning individual
links, from Eq. (5) we find that all links have an equal confinement
strength, w = 1/Z.
Finally, we note that the strength of a link could be associated
with additional quantities. For example, a time average of suitably
defined elastic interactions over the four strands making the link,
the local friction between the mated chains, the real space fluctuations of the link, the monomer diffusion through a link, etc. At a
first approximation, here, we consider that all these quantities are
expressed indirectly through the link ‘persistence’. They could be
extracted from atomistic simulations as long as individual link trajectories can be defined, as discussed in Section 5.6 and in Appendix II).

5.4

Collective Entanglement Environment, and
Mean-Field Type Links

A useful relation can be obtained by examining Figure 4, again. Denoting by ταβ the LT of a link between chains α, β , the following
equation holds,
ZT

Uα

∑ ταβ =
β =1

za (t)dt ,

(6)

0

where Uα = Uα (T ). With reference to Figure 4, Eq. (6) states
that in order to add up the LTs of the links sampled by α, we can
sum either segmented horizontal lines (left-hand side), or the number of points in vertical t-columns (right-hand side). In either case,
the sums correspond to the total plotted length of the link trajectories, up to time T .
To proceed further we note that the average LT of a link of chain
α, τn,α , and hzα (t)i, can be written as
τn,α =

1
Uα

Uα

∑ ταβ = T τ̃n,α

,

(7)

β =1

hzα (t)i =

1
T

ZT

za (t)dt .

(8)

0

Then, by dividing Eq. (6) with Uα T , we find
Uα τn,α = hzα (t)iT .

(9)
variables 113

Since Uα and τn,α are independently distributed
over the chains of the system (numerically checked), the chain average of Eq. (9) reads
Uτn = hz(t)iT ,

(10)

that can also be written in the T -independent form
U τ̃n = hz(t)i · 1 ,

8

which shows that the average link persistence is τ̃n = hz(t)i/U,
and that the U links can be mapped to hz(t)i links with a persistence
of unity. Eq. (10), Eq. (11), which are exact, provide a concise
microscopic description of entanglements. It can be understood as
follows.
By observing the system over a time T , which covers a few times
its longest relaxation time, we found that for the average single
chain the entanglement environment is made by U different chains,
with which the constrained fluctuating PP collides and forms binary
links. Each link represents a pairwise uncrossability interaction,
with a specific mate chain. The average linking time, τn , is much
smaller than T , because the majority of links are active only for very
short times (blinking links). The large number of these interactions
shows that the entanglement environment is inherently collective.
This description corresponds to the left-hand side of Eq. (10).
The right-hand side is basically a mean-field type average of the
left-hand side, where the identities of the mate chains are mixed. It
is understood as follows. For the average single chain, the entanglement environment can be viewed as hz(t)i links per chain which are
active over the entire observation time, T . These links do not blink.
Their linking time is τ = T (permanent links), so that their link persistence is τ̃ = 1. However, the identities of their mate chains, and
therefore their coordinates in real space and along the chain, are not
specific. They are of mean-field type. Each one represents many
pairwise interactions, and all together represent the complete set of
the U links on the left-hand side. This view leads to the foundations
of the mean field picture employed in slip-link models.
The above discussion is also valid in the limit T → ∞. In this
case, the appropriate equation for the mapping of the collective entanglement environment to a small number of hz(t)i mean-field type
interactions is Eq. (11). In stochastic slip-link models, these meanfield interactions are usually realized as binary slip links, though
they are not necessarily pairwise. For example, it is possible to consider that slip links represent multichain interactions, as has been
discussed by Nair and Schieber. 33 The degree of multichain or pairwise character of these mean field interactions is examined in the
next section.

(11)

5.5

Pairwise Parameter

To examine the mean field uncrossability interactions in more detail, we define zα (t)|zα (0) as the number of links at t = 0, which
also contribute to zα (t) at time t, i.e., the ‘overlap’ between the
sets contributing to zα (0) and zα (t). By definition, this number
is smaller than or equal to zα (0) (see Figure 2). By averaging
zα (t)|zα (0) over multiple time origins along an equilibrium trajectory, we obtain the autocorrelation function hzα (t)|zα (0)i. Note
that the links which contribute to zα (t)|zα (0), for a different time
origin, need not always be the same. The ratio
hzα (t)|zα (0)i
(12)
hzα (t)i
is the percentage of links at time t = 0 which are also present at
time t, irrespective of their state of entanglement with α at times
between 0 and t. The corresponding average over all chains, q(t),
is plotted in Figure 8. It is defined as
qα (t) =

On the same footing, it is meaningful to assume that the time
correlation function defined in Eq. (12) can be written as
Uα

hzα (t) |zα (0)i =

∑ Pαβ Pαβ

(15)

β =1

Then, the weight-average persistence of the links of chain α
reads
Uα

τ̃w,α =

∑ wαβ τ̃αβ =
β =1

=
Figure 8. Fraction of links at time t = 0, which are also present at time t.
The plateau indicates the pairwise character of the mean-field interactions
that confine the average single chain. The squares denote corresponding
predictions from the weight-average link persistence τ̃w (T ), for observation
times (T /τe ) = 0, 1, 2, 5, 10, 15, ..., 50. (see text).

hzα (t)i τ̃w,α = hzα (t) |zα (0)i .

α=1

∑ hzα (t)i

α=1

=

Moreover, Eq. (18) can now be written as
qU τ̃n = hz (t)i τ̃w ,

hz (t) |z (0)i
hz (t)i

(13)

We observe that q(t) starts from unity (t = 0), the largest possible
value, then decreases, and after a certain time reaches a plateau. For
all systems, this time is around t = 10τe . The decay of q(t) is due
to the mean-field nature of the hz(t)i links. The pairwise character
of these links is quantified by the pairwise parameter, q, which is
defined as the asymptotic value q = q(t → ∞). We find that q is
0.76 for the rubber, 0.74 for the EG-melt (C500), and 0.81 for the
EG-melt (C1000).
In principle, 0 < q ≤ 1, though it is obvious that it cannot become arbitrarily 114 small. According to Eq. (13), when q = 0, the
chains linked to a reference chain at times zero and t would all be
different to each other, something impossible in a system with fixed
topology. q = 1 corresponds to a strictly pairwise character. The
larger the deviation of q from unity, the higher the multichain or
collective character of the environment. Here, the mean field links
have a strong pairwise character, supporting the employment of binary links in slip-link models. Moreover, it seems that the pairwise
parameter is practically chain length and entanglement density independent, a very interesting result.
A simple model which relates q to the weight-average link persistence, and therefore to the confinement strength of pairwise interactions, is presented below. The linking probability, Pαβ , that
chain α is linked to chain β , can be estimated as the ratio of the
linking time ταβ , over the observation time T , i.e., Pαβ = τ̃αβ . The
probability that these chains are not linked is 1 − Pαβ . Obviously,
Pαβ = 0 for chains not included in Uα . The analysis below concerns
long observation times, T → ∞, where these probabilities become
T -independent,with the convention t ≡ T .
The average number of different chains linked to chain α is
Uα

hzα (t)i =

9

Uα

∑ Pαβ = ∑ τ̃αβ
β =1

(18)

From Eq. (13),Eq. (18), and by taking into account that T → ∞ we
then find
q = τ̃w .
(19)

=

Nch

(17)

As in Eq. (9), hzα (t)i and τ̃w,α are independently distributed
variables over the chains of the system (numerically checked).
Thus, the chain average of Eq. (17) reads
hz (t)i τ̃w = hz (t) |z (0)i · 1

∑ hzα (t) |zα (0)i

(16)

which leads to

Nch

q (t) =

Uα
1
Pαβ Pαβ
hzα (t)i β∑
=1

β =1

(14)

(20)

which is the ‘weighted’ form of Eq. (11).
A key result of this work is Eq. (18). In the latter, the hz(t)i
mean-field links, of strength-weighted average link persistence τ̃w ,
are mapped to hz(t)|z(0)i (or qhz(t)i) links with a strength-weighted
persistence of unity (shown explicitly in the equation).
Eq. (19) is in very good agreement with the data of Figure 8.
Even for short observation times T , where τ̃w is T -dependent (see
Supporting Information), the relation q(T ) = τ̃w (T ) is able to follow the data, while in the asymptotic regime the agreement is very
good. The small deviations are due to Eq. (15), which holds only
approximately.
The above eqs when τ̃n = τ̃w = 1, i.e., when the links do not
‘blink’, lead to hz(t)i = hz(t)|z(0)i = U, and q = 1. This is the
case of a corresponding slip-link model, i.e., of a strictly pairwise
entanglement environment (see Section 5.3). In practical terms,
the meaning of the pairwise parameter, and of Eq. (13), is that the
mean-field links can be realized as qhz(t)i effective binary links,
with specific mate chain identities and coordinates.

5.6

Selecting the Strongest Pairwise Interactions

In Section 5.3, we have seen that the links have various strengths,
which were categorized according to their link persistence, τ̃. However, a specific persistence scale separating the links into strong and
weak does not seem to exist. The reason is that, for intermittent
links, it is not only the linking time which qualifies a link, but also
how this time is distributed over the observation time. The more
uniformly it is distributed, the less weak is the link, as long as its
persistence is appreciable. Therefore, a methodology for selecting
the strongest links has to consider the idle time intervals, or time
gaps, τg , of the blinking links. These are the gaps in the ‘link trajectories’ of Figure 4.
In Figure 9 we present the normalized distribution of τg reduced

Distribution of the persistence of selected links. The maximum
time gap, τg,max , is adjusted so that zsel = qhz(t)i, (filled symbols in Figure 10). In the inset the maximum time gap is adjusted so that zsel = hz(t)i.
The complementary distribution of discarded links can be found in the Supporting Information.
Figure 11.

Distribution of idle time intervals (time gaps), τg , of intermittent
link ‘trajectories’ such as those presented in Figure 4. Log-log coordinates
in the inset.

Figure 9.

Ratio between selected links, zsel , and average number of links
per chain hz(t)i for various time gaps τg,max . Filled symbols correspond to
ratios dictated by the pairwise parameter, q.

Figure 10.

by τe . The time gaps before the first, or after the last appearance
of a link contribute to the distribution. We see that it follows a
power-law decay (inset), and thus it is scale-free. The exponent
is somewhat higher than -2. Almost all values are concentrated at
τg  τe , and large time gaps are rare.
In order to select the strongest links, a possible strategy is to
consider that, for idle time intervals less than or equal to a maximum τg,max , the links are instead active. This way we actually ‘fill
in’ certain time gaps of intermittent link trajectories, such as those
in Figure 4. When all the time gaps of a trajectory are less than
or equal to the specified τg,max then this link spans the whole observation time, and it can be selected as a link which is sampled at
least once within this time interval. The idle times at the beginning
and end of the observation time, if present, can be treated with a
different τg,max . Here, for simplicity, a common τg,max has been
used.
The ratio of the average number of selected links per chain, zsel ,
over hz(t)i, for various values of τg,max , is shown in Figure 10. In
the regime of interest the ratio scales as (τg,max /τe )0.42 . From this
plot we can pick out an appropriate time scale for filling the gaps
of link trajectories. Below we examine two possible choices, and a
third one is examined in the next section.
Following the outcome of weighted averaging, τg,max can be adjusted so that we select as many links as the effective binary links,
i.e., zsel = qhz(t)i, where q is the pairwise parameter. In Figure 10,
this case is shown with filled symbols, and the corresponding τg,max

10

is approximately one τe , for both systems.
The other choice is to select as many links as the average number
of links per chain, which are mean-field type links (see Section 5.4).
That is, zsel = hz(t)i. This scenario corresponds to a ‘realization’
of the mean field in terms of specific pairwise interactions and link
coordinates. In Figure 10, the corresponding τg,max is estimated
from the intersections of the dashed line with the data. It is 1.5τe
for the rubber and 2τe for the EG-melt (C500).
The time scale of the maximum time gaps is very reasonable.
The distribution of the persistence of selected links is shown in Figure 11. The peak at weak links has now disappeared. We also see
that a smaller τg,max leads to fewer selected links, with larger persistencies. It also seems that the distributions are superposable. By
adjusting τg,max to fit the effective binary links, contributions from
links with τ̃ < 0.45 vanish.
To examine the effectiveness of this strategy, in Figure 12 we plot
the trajectories of all the links selected under the condition zsel =
qhz(t)i, with τ̃ ' 0.45. There are few of them. It is seen that they
blink in such a way that they cover the whole observation time.
The above results show that the entanglement environment can
be mapped to specific pairwise interactions, according to a given
link density. The selection procedure sorts out the links according
to their strength, and then selects interactions from the strong part of
the confinement strength spectrum. A certain time scale (interval),
τg,max , is introduced, which is self-consistently determined to be of
the order of one τe . The selected links have the property that they
are sampled at least once within this time interval.
The use of this time scale permits a controlled study with respect
to a slip-link mapping of the system, and the development of simulation schemes which track the motion of entanglements at equilibrium, or under deformation and flow. For trapped entanglements,
this is a straightforward procedure. First, the strong links can be
selected by analyzing a short equilibrium MD trajectory. Then, it is
possible 105 to follow these links upon any kind of deformation. The
whole method is relatively fast, as long as the necessary software
exists. When CR is active, an additional scheme 105 for dealing with
the update of links would be required.

5.7

Link Density, Storage Modulus and Slip-Link
Mapping

Rheological estimates of Me from plateau modulus measurements
are in very good agreement with Me estimates 58,61,64–67,81 from

Figure 13. Cumulative distribution function of p (τ̃), and w (τ̃) (inset),
which were presented in Figure 7. The symbols are put at the specific τ̃’s
for which U pcdf (τ̃) = zsel , according to the table of the inset (see text).
The curves should be examined from the right to the left. The shaded area
encloses the spectrum of τ̃’s corresponding to links which can potentially
contribute to the low frequency modulus of an elastomer, or to the plateau
modulus of a melt.

Intermittent link trajectories that correspond to effective binary links, discussed in Section 5.5. They have been selected by using a
maximum time gap such that zsel = qhz(t)i. (a) EG-melt (C500), (b) rubber.
All the trajectories have a link persistence τ̃ ' 0.45. τg,max is 0.7τe for the
rubber and one τe for the EG-melt (C500). The trajectories are plotted with
different colors and parallel to each other. The vertical axis does not provide
any kind of information.
Figure 12.

the Kuhn segment of the PPs, as obtained from atomistic systems.
However, this length scale is larger 61,69 than the mesh length, 115
MTC , of the networks presented here, i.e., Me ' 2 to 2.5MTC , leading to a link density which is larger 116 than the ‘rheological’ entanglement density.
In the language of this paper, MTC is the average molar mass between the successive, hz(t)i on average, links per chain. The statistical properties of these networks have been presented elsewhere. 61
Conformationally speaking, the larger link density is due to exponentially decaying orientational correlations 61 along successive
steps of the PP. A slowing down of Rouse modes conforming to the
mesh length MTC of the networks has also been observed. 84,111
Hence, a one-to-one mapping of our networks to slip-link models employing the rheological entanglement density, is not viable.
However, given that the links here have various strengths, a way
to resolve this issue is to consider the PP length as obtained from
the networks, but for the slip-link motion under deformation, flow,
or in equilibrium, to consider only a subset of very strong links.
For example, in Appendix II we present the mean square displacement of the selected links zsel = qhz(t)i, which was constructed by
averaging over their individual real space trajectories.
Then, a practical approach is to adjust τg,max of the previous section, so that the selected link density matches the rheological entanglement density. Applying this scheme here, we found that only the
very strong links, with a persistence τ̃ > 0.96, were selected (see
below). The required τg,max is very small, approximately 0.1τe ,
for both systems. It remains to be shown that the spatial statistics of these links provide a meaningful mesoscopic picture. This
approach seems promising as a simple coarse graining scheme for
bridging the gap between atomistic and slip-link models. We note

11

that this scheme is self-consistent, since τg,max is adjusted by the
Me obtained from the Kuhn length of PPs. Alternatively, τg,max can
be adjusted so that the selected link density matches a relaxation
modulus obtained from simulation.
Evidently, the most important question is how the trapped links
revealed here contribute to the low frequency storage modulus of
an elastomer. For example, we have seen that the majority of the
links blink instead of being continuously present (Section 5.2). The
blinking is due to stored length fluctuations (Appendix V), which
at the network level lead to thermal PP fluctuations and considerable idle times in certain link trajectories (Figure 4). Stored length
fluctuations can ‘relax’ the constraining effect of these links, either
fully or partially. Most probably, weak links can be fully relaxed so
that they do not contribute to the modulus, while strong links can
only partially relax. In this respect, the persistence of each link is
indicative of its contribution to the low frequency modulus.
To investigate this issue further, we define the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the persistence of links
Z 1

pcdf (τ̃) =


p τ̃ 0 dτ̃ 0 ,

(21)

τ̃

where p (τ̃) is integrated backward, from the right to the left.
pcdf (τ̃) is the fraction of U links with a persistence τ̃ ≤ τ̃ 0 ≤ 1.
We also introduce wcdf (τ̃), the CDF corresponding to w (τ̃), which
is defined similarly to pcdf (τ̃). wcdf (τ̃) is the fraction of confinement strength provided by links with a persistence τ̃ ≤ τ̃ 0 ≤ 1. Both
distributions are shown in Figure 13. From the form of the CDFs
we see that a τ̃-scale separating the links into strong and weak is
not obvious. However, we observe that the two wcdf (τ̃) superpose,
and that there are two regimes. From τ̃ ' 1 to τ̃ ' 0.95 the confinement strength provided by these links increases abruptly, while
below τ̃ ' 0.95 it follows a smooth increase.
A way to examine Figure 13 with respect to relaxation effects
is the following. In the inset we present a table with the required maximum time gap, τg,max , so that the number of selected
links, zsel , matches
certain link densities discussed in the article.

Z = hLpp i/d − 1, where hLpp i is the average PP contour length,
and d is the PP Kuhn length obtained by mapping the PPs to random
walks 61 (see Appendix II). Z corresponds to the number of ‘rheo-

logical’ entanglements, i.e., Z = (M/Me ) − 1, and is much smaller
than hz(t)i.
It is meaningful to assume that links with a large τg,max can relax
to a larger degree than links with a small τg,max . For example, we
can safely consider that the links with τg,max ≥ τ 0 R , where τ 0 R is
the longest monomer relaxation time in the system (Appendix II),
do not contribute to the low frequency modulus. On the other hand,
links with τg,max ≤ τe can contribute to the modulus, but they can
also partially relax, possibly to a different degree. Grossly speaking, we can assume that at low frequencies links with τg,max > τe
become fully relaxed. We envisage that links which disappear and
reappear, with idle times longer than τe , have been relaxed by stored
length fluctuations.

To proceed further we need to associate a pair of zsel , τg,max ,
to a link persistence. This can be done by associating zsel to a specific τ̃, such that the fraction of the U links with τ̃ ≤ τ̃ 0 ≤ 1 is zsel .
That is, U pcdf (τ̃) = zsel . For example, each symbol of Figure
13

is plotted at a τ̃ associated with a specific pair zsel , τg,max of the
table in the inset. We see that the fraction of links with τg,max < τe
is approximately 20%, with τ̃ > 0.65, for both systems (circle symbols). These links provide approximately 70% of the confinement
strength, (see wcdf (τ̃)) they are qhz(t)i in number, and they can potentially contribute to the low frequency modulus. In Figure 13 they
are enclosed in a gray shaded area.
The rheological entanglement density corresponds to Z very
strong links with τg,max ' 0.1τe and τ̃ > 0.96 (square symbols).
These links provide only 30% to 40% of the confinement strength.
Interestingly, the full confinement strength is provided by links with
τg,max < τ 0 R (diamond symbols). The above results demonstrate
that weak links, though essentially trapped, do not contribute to the
low frequency modulus, in contrast to common belief. It seems
that stored length fluctuations can fully relax weak topological interactions. The role of these fluctuations in the viscoelasticity 117 of
elastomers and melts is central. Regarding the contribution of weak
links to the plateau modulus of a melt, the above discussion is still
valid.

5.8

Discussion

We have seen that the pairwise uncrossability constraints detected
as kinks by chain shrinking methods, such as the Z1, 60,81 CReTA 61
algorithms, or the primitive path analysis method, 58,118 can be either strong or weak interactions, and not detected at all times (link
blinking), even in the absence of CR. The entanglement environment is collective, and certain binary interactions are more important than others. Thus, under nonlinear deformation or flow,
where some kind of entanglement network evolution takes place
(due to CR), it is possible that changes in the number of detected
kinks 75,118,119 do not reflect the actual microscopic changes of the
entangled state of the system.

6

Summary and Conclusions

In molecular theories of rubber elasticity and polymer rheology, the
microscopic entanglement constraints are replaced with a confining
mean field, that restricts laterally chain dynamics and fluctuations.
Here, we examine in detail at what level this mean field is a collective entanglement effect, as in tube model theories, or can be
described through certain pairwise uncrossability interactions, as in
slip-link models (see p. 552 in ref 20).
To this end, for the average single chain, the entanglement environment was expanded to a set of U local links. Each link represents a pairwise uncrossability interaction with a different neigh-

12

boring chain, resembling a familiar slip-link. Since in our systems
all entanglements are trapped, we claim that the U pairwise interactions form a complete set, and that the entangled state of the
system, at any time, can be projected to them. Even if some interactions have been left out of the analysis, it is shown that they are
too weak to be considered.
The number of the U interactions, or links, is very large, which
means that the entanglement environment is inherently collective.
However, their confinement strength varies from strong to weak,
and the majority of them are weak. The plethora of these links is
due to the fact that Primitive Paths (PPs) are fluctuating objects.
Thus, as a PP fluctuates, it collides with the contours of other
PPs and forms local links with them. This sampling mechanism
reveals that weak links appear as intermittent, blinking links, because they are not continuously sampled. However, there also exist
strong links which are sampled continuously, and appear as permanent constraints. The weak links can "disappear" for time intervals
longer than τe , thus they do not contribute to the low frequency
modulus of an elastomer, or the plateau modulus of a melt. Overall,
the average effect of these interactions is to confine a chain through
a much smaller number of mean-field type, permanent links, hz(t)i,
which in principle represent many other pairwise interactions.
The multichain, or pairwise character of these mean-field links
was quantified by defining a pairwise parameter, and it was shown
that the pairwise character dominates. Moreover, for the systems
studied the pairwise parameter is entanglement density and chain
length independent. These results imply that the realization of a
confining mean field with binary interactions, as in slip-link models, is not in contrast with a collective entanglement environment.
On this basis, we proposed a self-consistent scheme for mapping
the entanglement environment to a slip-link model. The scheme
discards weak links and selects the strongest binary interactions
conforming to a given entanglement density. It is directly applicable to trapped entanglements, and to the analysis of MD deformation trajectories of bead-spring and atomistic polymer networks.
From such studies, available slip-link network models can be refined, corrected, or extended, in a hierarchical manner. With suitable extensions, 105 the tracking of constraint release events in polymer melt simulations, seems also possible. A list of symbols and
abbreviations for this paper is given in Table 1.

Appendix I: Construction of a Defect-Free Entangled PE Network
In flexible polymers, the degree of chain overlap is controlled 120
by density and stiffness. Therefore, it seems unusual that the two
systems examined here (rubber and end-grafted melt) have a different degree of entanglement, though the slightly larger C∞ of the
rubber would decrease 120 Me , in comparison to the melt. Since
both systems are well equilibrated, the difference must be due to
the short subchains and the artificial preparation conditions of the
network. The latter is constructed as follows. At the nodes of the
diamond lattice we place carbon atoms. The lattice constant is then
adjusted so that the carbon atoms are bonded with PE chains at full
extension (all-trans state of dihedral angles). This is an unentangled state. Then, the network is let to relax at 1 Atm. Because
of entropic elasticity and cohesive interactions it contracts to the
melt density. At this stage the system is not equilibrated conformationally. To impose equilibration a phantom chain simulation at
melt density (NVT ensemble) is performed. Bead overlaps are then
eliminated by the gradual push-off 101 method.
Entanglements are introduced dynamically after the chains have
been linked to a network, by letting them interpenetrate at the phantom chain simulation stage. It seems that this procedure, together

Figure 14. Mean square displacement of middle chain monomers (10%),
reduced by t 0.5 , for the rubber and the (C500) EG-melt. From the crossovers
we estimate the shortest and longest relaxation time of each system.

with the short length of the chains, leads to a larger degree of chain
overlap in comparison to the melt state. We expect that in networks
of very long subchains, where the cross-link density vanishes, this
effect would subside. It can also be avoided through random linking of a melt system, at the cost of introducing network defects. On
the other hand, the fact that our results have been obtained with different entanglement densities makes our conclusions fairly general.
A different path to defect-free networks has been followed by
Everaers. 52,121 It invokes constructing identical interpenetrating diamond networks, where the lattice constant is set to the root mean
squared end-to-end distance of melt chains. The system consists of
as many networks as are required to reach the melt density, which
is held fixed. As in our case, equilibration is achieved by letting the
networks interpenetrate at a phantom chain simulation stage. Chain
overlaps are then eliminated through a gradual 101 ‘push-off’ stage.
In comparison to our networks the chains can also entangle with
chains from other identical networks.

Appendix II: Mean Square Displacement and Characteristic Relaxation Times
In Figure 14 we present the mean square displacement (msd), g1 (t),
of middle chain monomers (10% of each chain), reduced by t 0.5 .
Four regimes are discernible. The first one is unimportant. It is usually called ballistic. A second regime, scaling as t 0.5 , corresponds
to free Rouse motion within the tube. The next regime is indicative
of tube confinement (restricted Rouse motion along a random-walk
like tube), and it scales, approximately, as t 0.28 , for both systems.
The corresponding tube model prediction 7 is t 0.25 . The last regime
corresponds to an invariant msd. From the first crossover (between
second and third regime) we estimate τe , the time that a monomer
‘hits’ the tube for the first time. It is 1.3 ns for the rubber and 1.7
ns for the EG-melt. From the second crossover we estimate τ 0 R ,
the longest monomer relaxation time of each system, which is 9.8
ns for the rubber and 11.5 ns for the EG-melt. This time corresponds to the Rouse time, τR . Here, it is denoted with a prime,
since the boundary conditions for a Rouse chain are different (free
chain ends). For the (C1000) EG-melt, the corresponding crossover
times are 1.6 and 19.4 ns (not shown).
In Figure 15 we present the msd of middle chain monomers together with the msd of links selected according to the pairwise parameter, i.e., zsel = qhz(t)i. The plateaus indicate the absence of
reptation and long chain diffusion. We see that the selected links
span much shorter distances than real chain monomers. Thus, we

13

Mean square displacement of middle chain monomers, and
selected links. (a) EG-melt (C500); (b) rubber. The links were selected
according to the condition zsel = qhz(t)i. The bars parallel to the plateaus
show certain length scales related to entanglement constraints (see text).

Figure 15.

can say that the enclosing tube of PPs is a shrunk version of the
alleged tube that restricts lateral motion of real chain monomers.
The bars plotted parallel to the plateaus correspond to estimations of certain length scales related to entanglement constraints.
d is the tube diameter estimated from the Kuhn segment of the
PP as d = hR2 i/hLpp i, where hR2 i is the mean square end-to-end
2 i is the mean square edge length of the link netdistance. hdTC
work. 61,83 w2pp is an estimation of the mean square distance between PP contours 61,83 from the inverse of the PP contour length
density. It is defined as w2pp = hV i/(Nch hLpp i), where hV i is the
average volume. Note that the average distance between PP contours is smaller than the average distance between connected links
along the PPs, hdTC i. For example, in Figure 5, the distance between PP contours, h, is much smaller than the PP segments with
average length hdTC i.
For both systems, we see that the msd plateau of the monomers
shows a better correlation with d 2 /4, which corresponds to the
squared radius of the tube, but is actually larger than that. This
is not surprising, since real chain monomers can penetrate the tube
walls, as parts of unentangled loops for example. In both systems
we also observe a correlation between the squared tube radius and
the mean edge length of the link network. The msd plateaus of
selected links are much smaller than these quantities, which means
that link fluctuations are restricted to the inner tube region along the
tube axis. These plateaus are also larger than w2pp , especially in the
EG-melt, which means that the fluctuating PPs can collide to each
other, in accordance with the lateral link sampling mechanism.

Appendix III: Binary Links, Local Knots, and
Ternary Nodes
As shown in Figure 1, each node links locally two chains, except
from few ternary nodes (see below). Within this terminology, each
node resembles a binary link that can be resolved into two TCs

Normalized probability that a chain forms n local links with
another mate chain.
Figure 16.

along two ‘mate chains’. Iwata and Edwards have discussed 90,91
melt dynamics and rheology in terms of local knots which are conceptually similar to the ones presented here. The knots were defined
at the real chain level by using as topological criterion a local form
of the Gauss linking number. For open chains this criterion is not
more rigorous 54,55,122 than the one defined here, while it is computationally more complex.
In our networks about 5% of the nodes are ternary. That is,
there exist situations where three chains, let us say α, β , and γ,
are mutually constrained and form local links with each other (see
videos). Detection of these cases is hard and needs special 105 attention. They are mapped to nodes with six edges, which are further
resolved 105 into three links, αβ , αγ, β γ, so that all three chains
are mutually coupled in pairs. With this choice, the mapping to a
network leads exclusively to binary links, as in slip-link models.
Information about ternary nodes is retrievable, though.
Upon dynamical evolution of the network, most of the ternary
nodes tend to break up into consecutive binary nodes along the
same chain, e.g., αβ , αγ, in the former example. The reverse procedure is also possible (see videos). A statistical analysis 61 has
shown that between successive links of a chain there exists an effective repulsion. Thus, we expect that, while ternary links certainly appear, they are transient. Interestingly, a repulsive interaction also emerges when enforcing 123 detailed balance in the dynamical equations of the slip-link based primitive chain network
model.

Appendix IV: Multiply Linked Chains
In Figure 16 we show the normalized probability, P(n), that a chain
α forms n local links with a mate chain in zα (t), instantaneously, at
time t, (see also Figure 2). For the rubber and the short chain EGmelt P(n) is highly peaked at unity. Therefore, the simplification of
dealing with LCs instead of individual links is justified. However,
as chain length increases P(1) decreases. Thus, in systems with
long chains the analysis should be made against individual links.

Appendix V: Lateral Link Sampling and CReTA
Mapping
The large set of different chains sampled by the PP is rather surprising. Since the PPs are determined by contour reduction, then,
by construction, the sampled chains have portions inside or at the

14

Reduced curvilinear coordinates of the links sampled by the
mechanism of Figure 5: (a) EG-melt (C500); (b) rubber. In order to increase
statistical accuracy we exploit head to tail symmetry. Coordinates with s >
0.5 are plotted at |1 − s|.
Figure 17.

boundaries of the pervaded volume of a reference chain. Moreover, they are not just simple chain contacts, since linked chains
satisfy the local topological criterion of Figure 1, (although some
very weak links could be considered as fluctuating chain contacts).
The lateral link sampling (LLS) mechanism that takes place is simple and was demonstrated in Figure 5.
In order to provide more evidence for this mechanism, we first
define the reduced curvilinear coordinates of a link, sα (t), sβ (t)
between chains α, β . These are defined such that 0 ≤ s ≤ 1. That
is, sα (t) = xα (t)/Lα (t), where xα (t) is the curvilinear coordinate of
the link along chain α, and Lα (t) is the PP contour length. Likewise
for sβ (t). Note that a local link can slide along PP contours, hence
the time dependence of sα , sβ .
In Figure 17 we plot sα (t), sβ (t), for all the links that were first
sampled at a time t > 0. In Figure 4, these links correspond to the
trajectories with Uα (t) > Uα (0), (continuous or segmented trajectories above the column to the left of t = 0 in Figure 4). For each
one of these links, we plot a single point that denotes sα (t), sβ (t),
at the time the link was first sampled. Beyond some explainable
heterogeneities, the homogeneous patterns support the LLS mechanism of Figure 5. The EG-melt data are less dense due to the
smaller number of simulated chains.
Data concentration at the lower left corner of Figure 17b implies
that many of the new links are formed between chain ends. This
is explained by the higher probability of instantaneous link formation between PPs attached to the same tetrafunctional crosslink of a
network. In the EG-melt, local links with sα ' 0 and sβ ' 0 are favored. This is an artificial effect, due to the less mobile chain ends
because of grafting. The fluctuating PPs have higher probability
to collide with certain PP segments which are relatively immobile,
or attached to fixed points. In systems with very long chains these
heterogeneites would disappear.
The physical origin of the LLS mechanism is the thermal motion
of real chains and, more specifically, the thermal motion of stored
length, 7 or chain slack. The spatial distribution of this length is
different at different time-snapshots of our systems. In slip-link
models this ‘redistribution’ is taken into account by the thermal

motion of links and by a random transfer of Kuhn segments between neighboring strands of the PP. Similar mechanisms apply in
our simulations. Since CReTA operates by consuming chain slack,
the spatial redistribution of stored length leads to associated thermal fluctuations of PP conformations (in real space), and transfer
of monomers between the strands of the PP. As a result, there exist small displacements of network nodes which lead to the LLS
mechanism.
As regards the mapping of a specific spatial distribution of stored
length to a network of links by CReTA, this is not unique. CReTA
minimizes the total contour length of the system. Assuming that
there is a unique, ‘global’ minimum, the value of the objective function will hardly be changed if we remove some small length from a
PP and add it to another. The stochastic nature of the reduction performed by CReTA is subject to this effect. At the network level, this
will lead to small displacement of nodes, and therefore, possibly, to
link sampling by the mechanism of Figure 5.
Thus, individual CReTA reductions of the same configuration
(same spatial distribution of stored length), performed with different pseudorandom numbers, may sample, each time, a slightly
different set of links, with practically the same shortest paths (PP
conformations and length). This uncertainty is inherent to the reduction problem. Equivalently, one could say that the stored length
can only be mapped to a small irregular volume around the centerline of the corresponding tube (see Figure 18), and not to a specific
path. This volume encloses a subset of the links which define the
tube constraint and has large overlap with the tube core. An individual reduction by CReTA, then, will sample a path line in this
volume. The links of the subset which are inside the tube core will
be sampled with higher probability. This kind of inherent ‘noise’ in
the network mapping does not affect any of our conclusions. It is
very small 105 relative to the thermal noise driving the sampling of
the links that assemble the tube constraint.

Appendix VI: Entanglement Constraints at the
Level of Shortest Paths and Local Links
A full view of what happens at the link level requires the knowledge of the distances spanned by fluctuating PPs. A short account
is given in Appendix II. A more detailed presentation will be given
elsewhere. 105 For the systems studied here, it suffices to say that,
as time proceeds, the PP segments cover an increasing distance
(through lateral fluctuations), until they have fully sampled their
corresponding tubes. Because of the coarse graining procedure
they span shorter distances than the real chain monomers. Thereby,
their enclosing tubes are shrunk versions of the real chain tubes,
and while they restrict lateral PP fluctuations they do not restrict
lateral monomer fluctuations. We could say that a PP samples the
domain around the centerline of the real chain tube. The picture
that emerges is described in Figure 18.

Schematic representation of entanglement constraints, at the
level of local links. A chain α in a system with fixed tubes is considered.
The PP is a fluctuating object outlined with a black line. The dashed lines
denote parts of the PP which are not shown. The open and filled circles
denote the fluctuating PPs of other chains, which cross the figure plane at
various directions. Because of lateral fluctuations of all PP conformations,
the PP of α can collide with the other PPs denoted by circles, and form
local links with them. Therefore, the PP of α samples its environment by
tracing a fluctuating path through these links. The sampling of links inside
the shaded tube, which are Uα in number, does not violate uncrossability
constraints. Links outside the tube cannot be sampled, or are too weak
to be considered. After a certain time, which for the systems studied is
T ' 40 − 50τe , (and depends on entanglement density), the PP has sampled
all the Uα links within its tube. Instantaneously, the PP is linked to zα (t)
links, a subset of Uα . The linking time (LT) of individual links, τ, varies
significantly. In the figure, the tube constraint is colored blue along the tube
core and light blue on the exterior, conveying the fact that the inner links
(filled circles) are sampled more frequently than outer ones. Thus, there
exist strong and weak links, and the tube constraint is applied collectively
by all of them. In the provided videos weak links appear as intermittent,
blinking nodes. The strong links, making the tube core, appear as nonblinking, continuously present nodes. The diameter of the depicted tube is much
smaller for PP segments, 105 than for real chain monomers (Appendix II),
which are not restricted by the shaded tube. The mean distance between the
circles is proportional to the average distance between PP contours. Note
that this distance is smaller than the average mesh length of the link network. The former distance is based on the density of sampled links Uα ,
which is larger than the link density defined by hzα (t)i (Section 5.2). Effectively, this means that the average distance between the circles is smaller
than the average distance between the filled circles along the tube axis. For
example, in Figure 5, the distance between PP contours, h, is much smaller
than the PP segments with average length < dTC >, which on the average
make the tube axis. The sampling of links is described in Figure 5, and in
Appendix IV.
Figure 18.

Appendix VII: Constraint Release Effects on q(t)
In Figure 19 we present q(t) for the (C500) melt, but this time analyzed as an end-constrained melt (EC-melt). That is, instead of
grafting chain ends to nearby chains, the MD trajectory was generated by keeping all chain ends fixed. This difference has a strong
effect on q(t) due to the presence of a CR mechanism, which can
be called end-looping constraint release (EL-CR). A polymer chain,
say chain A, can disentangle from a mate chain, say chain B, by developing a lateral unentangled hernia that passes over a chain end
of B. That is, by hopping of an internal portion of A over one end of
B, through Rouse motion (see Figure 7 in the work of Zhou 82 and

15

Fraction of links at time t = 0, which are also present at time t,
for the end-constrained melt (C500) generated from the same melt configuration as the EG-melt (C500). The squares denote q(t) estimations from the
weight-average link persistence, as described in Section 5.5.
Figure 19.

Larson). Here, we see that EL-CR reduces q(t) to a lower plateau
value, which becomes discernible at t/τe ' 100. However, a safe
estimation of this plateau would require a longer observation time.
Grossly speaking, the EC-melt can be viewed as the EG-melt
with some links not being trapped, but subject to updating by ELCR. This is similar to a network with dangling chains, i.e., with
both trapped and temporary links. In such a system q(t) will decay toward a certain plateau, characteristic of the density of trapped
entanglements. In a melt with free chain ends (exclusively temporary links), q(t) will eventually vanish. The plateau value for the
EC-melt will be smaller than that of the EG-melt (smaller trapped
entanglement density). However, the pairwise parameter is defined
as the plateau of q(t) when a system is examined with all of its
entanglements being trapped (fixed tubes). For this purpose, as explained in Section 3, CR is eliminated by grafting all free chain
ends. Therefore, a plateau in q(t), in the presence of CR, does not
correspond to a pairwise parameter for the entanglement environment. The decay of q(t), or the difference between the EG-melt and
EC-melt plateau, can possibly provide some kind of CR information, but this issue was not examined here.

Author Information
Corresponding Author
E-mail: tzoum@central.ntua.gr

Supporting Information
Entanglement network views of a PE melt (Figure S1), link trajectories for representative chains (Figure S2), number and weight
distribution of link persistences, for increasing observation time T
(Figure S3), Number-average and weight-average link persistence
as a function of increasing T (Figure S4), distribution of unselected
link persistences (Figure S5), magnified section of Figure 13 (Figure S6), and 15 explanatory videos for the material discussed in the
document, with an associated description. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Table 1.

List of Symbols and Abbreviations

zα (t)|zα (0)
hzα (t)|zα (0)i
qα (t)
z(t),U(t), q(t)
q

Number of chains in the system
Chain index, 1 ≤ α ≤ Nch
entanglement time
Rouse time
Entanglement Molecular Weight
Observation Time (OT)
Linking Time (LT)
Link persistence
Number of different links or Linked Chains (LCs)
constraining α at time t
Cumulative number of the different links
sampled by α up to time t
Subset of links constraining α at both times, 0 and t
zα (t)|zα (0) averaged over multiple time origins
ratio of hzα (t)|zα (0)i over hzα (t)i
Chain averages of the corresponding quantities above.
Pairwise parameter, q = lim q(t)

p(τ̃)
w(τ̃)
τ̃n,α
τ̃n
τ̃w,α
τ̃w
τ̃αβ
wαβ (τ̃αβ )
Pαβ
τg,max
zsel
PP
TC
LC
LLS
CDF
EG-melt
EC-melt
EL-CR

Number distribution of link persistence
Weight distribution of link persistence
Average persistence of links of chain α
Average link persistence
Weight average persistence of links of chain α
Weight average link persistence
Persistence of a link between chains α, β
Confinement strength of a link with persistence τ̃αβ
Probability that chain α is linked to chain β
Maximum time gap of link trajectories
Number of selected links per chain
Primitive Path
Topological Constraint
Linked Chain
Lateral Link Sampling
Cumulative Distribution function
End-Grafted melt
End-Constrained melt
End-Looping Constraint-Release

Nch
α
τe
τR
Me
T
τ
τ̃ = τ/T
zα (t)
Uα (t)

t→∞

Acknowledgement The authors would like to acknowledge collaborative work with Mark Robbins, Ting Ge, and Robert Hoy on
the problem of quantifying entanglement loss in crazed polymer
glasses, which helped in posing some of the problems examined
here. We also would like to thank Athanasios Morozinis for sharing
the MD trajectories used in this study. The work of C.T. and D.N.T.,
in the context of this paper, is part of the Research Programme of
the Dutch Polymer Institute (DPI), Eindhoven, The Netherlands,
Project No. 650. S.D. Anogiannakis is thankful to the National
Technical University of Athens for a PhD fellowship. The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

16

7
Notes and References
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
(31)
(32)
(33)
(34)
(35)
(36)
(37)
(38)
(39)
(40)
(41)
(42)
(43)
(44)
(45)
(46)
(47)
(48)
(49)
(50)
(51)
(52)
(53)
(54)
(55)
(56)
(57)
(58)
(59)
(60)
(61)
(62)
(63)
(64)

17

Edwards, S. F. Proc. Phys. Soc. 1967, 91, 513.
Edwards, S. F. J. Phys. A: Gen. Phys. 1968, 1, 15.
Deam, R. T.; Edwards, S. F. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 1976, 280, 317–353.
Edwards, S. F. Proc. Phys. Soc. 1967, 92, 9–16.
Edwards, S. F. Br. Polym. J 1977, 9, 140–143.
de Gennes, P. G. J. Chem. Phys. 1971, 55, 572–579.
de Gennes, P. G. Scaling concepts in polymer physics; Cornell University
Press, Ithaca, 1979.
Doi, M.; Edwards, S. F. J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans. 2 1978, 74, 1802–
1817.
Doi, M.; Edwards, S. F. The theory of polymer dynamics; Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1986.
Edwards, S. F.; Vilgis, T. A. Rep. Prog. Phys. 1988, 51, 243.
Graessley, W. W.; Pearson, D. S. J. Chem. Phys. 1977, 66, 3363–3370.
Ball, R. C.; Doi, M.; Edwards, S. F.; Warner, M. Polymer 1981, 22, 1010
– 1018.
Edwards, S. F.; Vilgis, T. A. Polymer 1986, 27, 483 – 492.
Hua, C. C.; Schieber, J. D. J. Chem. Phys. 1998, 109, 10018–10027.
Rubinstein, M.; Panyukov, S. Macromolecules 2002, 35, 6670–6686.
Watanabe, H. Prog. Polym. Sci. 1999, 24, 1253–1403.
McLeish, T. C. B. Adv. Phys. 2002, 51, 1379–1527.
Rubinstein, M.; Colby, R. H. Polymer physics; Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2003.
Dealy, J. M.; Larson, R. G. Structure and Rheology of Molten Polymers;
Hanser Gardner Publications Inc., Cincinnati, 2006.
Graessley, W. W. Polymeric Liquids & Networks: Dynamics and Rheology; Taylor & Francis Group, New York, 2008.
Gaylord, R. J.; Douglas, J. F. Polym. Bull. 1987, 18, 347.
Gaylord, R. J.; Douglas, J. F. Polym. Bull. 1990, 23, 529.
Heinrich, G.; Straube, E.; Helmis, G. Adv. Polym. Sci. 1988, 85, 33–87.
Graessley, W. W. Polymeric Liquids & Networks: Structure and Properties; Taylor & Francis Group, New York, 2004.
Khaliullin, R. N.; Schieber, J. D. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 188302.
Schieber, J.; Horio, K. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132, 074905.
Tasaki, H.; Takimoto, J. I.; Doi, M. Comput. Phys. Commun. 2001, 142,
136–139.
Masubuchi, Y.; Takimoto, J.-I.; Koyama, K.; Ianniruberto, G.; Marrucci, G.; Greco, F. J. Chem. Phys. 2001, 115, 4387–4394.
Shanbhag, S.; Larson, R. G.; Takimoto, J.; Doi, M. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2001,
87, 195502.
Doi, M.; Takimoto, J.-I. Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A 2003, 361, 641–652.
Masubuchi, Y.; Ianniruberto, G.; Greco, F.; Marrucci, G. Modell. Simul.
Mater. Sci. Eng. 2004, 12, S91–S100.
Likhtman, A. E. Macromolecules 2005, 38, 6128–6139.
Nair, D. M.; Schieber, J. D. Macromolecules 2006, 39, 3386–3397.
Oberdisse, J.; Ianniruberto, G.; Greco, F.; Marrucci, G. Rheol. Acta 2006,
46, 95–109.
Masubuchi, Y.; Watanabe, H.; Ianniruberto, G.; Greco, F.; Marrucci, G.
Macromolecules 2008, 41, 8275–8280.
Khaliullin, R.; Schieber, J. D. Macromolecules 2009, 42, 7504–7517.
Jensen, M. K.; Khaliullin, R.; Schieber, J. D. Rheol. Acta 2012, 51, 21–
35.
Colby, R. H.; Rubinstein, M.; Viovy, J. L. Macromolecules 1992, 25,
996–998.
Heynmans, N. Macromolecules 2000, 33, 4226–4234.
Milner, S. T. Macromolecules 2005, 38, 4929–2939.
Wang, S. Q. Macromolecules 2007, 40, 8684–8694.
Fetters, L. J.; Lohse, D. J.; Richter, D.; Witten, T. A.; Zirkel, A. Macromolecules 1994, 27, 4639–4647.
Lin, Y. H. Macromolecules 1987, 20, 3080–3083.
Kavassalis, T. A.; Noolandi, J. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1987, 59, 2674–2677.
Kavassalis, T. A.; Noolandi, J. Macromolecules 1988, 21, 2869–2879.
Rubinstein, M. In Theoretical challenges in the dynamics of complex fluids; McLeish, T. C., Ed.; Kluwer Academic Publishes, Dordrecht, 1997.
Colby, R. H.; Rubinstein, M. Macromolecules 1990, 23, 2753–2757.
Gao, J.; Weiner, J. H. J. Chem. Phys. 1995, 103, 1621–1626.
Ben-Naim, E.; Grest, G. S.; Witten, T. A.; Baljon, A. R. C. Phys. Rev. E
1996, 53, 1816–1822.
Szamel, G.; Wang, T. J. Chem. Phys. 1997, 107, 10793–10798.
Yamamoto, R.; Onuki, A. Phys. Rev. E 2004, 70, 041801.
Everaers, R.; Kremer, K. Phys. Rev. E. 1996, 53, R37–R40.
Michalke, W.; Lang, M.; Göritz, D. Phys. Rev. E 2001, 64, 12801.
Orlandini, E.; Whittington, S. G. J. Chem. Phys. 2004, 121, 12094–
12099.
Panagiotou, E.; Tzoumanekas, C.; Lambropoulou, S.; Millet, K. C.;
Theodorou, D. N. Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 2011, 191, 172–181.
Rosa, A.; Orlandini, E.; Tubiana, L.; Micheletti, C. Macromolecules
2011, 44, 8668–8680.
Qin, J.; Milner, S. T. Soft Matter 2011, 7, 10676–10693.
Everaers, R.; Sukumaran, S. K.; Grest, G. S.; Svaneborg, C.; Sivasubramanian, A.; Kremer, K. Science 2004, 303, 823–826.
Sukumaran, S. K.; Grest, G. S.; Kremer, K.; Everaers, R. J. Polym. Sci.
Part B Polym. Phys. 2005, 43, 917–933.
Kröger, M. Comput. Phys. Commun. 2005, 168, 209–232.
Tzoumanekas, C.; Theodorou, D. N. Macromolecules 2006, 39, 4592–
4604.
Shanbhag, S.; Larson, R. G. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 94, 76001.
Shanbhag, S.; Larson, R. G. Macromolecules 2006, 39, 2413–2417.
León, S.; van der Vegt, N.; Delle Site, L.; Kremer, K. Macromolecules
2005, 38, 8078–8092.

(65) Spyriouni, T.; Tzoumanekas, C.; Theodorou, D. N. Macromolecules
2007, 40, 3876–3885.
(66) Kamio, K.; Moorthi, K.; Theodorou, D. N. Macromolecules 2007, 40,
710–722.
(67) Harmandaris, V. A.; Kremer, K. Macromolecules 2009, 42, 791–802.
(68) Hou, J.-X.; Svaneborg, C.; Everaers, R.; Grest, G. S. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2010, 105, 068301.
(69) Tzoumanekas, C.; Theodorou, D. N. Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci.
2006, 10, 61–72.
(70) Masubuchi, Y.; Uneyama, T.; Watanabe, H.; Ianniruberto, G.; Greco, F.;
Marrucci, G. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132, 134902.
(71) Li, Y.; Kröger, M.; Liu, W. K. Polymer 2011, 52, 5867 – 5878.
(72) Riggleman, R. A.; Toepperwein, G.; Papakonstantopoulos, G. J.; Barrat, J.-L.; de Pablo, J. J. J. Chem. Phys. 2009, 130, 244903.
(73) Termonia, Y. Polymer 2010, 51, 4448 – 4451.
(74) Termonia, Y. J. Polym. Sci. Part B: Polym. Phys. 2010, 48, 687 – 692.
(75) Toepperwein, G. N.; Karayiannis, N. C.; Riggleman, R. A.; Kröger, M.;
de Pablo, J. J. Macromolecules 2011, 44, 1034–1045.
(76) Li, Y.; Kröger, M.; Liu, W. K. Macromolecules 2012, 45, 2099–2112.
(77) Hoy, R.; Grest, G. S. Macromolecules 2007, 40, 8389–8395.
(78) Hoy, R. S.; Robbins, M. O. Phys. Rev. E 2005, 72, 061802.
(79) Baig, C.; Mavrantzas, V.; Kröger, M. Macromolecules 2010, 43, 6886–
6902.
(80) Uchida, N.; Grest, G. S.; Everaers, R. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 128, 44902.
(81) Foteinopoulou, K.; Karayiannis, N. C.; Mavrantzas, V. G.; Kröger, M.
Macromolecules 2006, 39, 4207–4216.
(82) Zhou, Q.; Larson, R. G. Macromolecules 2006, 39, 6737–6743.
(83) Tzoumanekas, C.; Lahmar, F.; Rousseau, B.; Theodorou, D. N. Macromolecules 2009, 42, 7474–7484.
(84) Lahmar, F.; Tzoumanekas, C.; Theodorou, D. N.; Rousseau, B. Macromolecules 2009, 42, 7485–7494.
(85) Stephanou, P. S.; Baig, C.; Tsolou, G.; Mavrantzas, V. G.; Kröger, M. J.
Chem. Phys. 2010, 132, 124904.
(86) Stephanou, P. S.; Baig, C.; Mavrantzas, V. G. Soft Matter 2011, 7, 380–
395.
(87) Stephanou, P. S.; Baig, C.; Mavrantzas, V. G. Macromol. Theory Simul.
2011, 20, 752–768.
(88) Baig, C.; Mavrantzas, V. G. Soft Matter 2010, 6, 4603–4612.
(89) Baig, C.; Stephanou, P.; Tsolou, G.; Mavrantzas, V. G.; Kröger, M.
Macromolecules 2010, 43, 8239–8250.
(90) Iwata, K.; Edwards, S. F. Macromolecules 1988, 21, 21901–21904.
(91) Iwata, K.; Edwards, S. F. J. Chem. Phys. 1989, 90, 4567–4581.
(92) Wang, Y.; Wang, S.-Q. Macromolecules 2011, 44, 5427–5435.
(93) Kindt, P.; Briels, W. J. J. Chem. Phys. 2007, 127, 134901.
(94) Briels, W. J. Soft Matter 2009, 5, 4401–4411.
(95) Padding, J. T.; Briels, W. J. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2011, 23, 233101.
(96) Read, D. J.; Jagannathan, K.; Likhtman, A. E. Macromolecules 2008, 41,
6843–6853.
(97) Bisbee, W.; Qin, J.; Milner, S. T. Macromolecules 2011, 44, 8972–8980.
(98) http://youtube.com/user/tzoumtube
(99) Martin, M. G.; Siepmann, J. I. J. Phys. Chem. B 1998, 102, 2569–2577.
(100) Martin, M. G.; Siepmann, J. I. J. Phys. Chem. B 1999, 103, 4508–4517.
(101) Auhl, R.; Everaers, R.; Grest, G. S.; Kremer, K.; Plimpton, S. J. Chem.
Phys. 2003, 119, 12718–12728.
(102) Karayiannis, N. C.; Mavrantzas, V. G.; Theodorou, D. N. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2002, 88, 105503.
(103) Karayiannis, N. C.; Giannousaki, A. E.; Mavrantzas, V. G.;
Theodorou, D. N. J. Chem. Phys. 2002, 117, 5465–5479.
(104) Morozinis, A.; Tzoumanekas, C.; Theodorou, D. N. in preparation
(105) Anogiannakis, S. D.; Tzoumanekas, C.; Theodorou, D. N. in preparation
(106) Foteinopoulou, K.; Karayiannis, N. C.; Laso, M.; Kröger, M. J. Phys.
Chem. B 2009, 113, 442–455.
(107) G.T. Dee, T. O.; Walsh, D. Polymer 1992, 33, 3642.
(108) Extreme care should be taken when dealing with different chain images.
For readers not familiar with simulations, we note that the chain parts
which are inside the simulation box can belong to different chain images.
Here, 76 and 329 different chains pass through the simulation box of
the EG-melt (C500) and rubber system, respectively. The results are not
influenced by periodic boundary conditions.
(109) By estimating the ratio of chain length over (hz(t)i + 1), which is proportional to the entanglement molar mass, we can compare the link density
between the two systems. In the rubber it is about twice that of the ECmelt. Estimating Me from the Kuhn segment of the PPs we are led to the
same conclusion. Note that the link density of our systems is larger than
the rheological entanglement density, as discussed in Section 5.8.
(110) Padding, J. T.; Briels, W. J. J. Chem. Phys. 2001, 115, 2846–2859.
(111) Padding, J. T.; Briels, W. J. J. Chem. Phys. 2002, 117, 925–943.
(112) On this point, strong evidence is provided by q(t), introduced in Section
5.5, which reaches a plateau at times where U(t) is still increasing.
(113) A chain average over these quantities satisfies the relation hUτn i =
hUihτn i.
(114) Note that, as explained in Appendix VII, the pairwise parameter can only
be defined in a system where all entanglements are trapped.
(115) In ref 61 MTC is denoted as MES .
(116) Everaers, R. Phys. Rev. E 2012, 86, 022801.
(117) Edwards, S. F.; Takano, H.; Terentjev, E. M. J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 113,
5531–5538.
(118) Léonforte, F. Phys. Rev. E 2010, 82, 041802.
(119) Mahajan, D. K.; Singh, B.; Basu, S. Phys. Rev. E 2010, 82, 011803.
(120) Graessley, W. W.; Edwards, S. F. Polymer 1981, 2, 1329–1334.
(121) Everaers, R. New. J. Phys. 1999, 1, 12.1–12.54.
(122) Millet, K.; Dobay, A.; Stasiak, A. Macromolecules 2005, 38, 601–606.
(123) Uneyama, T.; Masubuchi, Y. J. Chem. Phys. 2011, 135, 184904.

