NaviCell: a web-based environment for navigation, curation
and maintenance of large molecular interaction maps
Kuperstein I1,2,3#, Cohen DPA1,2,3#, Pook S4#, Calzone L1,2,3, Barillot E1,2,3 and
Zinovyev A1,2,3*
1

Institut Curie, 26 rue d’Ulm, 75248 Paris cedex 5, France

2

INSERM, U900

3

Mines ParisTech

4

Sysra

*To whom correspondence should be addressed
#

These authors contributed equally to the work

Emails: Inna.Kuperstein@curie.fr, David.Cohen@curie.fr, Stuart.Pook@curie.fr,
Laurence.Calzone@curie.fr, Emmanuel.Barillot@curie.fr, Andrei.Zinovyev@curie.fr

Keywords: biological network, comprehensive map of molecular interactions,
Google Maps, semantic zooming, modules in biological networks, blogging
interaction maps

Abstract
BACKGROUND: Molecular biology knowledge can be formalized and
systematically represented in a computer-readable form as a comprehensive map of
molecular interactions. There exist an increasing number of maps of molecular
interactions containing detailed and step-wise description of various cell mechanisms.
It is difficult to explore these large maps, to comment their content and to maintain
them. Though there exist several tools addressing these problems individually, the
scientific community still lacks an environment that combines these three capabilities
together.
RESULTS: NaviCell is a web-based environment for exploiting large maps of
molecular interactions, created in CellDesigner, allowing their easy exploration,
curation and maintenance. It is characterized by the unique combination of three
essential features: (1) efficient map browsing based on Google Maps engine; (2)
semantic zooming for viewing different levels of details or of abstraction of the map
and (3) integrated web-based blog for collecting the community feedback. NaviCell
can be easily used by experts in the field of molecular biology for studying molecular
entities of their interest in the context of signaling pathways and cross-talks between

pathways within a global signaling network. NaviCell allows both exploration of
detailed molecular mechanisms represented on the map and a more abstract view of
the map up to a top-level modular representation. NaviCell greatly facilitates curation,
maintenance and updating the comprehensive maps of molecular interactions in an
interactive and user-friendly fashion due to an imbedded blogging system.
CONCLUSIONS: NaviCell provides an easy exploration of large-scale maps of
molecular interactions, thanks to the Google Maps and WordPress interfaces, with
which many users are already familiar. Semantic zooming which is used for
navigating geographical maps is also adopted for molecular maps in NaviCell,
making any level of visualization meaningful to the user. In addition, NaviCell
provides the framework for community-based curation of maps.

Background
One of the most important objectives of systems biology is developing a common
language for a formal representation of the rapidly growing molecular biology
knowledge [1, 2]. Currently, most of the information about molecular mechanisms is
dispersed in thousands of scientific publications. This knowledge exists in a humanreadable form, which limits its formal analysis by bioinformatics and systems biology
tools.
One of the approaches to formalize biological knowledge is to collect the information
on molecular interactions in the form of pathway databases [3]. Examples of them are
Reactome [4], KEGG [5], Panther [6], SPIKE [7], WikiPathways [8], TransPath [9]
and others that are created using various frameworks and formalisms [10]. Most of
the pathway databases provide ways for exploring the molecular pathways visually,
some include analytical tools for analyzing their structure and some have a possibility
to collect users’ feedback (see Table 1).
A parallel approach for formalizing the biological knowledge consists in creating
graphical representations of the biochemical mechanisms in the form of maps of
molecular interactions [11-19]. The idea of mapping some aspects of molecular
processes onto a two-dimensional image appeared at the dawn of molecular biology.
The first large maps of metabolism, cell cycle, DNA repair have been created
manually starting from the ‘60s and were not supported by any database structure [20,
21]. Such maps can be considered as a collection of biological diagrams, each
depicting a particular cellular mechanism, assembled into the seamless whole, where
the molecular players and their groups occupy particular “territories”. Molecules put
close on the map are assumed to have similar functional properties (though it is not
always possible to achieve in practice). This geographical metaphor has certain
advantages over the database representations for which no global visual image of
pathways’ functional proximity and crosstalk exist.
A significant achievement of systems biology was in combining both approaches for
knowledge formalization into one. For this purpose, it was necessary to develop a

graphical language (meaningful to humans), a computer-readable language (onto
which the graphical language would be mapped) and a piece of software that would
allow charting a large map of molecular interactions and, simultaneously, creating a
computer-readable file (serving as a database). This inspired the creation of tools like
CellDesigner [22], SBGN standard for graphical representation of biological diagrams
[23] and SBML [24] and BioPAX standards for exchanging the content of biological
pathway databases [25]. A number of comprehensive maps of molecular interactions
in the form of reaction networks representing various relatively large parts of
molecular mechanisms, often disease-associated, were created following this way [1119].
However, large maps of molecular interactions are difficult to exploit, maintain and
improve without proper software support for navigation, querying and providing
feedback on their content. There are a number of tools recently developed that take
care of some of these aspects [26] (Table 1). Such tools as CellPublisher [27],
Pathway Projector [28], GenMAPP [29] and PathVisio [30] focus on navigating
within the maps, in particular, exploiting the geographical metaphor and using the
Google Maps engine. SBGN-ED [31] supports all SBGN diagram types.
WikiPathways [8] and Payao [32] focus on the web-based service for network
annotation and curation. Similarly, PathBuilder is an example of a web-based
pathway resource including an annotation tool [33]. The BioUML platform supports
SBGN, SBML and enables the maps to connect to other databases as well as
collective drawing of maps, similar to the principles of Google Docs. Nevertheless,
from our practical experience of map creation, maintenance and curation, we
identified the lack of a tool that would offer simultaneously a) easy web-based
navigation through the content of comprehensive maps of molecular interactions
created according to the systems biology standards; b) visualization of the map at
different scales in a readable form; c) possibility to collect the feedback of a user
about the map’s content in an interactive manner. To fill this unoccupied but highlydemanded niche, we have developed NaviCell which uses the Google Maps engine
for navigation into the map, semantic-zooming principles for exploring the map at
various scales and the standard WordPress blogging system for collecting comments
on the maps, providing a discussion forum for the community around the map’s
content. The combination of these three features makes NaviCell unique and a useful
tool for enabling user-friendly navigation, curation and maintenance of (large) maps
of molecular interactions. NaviCell is publicly available at http://navicell.curie.fr.

Implementations
NaviCell architecture and installation
NaviCell is a bioinformatics environment which allows the conversion of a large
CellDesigner xml file into a set of images and html pages, containing Google Maps
javascript code (Figure 1). These pages can be placed onto a web-server or used
locally through all major flavors of Internet browsers. The procedure of creating map

representations in the form of NaviCell pages is straightforward, and, in the simplest
case of a browse-only representation, takes only a few clicks and several minutes.
Creation of the blog is also straightforward but requires installation of the WordPress
server and automatic generation of topics (posts) in the blog (Figure 1). NaviCell is
supposed to be used by users with two roles: a) a map manager who creates, updates
and annotates the map; and b) a map user who navigates the map through the webinterface, and comments its content through the blog.

Figure 1. General architecture of NaviCell environment.

NaviCell ontology
Since NaviCell uses the CellDesigner files for creating their web-based
representations, it reuses the ontology of biological entities implemented in
CellDesigner SBML extension. NaviCell distinguishes Proteins, Genes, RNAs,
antisense RNAs as distinct biological entities, existing with different modifications
(eg., different phosphorylated forms of the same protein) and in different cell
compartments. Moreover, the same modification of an entity can be represented on
the map at several places by multiple aliases. NaviCell creates and displays in the
selection panel an explicit list of all map elements and groups them per type of
biological entities as described above (see Figure 2).
Naming the map elements in NaviCell is adopted from the BiNoM Cytoscape plugin
[34]. More precisely, entity names are combined with other features such as
modifications, compartment names and complex components. The different features
are indicated by special characters, such as “@” for the compartments, “|” for
modifications and “:” to delimit the different components of a complex. For example,

the name “Cdc25|Pho@cytoplasm” represents the protein Cdc25 in a phosphorylated
state,
located
in
the
cytoplasm,
while
the
name
“Cdc13:Cdc2|Thr167_pho@cytoplasm” indicates a protein complex located in the
cytosplasm, composed of the protein Cdc13 and the protein Cdc2 which is
phosphorylated at position 167 on a threonine residue.

Figure 2. NaviCell layout. (A) Map panel with top-level view of the modular RBE2F map, (B) Fragment of the detailed view of the map with pop-up bubble and
markers, (C) Selection panel with list of the map entities grouped per type.

Semantic zooming
Semantic zooming is a visualization principle which is widely used in modern
geographical maps and consists in providing readable image of the observed part of
the map at each zoom level [35]. In semantic zooming, details of representation
vanish progressively when zooming out, and individual objects or group of objects
can be replaced by representations more suitable and informative for the current scale
of visualization (see Figure 3 for an example). By contrast, simple mechanistic
compression of pixels that is used currently in most biological network viewers makes
network images uninformative. Because of this, the idea of semantic zooming in
application for visualization of biological networks attracted recently some attention
[36, 37]. In NaviCell, the map manager can provide as many semantic zooming views
of the network as needed, and creation of the corresponding images remains in the
manager’s hands. The only requirements that should be met come from Google Maps:
a) The size of the each semantic zooming view should be half-size of the previous
view; b) Relative object position should not change in different zooming views; c) It

is preferable that each image size (in pixels) of the semantic zooming could be
divided by 256.
At the most-detailed zoom level, the image contains all the details, while at leastdetailed zoom, the image provides a general top-level view of the map, hiding details
and simplifying representations of individual objects. Therefore, semantic zooming
consists in gradual hiding and transforming the details of information to give a
meaningful abstract representation when zooming out from the detailed towards the
top level view. These ideas are demonstrated in the Results section using the RB/E2F
pathway map example.
In the simplest case, a user might provide only the most detailed and the least detailed
(top-level) view of the map. NaviCell is able to generate the missing images
automatically, by reducing the numbers of pixels of the images (not semantic zoom
views).

Preparing biological network maps for NaviCell
General requirements
There are three necessary elements for generating the NaviCell representation of a
comprehensive map of molecular interactions: a) a map file in CellDesigner xml
format (the master map); b) a set of semantic zooming views of the map (in PNG
format). At least two levels must be present: the most detailed and the top-level
images; c) a simple configuration file, specifying several options for generating
NaviCell files.

Preparation of map modules
In addition, a user can split the map (master map) into sub-maps called modules,
typically defined on functional or structural basis, though any other criteria might be
used. An unlimited number of separate simplified map representations that can
contain subsets of the master map objects can accompany the master map in NaviCell.
Each module can be represented with its own layout in the most clear and readable
form. NaviCell allows accessing and shuttling between the map’s modules. This
option is of the utmost convenience for facilitating the map exploration as it is
demonstrated in the Results section on the example of RB/E2F map.
NaviCell annotation format
NaviCell is capable to process a structured form of annotations of biological entities,
if the CellDesigner xml file contains annotations in appropriate format. According to
the NaviCell annotation format, annotations are structured in sections, each grouping
specific information (in our examples, we used sections “Identifiers”, containing the
standard entity’s IDs, “Modules” for specifying to which module a particular entity
belongs, and “References” for providing links to publication records of the entity and
free comments). Different sections are further highlighted by different colors in the
NaviCell interface, making them easier to distinguish in the pop-up bubbles and in the

blog posts. In addition, NaviCell converts several types of tags into hyperlinks such
that a user could immediately access external databases such as HUGO, UniProt,
Pubmed, etc.

Figure 3. NaviCell semantic zooming. The same area of the map is visualized at 4
different zoom levels; each image is twice smaller than in the preceding zoom level.
(A) In the top-level view, boundaries of map modules are visualized. (B) In the
pruned view, only the most important molecular cascades are visualized. (C) In the
hidden details view, unreadable tiny details (such as residue names) are hidden. (D) In
the detailed view, entity names, modifications and reaction IDs are visible.
If the entities of the map are not annotated or annotated using a format differing from
NaviCell’s, the pop-up bubble and annotations in the blog are generated with raw
annotations, without the sections that are described above.

NaviCell map generation
When the necessary files are prepared, the NaviCell map representation is generated
through a menu “BiNoM/BiNoM I/O/Produce NaviCell maps files…” of the BiNoM
Cytoscape plugin [34]. This is done through a simple dialog asking to indicate the
location of the configuration file. There are two modes of generating NaviCell files.

The simple mode produces a local set of files with annotations as html files. In this
case, no commenting on the map’s content is possible. The complete mode requires
pre-installed WordPress blogging system, creating and configuring a new blog
devoted to the map, and specifying credentials for a user of WordPress with
administration user rights, in order to automatically generate new posts in the blog.
The source xml file of the map might be or not presented to users: this will depend on
the policy of the map manager.

Figure 4. Module maps. (A) RB module on the Top-level view zoom, (B) RB
module on the hidden-details view zoom, (C) RB module shown as a separate map.

Collecting user’s feedback and expertise
A unique feature of NaviCell is the possibility to create and generate a web-blog for
providing a discussion forum around an already existing map. The users browsing the
map can view the blog entries without registering, or leave their comments after a
simple registration procedure.
NaviCell implements a mechanism of updating the blog entries when the map is
modified. If an entity in the map is removed, then the corresponding blog entry is
moved to archive and becomes invisible. If the annotation of an entity in the map is
changed, then the corresponding blog entry is updated, and the previous version is
moved into the archive together with all previous users’ comments. The blog archive
is accessible to users, by this way providing traceability of all discussions and

changes. This mechanism is implemented to avoid confusion in discussion if an
entity’s annotation has been significantly modified.

Figure 5. Annotation post in the blog for the
complex CDK2:cyclin A2*:p27Kip1*

NaviCell documentation
The NaviCell is accompanied by two detailed guides downloadable from the NaviCell
web site. There is the ‘Guide for map manager and system administrator’ describing
in details NaviCell installation procedure, recommendations for map construction and
structuring entity annotations for the most efficient use of NaviCell, instructions for
semantic zooming levels creation, recommendations for preparing map modules and
using the map in NaviCell (http://navicell.curie.fr/pages/install.html).

For NaviCell users that are interested to explore and comment the existing maps
without installing NaviCell and uploading their map to NaviCell, the explanations of
NaviCell layout and instructions for efficient navigation and commenting maps in
NaviCell can be found in the ‘Guide for user and map curator’
(http://navicell.curie.fr/pages/guide.html).
In addition, a video tutorial is available which provides a fast introduction to NaviCell
features and demonstration of maps navigation and commenting in NaviCell
(http://navicell.curie.fr/pages/tutorial.html).

Results
Example of RB/E2F map in NaviCell
To illustrate NaviCell’s capabilities, we use the map of RB/E2F pathway we created
earlier [17]. We redesigned the global map layout which now reflects the cell cycle
organization (Figure 2). We made four levels of semantic zooming (Figure 3) as
described below in more details. The RB/E2F map contains 16 modules as they were
described before [17]. Each module is also represented as a separate map with a
simple and readable layout. The shuttling between the master map and the module
maps is provided through internal links in NaviCell (Figure 4). The map is connected
to a web-blog with pre-generated posts corresponding to each map’s entity or module
(Figure 5). Each such post provides full entity annotation specifying in what forms it
exists, in what reactions it participates and which role it plays in reactions (reactant,
product, catalyzer, etc.). The post can be commented by the map’s users. A user can
submit comments on the annotation posts in the form of hypertext enriched with
images and hyperlinks. This blog is a system for knowledge exchange and active
discussion between specialists in the corresponding domain and NaviCell map
managers. The RB/E2F map is used for the video-tutorial of NaviCell’s functions
available at the web-site.
Together with the RB/E2F map, NaviCell representations are provided for the map of
Notch and P53 pathway crosstalk that was used in one of our projects, as well as for
number of large CellDesigner’s maps that were published until so far in the literature
[11, 13, 16, 18, 19]. The whole collection of maps is accessible from the NaviCell’s
web site http://navicell.curie.fr/pages/maps.html .

Navigating a comprehensive map in NaviCell
Navigation through the map of molecular interactions in NaviCell is assured by the
standard and user-friendly engine of Google Maps, allowing scrolling, zooming,
dropping down markers and showing pop-up bubbles (Figure 2). Using Google Maps
makes it easy to get started with NaviCell, as it is an intuitive and widely used
interface. The content of the map is detailed in the right-hand selection panel, which
contains a list of entities and map objects grouped by their types. The selection panel

allows identifying and selecting the desired map element and dropping down a
clickable marker. Also a user can identify a molecular entity by using the full-text
search function, which queries molecular entities by any substring in their description
(by name, by synonym if provided, by word in the annotation). The markers do not
disappear when zooming in or out, indicating the positioning of the selected map
elements at all zoom levels. Clicking on a marker opens a pop-up bubble that contains
a short description of the selected entity, hyperlinks to external databases; internal
hyperlinks to related map objects and a link to the corresponding annotation post in
the blog where the user’s comments can be posted (see Figure 5 and below for the
blog explanation).

Semantic zooming views of the RB/E2F map in NaviCell
The RB/E2F map can be navigated similarly to geographical maps through Google
Maps, by several levels of map views (Figure 3). The navigation of the map starts
from the top-level view (Figure 3A) where one can identify 16 map modules with
their names (analogous to countries or regions), together with the positioning of the
most important molecular entities inside them (analogue of country capitals). In
addition, the cell cycle phases are indicated.
In the next level, a more detailed level of zooming called “Pruned” in Figure 3B, the
major or canonical cell signaling pathways are visualized. These pathways were
specified by intersecting the content of the RB/E2F map with several pathway
databases and selecting those entities and reactions that are “canonically” represented
in those databases (see the NaviCell guide for semantic zoom levels generation
explanation).
The third zoom level is a “Hidden details” level shows the RB/E2F map with all
molecular players and reactions. The tiny details such as the names of posttranslational modification residues, complex names, and reaction ids are hidden at this
level. In addition, the relative font sizes are increased for better readability (Figure
3C).
The fourth semantic zooming level is the most detailed view where all map elements
are present (Figure 3D).
The module background coloring appears as a context layer in the background of all
levels of zooming, which allows having an idea which modules of the map are
currently visualized, at all zoom levels [38].

RB/E2F map modules representation in NaviCell
Each molecular entity of the RB/E2F map can be found in one or more of the 16
modules. The participation of an entity in various modules is indicated in the protein’s
annotation bubble by a link which leads to a separate module map(s). In addition,
each module map can be accessed from the selection panel. The module map

represents the corresponding sub-map with a simplified layout (Figure 4); the right
hand panel contains the list of only those entities that are associated with this module.
Thus, the master map is connected to a collection of maps of modules, and a user can
easily shuttle between them. An example of this is shown in Figure 4: the RB module
map is shown in Figure 4C, and it helps to understand the whole life cycle of the RB
protein (how it gets phosphorylated at different residues, in which complexes it
participates, what are the regulators of the main transitions).

Blogging in NaviCell: commenting the RB/E2F map
NaviCell uses the WordPress (http://wordpress.org) web-based blog system to collect
feedback from the map users. The blog contains pre-generated posts for each entity of
the map (genes, proteins, complexes, reactions etc.). Each post is composed of a
detailed entity annotation (HUGO names, references, etc.), links to other entities in
the network (internal hyperlinks) and links to databases including PubMed, NCBI etc.
(external hyperlinks).
An example of a pre-generated post is shown in Figure 5 for a molecular complex
composed of CDK6, Cyclin D1 and p27Kip1 proteins. The post contains annotation
of the complex, list of complex forms (modifications) and reactions in which the
complex participates as reactant or product, or catalyzer. Note that each globe icon in
the post leads to the map, and allows selecting corresponding objects on it. For
example, clicking at the globe icons in the line describing the reaction
DP2*:E2F4:p107*@nucleus → DP2*:E2F4:p107*|pho@nucleus, the markers will
show either DP2*:E2F4:p107*@nucleus species or DP2*:E2F4:p107*|pho@nucleus
species or the reaction itself on the map. Parallel use of the map and the blog
facilitates exploring and understanding the map.
The blog system provides a feedback mechanism between the map users and map
managers. Updating the map is foreseen in the following scenario. The manager of the
map regularly collects the users’ comments and updates the map accordingly in a
series of releases. In turn, NaviCell can automatically update the blog and archive
older versions of posts including users’ comments, thus providing traceability of all
changes on the map and simplifying map maintenance (See Figure 1).

Discussion
NaviCell is an environment for visualization and simplified usage of large-scale maps
of molecular interactions created in CellDesigner. NaviCell allows showing the
content of the map in a convenient way, at several scales of complexity or abstraction;
it provides an opportunity to comment on its content, facilitating maintenance of the
maps. NaviCell is not implemented to cover the functionality of all existing network
visualization tools: however, NaviCell combines several essential features together,
and therefore fits to a quite demanded niche in the map maintenance and support
process.

The use of the Google Map interface makes it straightforward for the user to get
started with NaviCell, as this interface is intuitive and already familiar to most users.
The development and application of semantic zooming principles is a unique feature
of NaviCell that allows step-wise exploration of the map and helps to grasp the
content of very complex maps of molecular interactions at several levels of
complexity from the global map structure, through major, canonical pathways up to
the most detailed level.
The concept of blog which we deliberately used for collecting the users’ feedback in
NaviCell competes with another paradigm of community-based map construction
represented by WikiPathways [8]. In this model map editing is open to everybody,
whereas in our model a map manager is in charge of validating propositions of
modifications. In many cases, comprehensive maps are a one person project requiring
thoughtful design of the map’s layout and resolving contradicting interpretations of
biochemical experiments and points of view. NaviCell, unlike WikiPathways, is not
designed for collective ab initio construction of the maps but, instead, allows visible
and open discussion forum around an already existing map. Later the map can be
modified and updated accordingly by the map manager who takes responsibility and
interprets the users’ comments, not allowing uncontrolled map changes. We believe
that both paradigms (blog vs wiki) are of interest in the systems biology field, and can
be combined in the future.
We believe that NaviCell will reinforce the interest to assemble large-scale maps of
molecular interactions and present them to the community for constructive critics. We
hope that in such a way more consensual formalizations of large maps of molecular
mechanisms will be achieved.
We now plan to extend NaviCell with an analytical toolbox implementing a set of
methods for visualizing high-throughput data (expression measurements, protein
activities, mutation profiles, etc.) on top of the molecular maps, and with tools for
analyzing the map’s structure in the spirit of Google Maps (for example, route
finding, suggesting several alternative routes, finding the ways to cut the routes).

Conclusions
NaviCell is a web-based, user-friendly and interactive environment, which can be
easily used by molecular biologists. NaviCell functionality has been already tested in
several concrete projects for navigation and curation of large maps of molecular
interactions.
In the future, we plan to convert NaviCell into an environment under which maps will
be visualized, discussed, updated and analyzed using a toolbox that is currently in
development.

Availability and requirements

Project name: NaviCell
Project homepage: http://navicell.curie.fr
Operating system(s): Platform independent
Programming language: Java, HTML, JavaScript
License: GNU GPL
Any restrictions to use by non-academics: license is not needed

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contrubution
The project was conceived by AZ, IK and EB. AZ developed the algorithms and
coordinated setting up the environment. SP developed the software code and
participated in setting up the environment. IK coordinated the project. DC, LC, IK
and AZ prepared maps in the NaviCell format. DC and IK designed and implemented
the web site. IK, DC, SP and AZ. prepared documentation and guidelines. IK and AZ
have written the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgments
We thank Camille Barette for help in setting up the informatics recourses and HienAnh Nuigen for help with NaviCell guides design. This work is supported by the
APO-SYS EU FP7 project under grant n° HEALTH-F4-2007-200767, by the grant
INCA LABEL Cancéropole Ile-de-France 2011-1-LABEL-1, by the grant INVADE
from ITMO Cancer (Call Systems Biology 2012) and by the grant “Projet Incitatif et
Collaboratif Computational Systems Biology Approach for Cancer » from Institut
Curie. IK, DC, LC, EB and AZ are members of the team “Computational Systems
Biology of Cancer”, Equipe labellisée par la Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer.

References
1.

Kitano H, Ghosh S, Matsuoka Y: Social engineering for virtual 'big science'
in systems biology. Nat Chem Biol 2011, 7(6):323-326.

2.

Ghosh S, Matsuoka Y, Kitano H: Connecting the dots: role of
standardization and technology sharing in biological simulation. Drug
Discov Today 2010, 15(23-24):1024-1031.

3.

Ooi HS, Schneider G, Lim TT, Chan YL, Eisenhaber B, Eisenhaber F:
Biomolecular pathway databases. Methods Mol Biol 2010, 609:129-144.

4.

Joshi-Tope G, Gillespie M, Vastrik I, D'Eustachio P, Schmidt E, de Bono B,
Jassal B, Gopinath GR, Wu GR, Matthews L et al: Reactome: a
knowledgebase of biological pathways. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33(Database issue):D428-432.

5.

Kanehisa M: The KEGG database. Novartis Found Symp 2002, 247:91-101;
discussion 101-103, 119-128, 244-152.

6.

Thomas PD, Kejariwal A, Campbell MJ, Mi H, Diemer K, Guo N, Ladunga I,
Ulitsky-Lazareva B, Muruganujan A, Rabkin S et al: PANTHER: a
browsable database of gene products organized by biological function,
using curated protein family and subfamily classification. Nucleic Acids
Res 2003, 31(1):334-341.

7.

Elkon R, Vesterman R, Amit N, Ulitsky I, Zohar I, Weisz M, Mass G, Orlev
N, Sternberg G, Blekhman R et al: SPIKE--a database, visualization and
analysis tool of cellular signaling pathways. BMC Bioinformatics 2008,
9:110.

8.

Pico AR, Kelder T, van Iersel MP, Hanspers K, Conklin BR, Evelo C:
WikiPathways: pathway editing for the people. PLoS Biol 2008, 6(7):e184.

9.

Choi C, Krull M, Kel A, Kel-Margoulis O, Pistor S, Potapov A, Voss N,
Wingender E: TRANSPATH--a high quality database focused on signal
transduction. Comp Funct Genomics 2004, 5(2):163-168.

10.

Stobbe MD, Houten SM, Jansen GA, van Kampen AH, Moerland PD:
Critical assessment of human metabolic pathway databases: a stepping
stone for future integration. BMC Syst Biol 2011, 5:165.

11.

Patil S, Pincas H, Seto J, Nudelman G, Nudelman I, Sealfon SC: Signaling
network of dendritic cells in response to pathogens: a community-input
supported knowledgebase. BMC Syst Biol 2010, 4:137.

12.

Kaizu K, Ghosh S, Matsuoka Y, Moriya H, Shimizu-Yoshida Y, Kitano H: A
comprehensive molecular interaction map of the budding yeast cell cycle.
Mol Syst Biol 2010, 6:415.

13.

Mizuno S, Iijima R, Ogishima S, Kikuchi M, Matsuoka Y, Ghosh S,
Miyamoto T, Miyashita A, Kuwano R, Tanaka H: AlzPathway: a
comprehensive map of signaling pathways of Alzheimer's disease. BMC
Syst Biol 2012, 6:52.

14.

Raju R, Balakrishnan L, Nanjappa V, Bhattacharjee M, Getnet D, Muthusamy
B, Kurian Thomas J, Sharma J, Rahiman BA, Harsha HC et al: A
comprehensive manually curated reaction map of RANKL/RANKsignaling pathway. Database (Oxford) 2011, 2011:bar021.

15.

Wu G, Zhu L, Dent JE, Nardini C: A comprehensive molecular interaction
map for rheumatoid arthritis. PLoS One 2010, 5(4):e10137.

16.

Caron E, Ghosh S, Matsuoka Y, Ashton-Beaucage D, Therrien M, Lemieux S,
Perreault C, Roux PP, Kitano H: A comprehensive map of the mTOR
signaling network. Mol Syst Biol 2010, 6:453.

17.

Calzone L, Gelay A, Zinovyev A, Radvanyi F, Barillot E: A comprehensive
modular map of molecular interactions in RB/E2F pathway. Mol Syst Biol
2008, 4:173.

18.

Oda K, Matsuoka Y, Funahashi A, Kitano H: A comprehensive pathway
map of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling. Mol Syst Biol 2005,
1:2005 0010.

19.

Oda K, Kitano H: A comprehensive map of the toll-like receptor signaling
network. Mol Syst Biol 2006, 2:2006 0015.

20.

Nicholson D: A lifetime of metabolism. Cell Mol Life Sci 2006, 63(1):1-5.

21.

Kohn KW: Molecular interaction map of the mammalian cell cycle control
and DNA repair systems. Mol Biol Cell 1999, 10(8):2703-2734.

22.

Kitano H, Funahashi A, Matsuoka Y, Oda K: Using process diagrams for the
graphical representation of biological networks. Nat Biotechnol 2005,
23(8):961-966.

23.

Le Novere N, Hucka M, Mi H, Moodie S, Schreiber F, Sorokin A, Demir E,
Wegner K, Aladjem MI, Wimalaratne SM et al: The Systems Biology
Graphical Notation. Nat Biotechnol 2009, 27(8):735-741.

24.

Hucka M, Finney A, Sauro HM, Bolouri H, Doyle JC, Kitano H, Arkin AP,
Bornstein BJ, Bray D, Cornish-Bowden A et al: The systems biology
markup language (SBML): a medium for representation and exchange of
biochemical network models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(4):524-531.

25.

Stromback L, Lambrix P: Representations of molecular pathways: an
evaluation of SBML, PSI MI and BioPAX. Bioinformatics 2005,
21(24):4401-4407.

26.

Bauer-Mehren A, Furlong LI, Sanz F: Pathway databases and tools for their
exploitation: benefits, current limitations and challenges. Mol Syst Biol
2009, 5:290.

27.

Florez LA, Lammers CR, Michna R, Stulke J: CellPublisher: a web
platform for the intuitive visualization and sharing of metabolic,
signalling and regulatory pathways. Bioinformatics 2010, 26(23):29972999.

28.

Kono N, Arakawa K, Ogawa R, Kido N, Oshita K, Ikegami K, Tamaki S,
Tomita M: Pathway projector: web-based zoomable pathway browser
using KEGG atlas and Google Maps API. PLoS One 2009, 4(11):e7710.

29.

Dahlquist KD, Salomonis N, Vranizan K, Lawlor SC, Conklin BR:
GenMAPP, a new tool for viewing and analyzing microarray data on
biological pathways. Nat Genet 2002, 31(1):19-20.

30.

Luna A, Sunshine ML, van Iersel MP, Aladjem MI, Kohn KW: PathVisioMIM: PathVisio plugin for creating and editing Molecular Interaction
Maps (MIMs). Bioinformatics 2011, 27(15):2165-2166.

31.

Czauderna T, Klukas C, Schreiber F: Editing, validating and translating of
SBGN maps. Bioinformatics 2010, 26(18):2340-2341.

32.

Matsuoka Y, Ghosh S, Kikuchi N, Kitano H: Payao: a community platform
for SBML pathway model curation. Bioinformatics 2010, 26(10):13811383.

33.

Kandasamy K, Keerthikumar S, Raju R, Keshava Prasad TS, Ramachandra
YL, Mohan S, Pandey A: PathBuilder--open source software for
annotating and developing pathway resources. Bioinformatics 2009,
25(21):2860-2862.

34.

Zinovyev A, Viara E, Calzone L, Barillot E: BiNoM: a Cytoscape plugin for
manipulating and analyzing biological networks. Bioinformatics 2008,
24(6):876-877.

35.

Pook S, Vaysseix G, Barillot E: Zomit: biological data visualization and
browsing. Bioinformatics 1998, 14(9):807-814.

36.

Latendresse M, Karp PD: Web-based metabolic network visualization with
a zooming user interface. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:176.

37.

Hu Z, Mellor J, Wu J, Kanehisa M, Stuart JM, DeLisi C: Towards zoomable
multidimensional maps of the cell. Nat Biotechnol 2007, 25(5):547-554.

38.

Pook S, Lecolinet E, Vaysseix G, and Barillot E: Context and interaction in
zoomable user interfaces. In AVI 2000, pages 227-231 & 317, Palermo,
Italy, May 2000. ACM Press.

SBGN representation
(or close to SBGN)
Scalable to large
maps

N/A

N/A

×

×
×

Modular map
representation
Structured annotation’s
of entities

N/A

Map editing

N/A

N/A

×
×

×

×
×
×
×

×
×

×

×

×

×
×
×

Dynamic layout
Analytical tools
Web interface

×*
×

×*
×

×
×

×
×
×

×
×

GoogleMaps-like
interface
Semantic zooming
Full text search
Links to databases
Associated discussion
forum
Archiving discussions
Browser
Reference

Any type Any type

5

4

Any type

7

×*
×

×
×
×
×

×
×

Any type

Any type

8

6

×
×
×
×
×
×
×

×
×

×*
×
×

×

×
×

Firefox
Safari
Chrome

Firefox
Firefox
Safari
Safari
Chrome, IE

×

×
×
×*

×
×
×
×
×
×*

×

N/A

N/A

×

×
×

×*

×*

×
×
×
×
×
×
×*
×

×

×

×

×
×

Any type

Cytoscape
+plugins

BioUML

Pathviseo

GenMAPP

SBGN-ED

Payoa

Cell
Designer

Pathways
Projector

Cell
Publisher

Panther

×

NaviCell

Standalone tools

Wiki
Pathways

Spike

KEGG

Feature

Reactome

Map browsers used in
pathway databases

×
×
×
×
×
×*

×
×
27

28

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

22

32

31

29

30

N/A

34

Table 1 Comparison of NaviCell features with existing tools
*Analytical tools:
Pathway projector-Data mapping, Path search, Sequence-based search (BLAST), Pathway prediction; KEGG-Data mapping, Pathways
enrichment analysis; Reactome-Data mapping, Pathways enrichment analysis, Path search; CellDesigner-Simulation; SBGN-ED-Data
mapping, Network analysis, Simulation; Panther-Data mapping; PathVisio-Data mapping, Pathways enrichment analysis; GenMAPP-Data
mapping, Pathways enrichment analysis; BioUML-Simulation and analysis; Cytoscape-Various tools available through plugins.

