Healthy
H
sweet in
nhibitorr of Plasmodiuum falciiparum
aquagllyceropporin

Lia
ao Y. Chen
Departtment of Physsics, Universiity of Texas at
a San Antonioo, One UTSA
A Circle, San Antonio, Texxas
78
8249 USA
Email: Liaao.Chen@utssa.edu
Tel: (210)458-545
(
57
Fax: (210)458-491
(
19

1 
 

ABSTRACT
Plasmodium falciparum aquaglyceroporin (PfAQP) is a multifunctional channel protein in the plasma
membrane of the malarial parasite that causes the most severe form of malaria infecting more than a
million people a year. Finding a novel way to inhibit PfAQP, I conducted 3+ microseconds in silico
experiments of an atomistic model of the PfAQP-membrane system and computed the chemical-potential
profiles of six permeants (erythritol, water, glycerol, urea, ammonia, and ammonium) that can be
efficiently transported across P. falciparum’s plasma membrane through PfAQP’s conducting pore. The
profiles show that, with all the existent in vitro data being supportive, erythritol, a permeant of PfAQP
itself having a deep ditch in its permeation passageway, strongly inhibits PfAQP’s functions of
transporting water, glycerol, urea, ammonia, and ammonium (The IC50 is in the range of high nanomolars).
This suggests the possibility that erythritol, a sweetener generally considered safe, may be the drug
needed to kill the malarial parasite in vivo without causing serious side effects.

KEYWORDS
aquaglyceroporin
malarial parasite
channel-transport regulation
polyol-protein interaction
chemical potential

2 
 

INTRODUCTION
Plasmodium falciparum aquaglyceroporin (PfAQP), a member of the aquaporin family[1-6], is a
multifunctional channel protein on the plasma membrane of the malarial parasite that is responsible for
the most severe form of malaria infecting over a million people a year. Now we have learnt from the the
functional experiments that PfAQP facilitates permeation of water, glycerol, erythritol, urea, ammonia,
and, possibly, ammonium across the cell membrane[7-12]. Is it possible for us to inhibit some of PfAQP’s
essential functions with one of its permeants? An affirmative answer to this question would open a new
way of inhibiting this and other multifunctional channel proteins. So far, in vitro experiments supplied us
with unostentatious but unambiguous evidence that glycerol inhibits water permeation through PfAQP.[7,
9, 13] The crystallization experiments aided by in silico simulations gave us the atomistic details of this
and other aquaporin proteins, illustrating how waters and glycerols line up in a single file inside the
conducting pore of this aquaglyceroporin and the Escherichia coli aquaglyceroporin GlpF[9, 14-16]. In
absence of glycerol, in vitro experiments showed that water easily traverses the conducting pore of
PfAQP[7] and in silico studies corroborated it with a flat landscape of its free energy[15, 17, 18]. In
presence of glycerol, in vitro data showed reduced water permeability of PfAQP[9, 19] and in silico
simulations produced a chemical-potential profile of glycerol having a ditch[20] in its permeation path
through the protein. Glycerol, when permeating through the protein channel, would dwell inside the
protein for a significant time like being in a bound state and thus occlude the conducting pore of the
protein. The existence of such a ditch along glycerol’s permeation path is due to the structural fitness of
PfAQP hosting a glycerol near the channel center where the van der Waals (vdW) interactions are all
attractive between a glycerol and the lumen residues of an aguaglyceropoin. In light of these
understandings, I hypothesize that erythritol, a permeant having an even better fit than glycerol in the
center of the PfAQP channel, would have a deeper ditch in its permeation path and thus would strongly
inhibit PfAQP’s functions of transporting water, glycerol, and other permeants. To theoretically validate
this hypothesis, we need an accurate determination of the chemical-potential profile for each permeant---

3 
 

the three-dimensional (3D) potential of mean force (PMF)[21-25] as a function of the permeant center-ofmass (COM) coordinates along its permeation path leading from the periplasm to the entry vestibule of
PfAQP, through the channel, to the cytoplasm. These chemical-potential profiles, considered on the basis
of the structure information available in the literature, can ascertain the conclusion that erythritol inhibits
PfAQP in the concentration range of high nanomolars.
In this paper, I present the chemical-potential profiles for the six permeants (erythritol, water,
glycerol, urea, ammonia, and ammonium) computed on the basis of 3+ µs molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations, which amount to more than ten times the computational efforts invested on an
aquaglyceroporin in the current literature. The chemical-potential profile of each of the permeants is
computed as the 3D PMF along the most probable path from the extracellular bulk, through the PfAQP
channel, to the cytoplasmic bulk. The results are shown in Fig. 1. Erythritol is found to have the strongest
binding with PfAQP. It’s chemical-potential curve has a very deep well inside the PfAQP channel near
the Asn-Leu-Ala (NLA) and Asn-Pro-Ser (NPS) motifs that is 12 kcal/mol below its chemical potential in
the bulk of periplasm/cytoplasm, leading to a dissociation constant of 786 nM. When an erythritol
molecule is dissociated from and bound to the ditch inside the protein’s conducting pore, PfAQP will
switch between being open and closed to permeation of water or other permeants. Therefore, we can
readily regulate PfAQP’s functions of transporting water and other permeants by adjusting the erythritol
concentration in the nM to µM range. Even though direct validation of this theory of erythritol inhibiting
PfAQP needs further in vitro experiments measuring the erythritol-PfAQP dissociation constant and the
protein’s permeabilities for various erythritol concentrations, the available in vitro data in the current
literature all support various biophysical implications of the chemical-potential profiles presented in Fig.
1.

METHODS

4 
 

System setup. This study was based on the following all-atom model of PfAQP embedded in the cell
membrane (illustrated in Fig. S1). The PfAQP-membrane system with glycerols was fully described in
Ref. [20]. Briefly, the PfAQP tetramer, formed from the crystal structure (PDB code: 3C02), was
embedded in a patch of fully hydrated palmitoyloleylphosphatidyl-ethanolamine (POPE) bilayer. The
PfAQP-POPE complex is sandwiched by two layers of water, each of which is approximately 30Å in
thickness. The system is neutralized and ionized with Na+ and Cl- ions at a concentration of 150 mM. The
entire system, consisting of 150,459 atoms, is 116Å×114 Å×107 Å in dimension when fully equilibrated.
The Cartesian coordinates are chosen such that the origin is at the geometric center of the PfAQP tetramer.
The xy-plane is parallel to the lipid-water interface and the z–axis is pointing from the periplasm to the
cytoplasm. The PfAQP-membrane systems with ammonium, ammonia, urea, and erythritol were,
respectively, built by replacing glycerols with the corresponding permeants. For the study of water
permeation, the PfAQP-membrane system was obtained by deleting all the glycerols. In the case of
ammonium, the system was re-neutralized with additional Cl- ions.
All the simulations of this work were performed using NAMD 2.9 [26]. The all-atom
CHARMM36 parameters [27-29] were adopted for inter- and intra-molecular interactions. Water was
represented explicitly with the TIP3 model. The pressure and the temperature were maintained at 1 bar
and 293.15 K, respectively. The Langevin damping coefficient was chosen to be 5/ps. The periodic
boundary conditions were applied to all three dimensions, and the particle mesh Ewald was used for the
long-range electrostatic interactions. Covalent bonds of hydrogens were fixed to their equilibrium length.
The time step of 1 fs was used for short-range interactions and 4 fs was used for long-range forces. The
cut-off for long-range interactions was set to 12Å with a switching distance of 10Å. In all simulations, the
alpha carbons on the trans-membrane helices of PfAQP within the range of -10Å<z<10Å were fixed to
fully respect the crystal structure.
Steered molecular dynamics (SMD). SMD[30-32] runs were conducted to sample the transition paths of
each of the permeating molecules (erythritol, water, glycerol, urea, ammonia, ammonium) going from the

5 
 

periplasm, through the conducting pore, to the cytoplasm, for computing the chemical-potential profiles.
The entire permeation path leading from the periplasm (z<-25Å), through the PfAQP pore, to the
cytoplasm bulk region (z>25Å), was divided into multiple sections of 1.0 Å each in width. In each section,
a chosen permeant’s COM was steered/pulled in the positive z-direction to sample a forward pulling path,
and then pulled in the negative z-direction to sample a reverse pulling path. The pulling speed was v=2.5
Å /ns in both directions. Four forward paths and four reverse paths were sampled in every section. 4.0 ns
equilibration was performed at both end points of each section so that the pulling paths were sampled
between equilibrium states with the permeant’s COM coordinates being fixed at the desired values. The
pulling of a permeant’s COM was implemented in the single-file vs non-single-file regions with one
subtle but important difference:
In the single-file region inside the conducting pore ( z1  z  z2 ), the z-coordinate of the pulled
molecule’s COM was advanced with the constant velocity given above while the x- and y-degrees of
freedom were left uncontrolled to obey the system’s dynamics. Thus the x- and y-coordinates fluctuate
around the free energy minimum ( x * ( z ), y * ( z )) on the xy-plane at a given z-coordinate. The COM of
the pulled molecule approximately follows the most probable path ( x * ( z ), y * ( z ), z ) as it is pulled in
the z-direction. Along each forward pulling path from A to B, the work done to system was recorded as

WA Z when a chosen permeant was pulled from A to Z. Along each reverse pulling path from B to A, the
work done to system was recorded as WB  Z when the chosen permeant was pulled from B to Z. Here Z
represents a state of the system when the COM z-coordinate of the pulled molecule is z. A and B
represent two end states of a given section, respectively. The 1D PMF of the chosen permeant, G1D ( z ),
when its center of mass is at a given coordinate z, can be computed through the Brownian dynamics
fluctuation-dissipation theorem (BD-FDT)[33] as follows:

 exp[WA Z / 2k BT ]
G1D ( z )  G1D ( z A )   k BT ln 
 exp[WZ  A / 2k BT ]

6 
 

F
R


 .


(1)

Here WZ  A  WB  A  WB  Z is the work done to the system for the part of a reverse path when the the
chosen permeant was pulled from Z to A. k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature.

z A and z B are the z-coordinates of the COM of the pulled permeant at the end states A and B of the
system, respectively.
In the non-single-file regions from the channel entry vestibule to the extracellular bulk and from
the channel exit to the cytoplasmic bulk, the z-coordinate was advanced in the same manner as in the
single-file region but the x- and y-degrees of freedom were fixed to their constant values

( x *( z1 ), y *( z1 )) on the extracellular side and ( x *( z2 ), y *( z2 )) on the cytoplasmic side respectively.
Recording the pulling work in the same manner as in the single-file region, we compute the 3D PMF of
the pulled molecule, G3 D ( x, y, z ), when its center of mass is at a given position (x,y,z):

 exp[WA Z / 2k BT ]
G3 D ( x, y, z )  G3 D ( x A , y A , z A )   k BT ln 
 exp[WZ  A / 2k BT ]


F
R


 .


(2)

This formula is valid for pulling along a straight line and for pulling along a fixed curve in general.
Overall, we have a continuously connected permeation path ( x *( z1 ), y *( z1 ), z ) for z  z1 ,

( x * ( z ), y * ( z ), z ) for z1  z  z2 ,and ( x *( z2 ), y *( z2 ), z ) for z2  z all the way from the extracellular
bulk, through the conducting pore, to the cytoplasmic bulk. The chemical-potential profile along this
permeation path will yield all the mechanistic essentials of permeation through PfAQP.
3D PMF along the most probable path. Connecting the single-file region ( z1  z  z2 ) to the nonsingle-regions ( z  z1 and z  z2 ), we need to convert the 1D PMF in Eq. (1) into the 3D PMF. By
definition, the 1D PMF is related to the 3D PMF as follows:[25, 34]

G1D ( z )   k BT ln

  dxdy exp  G

3D

( x, y, z ) / k BT  / Aref .

 G3 D  x *( z ), y *( z ), z   k BT ln  A( z ) / Aref . 
7 
 



(3)

where Aref and A( z ) are, respectively, the area for reference and the area occupied by the COM of a
permeant on the plane of a given z-coordinate. x * ( z ) and y * ( z ) are the median coordinates of
integration on the same plane. Assuming Gaussian approximation for the single file region ( z1  z  z2 ),
the median coordinates of integration x * ( z ) and y * ( z ) are equal to the coordinates of the minimum of
the 3D PMF on the xy-plane. Taking Aref . as A( z1 ) , we have the following approximation for the 3D PMF
along the most probable path,

G3 D  x *( z ), y *( z ), z   G1D ( z )  kBT ln  A( z ) / A( z1 ) 

(4)

where the area ratio can be evaluated by computing the determinant of the variance matrix of the COM xand y-coordinates of the pulled molecule,

  x2
z
A( z ) / A( z1 )  
  x y

z


 x y
 y2

z

z

 x2
 x y

z1
z1

 x y
 y2

1/2

z1

z1


 .




(5)

Here  x  x  x *( z ) and  y  y  y *( z ) denote deviations from the most probable path. The brackets
with subscript z mean the statistical average on the xy-plane of a given z coordinate.

Computing the dissociation constant. Following Ref.[24], we have the binding constant

c0 / kd  c0  dxdydz exp  G3 D [ x, y, z ] / k BT 
 c0 A( z1 )  dz exp  G1D [ z ] / k BT  .
z2

(6)

z1

In Eq.(6), c0  1M  6.02  104 Å 3 is the standard concentration. k d is the dissociation constant. The
PMF in the bulk is chosen to be zero. For the estimations in this paper, we approximate the 3D integration
of Eq. (6) as Gaussian around the minima of each permeant’s chemical-potential curve so that the
dissociation constant of each permeant is determined in terms of the depths of its 3D PMF ditches and the
deviations of its COM coordinates:

8 
 

 x2
kd  c0

c e
0



G3 D [ xi , yi , zi ]
k BT

i

 x y

i

 x y

i

 y2

 x z

i

 y z

i

i
i

1/2

 x z

i

 y z

i

 z2

.

(7)

i

In the numerator of Eq. (7), we use the standard concentration c0  1M while in the denominator we use
its equivalent c0  6.02  10 4 Å 3 . In this way, Eq. (7) gives the dissociation constant in molars (M). The
brackets with subscript i mean the mean square deviation of the permeant’s COM coordinates around the
i-th minimum of its chemical-potential curve. These deviations are shown the supplementary figures S2 to
S6 for erythritol, urea, and glycerol respectively.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Shown in Fig. 1 are chemical-potential profiles (from top panel down) for ammonium, ammonia,
water, urea, glycerol, and erythritol, respectively, each of which is the 3D PMF (kcal/mol) as a function
of the permeant’s COM z-coordinate ( Å ). Note that, in the single file channel region
( 10 Å  z1  z  z2  10 Å ), the 3D PMF curves are along the most probable path ( x * ( z ), y * ( z ), z )
while outside the channel in the bulk regions ( z  z1 and z  z2 ), the PMF curves are along two lines
( x *( z1 ), y *( z1 ), z ) and ( x *( z2 ), y *( z2 ), z ) respectively. For all of the six permeants, the chemical
potential in the extracellular bulk is, within the margin of error, equal to that in the cytoplasmic bulk,
indicating validity of the computation. These six curves cannot be directly confirmed experimentally.
However, their biophysical implications are in full agreement with the existent in vitro data available in
the current literature. Their validation can be furthered with more experiments measuring the binding
affinities and the permeation regulations.
The top panel of Fig. 1 shows that ammonium permeation through PfAQP has a barrier of about
14 kcal/mol. This means that PfAQP does not effectively facilitate the transport of ammonium and,
speculatively, other monovalent ions. In this regard, it is in line with other members of the aquaporin
9 
 

family[35]. Interestingly, the 3D PMF curve for ammonia permeation is rather shallow (Fig. 1, second
panel). Its deepest well is -2.5 kcal/mol and its highest barrier is only 1.5 kcal/mol, indicating that
ammonia can traverse the conducting pore of PfAQP nearly as easily as through a bulk region outside the
protein. Therefore, it can be concluded that PfAQP facilitates ammonia transport across the plasma
membrane of P. falciparum at a very high efficiency. Inhibiting this function of PfAQP may severely
harm the parasite’s metabolism.
The third panel of Fig. 1 shows the 3D PMF for water permeation that has multiple shallow
minima and low maxima, giving an Arrhenius activation barrier of 3 kcal/mol for water permeation. This
profile indicating high water permeability is in full agreement with the in vitro findings [7, 9] that PfAQP
is as efficient as the water specific aquaporins AQP1 and AQPZ. Inhibiting this extremely efficient
function in water permeation would seriously reduce the parasite’s ability of maintaining hydrohomeostasis across its plasma membrane when it is subject to severe osmotic stress during renal
circulations. Inside the PfAQP channel, there are seven minima whose locations correspond well with the
locations of waters found in the crystal structure of PfAQP (Fig. 2, top right, bottom left, and bottom right
illustrations), which is similar to AQPZ[36]. Also, the barrier value of 3 kcal/mol resembles that of AQPZ
that was experimentally measured [19].
The fourth and fifth panels of Fig. 1 show that the chemical-potential profiles of urea and glycerol
both have deep ditches inside the single-file channel regions. Urea and glycerol, when permeating PfAQP,
are both subject to the process of being bound inside the protein (dwelling inside the channel for
significant times), occluding the channel from conducting water and ammonia. The binding affinities of
urea and glycerol are similar, both in the low mM range. In terms of dissociation constant, we have

kdurea  2.9 mM and k dgol  1.8 mM, using Eq. (7),. (Note that Ref.[20] did not estimate this dissociation
constant with good enough accuracy.) This leads to the prediction that, in the mM concentration range,
either urea or glycerol inhibits water/ammonia permeation through PfAQP. In presence of high
concentration of glycerol/urea, PfAQP will be saturated with glycerol/urea inside its channel. Then water

10 
 

permeation is fully correlated to the off rate of glycerol/urea and thus will have an activation barrier (over
6 kcal/mol) much higher than the barrier (around 3 kcal/mol) in absence of glycerol/urea. The current
literature does not have all the data to fully validate this theoretical prediction but the existent in vitro
experiments do show that the presence of glycerol suppresses water conduction as discussed in details in
Ref.[37].
Another similarity between glycerol and urea is that the highest barriers of their chemicalpotential profiles are both in the ar/r selectivity-filter region. The Arrhenius activation barriers for their
transport are, respectively, 7.7  1.5 kcal/mol for urea and 11.5  1.5 kcal/mol for glycerol. In vitro
experiments are needed to measure the activation barriers and to measure the dissociation constants of
urea and glycerol. Note, however, that the Arrhenius activation barrier for glycerol permeation through
GlpF was measured to be 9.7 kcal/mol and the same for water permeation 7 kcal/mol[19]. These two
measured values validate GlpF’s chemical-potential profile[37] that resembles PfAQP’s profile discussed
above.
The sixth panel of Fig. 1 shows the chemical-potential profile of erythritol. The activation barrier
of erythritol permeation is slightly higher than that of glycerol and thus the conclusion that PfAQP is
slightly less permeable to erythritol then to glycerol. This conclusion is in agreement with the in vitro data
of Ref. [7]. One implication of this profile is that equilibrium of erythritol concentrations between the
extracellular and the cytoplasmic sides can be quickly reached when erythritol is added to the host
solution. Assuming that human aquaglyceroporins are permeable to erythritol (just like PfAQP), any
concentration of erythritol in the blood serum would permeate the red cell membrane and the P.
falciparum membrane to reach the parasite’s cytoplasm. Therefore erythritol equilibrium is expected to be
quick between the blood serum and the malarial parasite’s cytosol once the sweetener enters into and
stays in the blood stream.
There is a very deep ditch (about 12 kcal/mol below the bulk level) in erythritol’s permeation
path inside the PfAQP channel. The deep ditch owes its existence to the van der Waals interactions
between erythritol and the lumen residues of PfAQP that are all attractive when erythritol is near the
11 
 

NPS-NLA motifs. This aquaglyceroporin’s structure is such that it hosts an erythritol inside with perfect
fitting (Fig. 2, top left illustration). Shown in Fig. 2, bottom middle panel, is the van der Waals energy
between erythritol and PfAQP as a function of the z-coordinate of the erythritol COM along a
representative path of traversing the PfAQP channel. These attractive interactions are responsible for the
chemical-potential profile of erythritol (Fig. 1) because the hydrogen-bonding interactions among the
erythritol, the lumen residues, and the waters inside the channel do not vary drastically throughout the
channel. The dissociation constant of erythritol from the PfAQP pore is estimated to be k dery  786 nM,
using Eq. (7). The binding affinity of erythritol is much stronger than urea or glycerol. Therefore, the
presence of glycerol or urea in the system will not inhibit the permeation of erythritol through the PfAQP
pore but, conversely, the presence of erythritol with concentration ranging from high nanomolars up will
inhibit the transport of glycerol, urea, water, ammonia and ammonium facilitated by PfAQP. Note that
what is relevant is the erythritol concentration that is generally in equilibrium between the two sides of
the P. falciparum plasma membrane, not the concentration gradient that would only show up during the
initial transient after erythritol is introduced into the host solution unless the parasite actually consumes
erythritol. If the parasite does metabolize erythritol, depending on the rate of consumption, a
concentration gradient would exist in the cytoplasmic direction. Even in such a case, the PfAQP pore will
still be occupied and thus occluded by an erythritol with a probability of nearly 100% if the extracellular
concentration of erythritol is far above the IC50 of 786 nM. Moreover, erythritol has a long biological
half-life in the human blood stream. Therefore, any amount of erythritol would practically inhibit the
highly efficient functions of PfAQP in facilitating transport of water, ammonia, urea, and glycerol.

CONCLUSIONS
The multi-functional channel protein PfAQP is capable of facilitating transport of water,
ammonia, urea, glycerol, and erythritol across the P. falciparum plasma membrane. Water and ammonia
can traverse the protein’s conducting pore without dwelling inside the channel much longer than

12 
 

occupying another space of similar volume in the bulk because their chemical-potential profiles do not
have deep ditches along their permeation paths through the channel. In contrast, urea, glycerol, and
erythritol all have deep ditches along their permeation paths. They all dwell inside the channel with a
much greater probability than occupying a similar space in the bulk regions. Therefore, the presence of
any of these three solutes in the system modulates the permeation of water and ammonia. Glycerol’s ditch
has a depth (-6.5 kcal/mol) similar to urea’s (-6.2 kcal/mol) and, therefore, the two mutually interfere
with one another’s transport. Finally and most importantly, the ditch along erythritol’s permeation path (12 kcal/mol) is much deeper than those of urea and glycerol. The presence of erythritol strongly regulates
PfAQP’s multifunctional capabilities. These conclusions can be considered partially validated because
they do not contradict any but agree with all the in vitro data that are available in the current literature.
They are still to be fully validated with more in vitro studies to measure transport regulations with a range
of urea, glycerol, and erythritol concentrations and to measure the dissociation constants for urea, glycerol,
and erythritol.

13 
 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author acknowledges support from the NIH (Grants #G12MD007591 and #GM084834) and the
Texas Advanced Computing Center.
REFERENCES
1. 

Agre, P., M. Bonhivers, and M.J. Borgnia, The aquaporins, blueprints for cellular plumbing 
systems. The Journal of biological chemistry, 1998. 273(24): p. 14659‐62. 
2. 
Engel, A. and H. Stahlberg, Aquaglyceroporins: Channel proteins with a conserved core, multiple 
functions, and variable surfaces, in International Review of Cytology, W.D.S. Thomas Zeuthen, 
Editor. 2002, Academic Press. p. 75‐104. 
3. 
Carbrey, J.M. and P. Agre, Discovery of the Aquaporins and Development of the Field 
Aquaporins, E. Beitz, Editor. 2009, Springer Berlin Heidelberg. p. 3‐28. 
4. 
Hedfalk, K., et al., Production, characterization and crystallization of the Plasmodium falciparum 
aquaporin. Protein Expression and Purification, 2008. 59(1): p. 69‐78. 
5. 
Lee, J.K., et al., Water and glycerol permeation through the glycerol channel GlpF and the 
aquaporin family. Journal of Synchrotron Radiation, 2004. 11(1): p. 86‐88. 
6. 
Benga, G., On the definition, nomenclature and classification of water channel proteins 
(aquaporins and relatives). Molecular Aspects of Medicine, 2012. 33(5–6): p. 514‐517. 
7. 
Hansen, M., et al., A single, bi‐functional aquaglyceroporin in blood‐stage Plasmodium 
falciparum malaria parasites. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 2002. 277(7): p. 4874‐82. 
8. 
Beitz, E., et al., Molecular dissection of water and glycerol permeability of the aquaglyceroporin 
from Plasmodium falciparum by mutational analysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2004. 101(5): p. 
1153‐8. 
9. 
Newby, Z.E., et al., Crystal structure of the aquaglyceroporin PfAQP from the malarial parasite 
Plasmodium falciparum. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology, 2008. 15(6): p. 619‐25. 
10. 
Song, J., et al., Molar concentrations of sorbitol and polyethylene glycol inhibit the Plasmodium 
aquaglyceroporin but not that of E. coli: Involvement of the channel vestibules. Biochimica et 
Biophysica Acta (BBA) ‐ Biomembranes, 2012. 1818(5): p. 1218‐1224. 
11. 
Zeuthen, T., et al., Ammonia permeability of the aquaglyceroporins from Plasmodium falciparum, 
Toxoplasma gondii and Trypansoma brucei. Molecular Microbiology, 2006. 61(6): p. 1598‐608. 
12. 
Holm, L., et al., NH3 and NH 4 + permeability in aquaporin‐expressing Xenopus oocytes. Pflügers 
Archiv, 2005. 450(6): p. 415‐428. 
13. 
Pavlovic‐Djuranovic, S., et al., Dihydroxyacetone and methylglyoxal as permeants of the 
Plasmodium aquaglyceroporin inhibit parasite proliferation. Biochim Biophys Acta, 2006. 
1758(8): p. 1012‐7. 
14. 
Fu, D., et al., Structure of a Glycerol‐Conducting Channel and the Basis for Its Selectivity. Science, 
2000. 290(5491): p. 481‐486. 
15. 
de Groot, B.L. and H. Grubmüller, Water Permeation Across Biological Membranes: Mechanism 
and Dynamics of Aquaporin‐1 and GlpF. Science, 2001. 294(5550): p. 2353‐2357. 
16. 
Tajkhorshid, E., et al., Control of the Selectivity of the Aquaporin Water Channel Family by Global 
Orientational Tuning. Science, 2002. 296(5567): p. 525‐530. 
17. 
Aponte‐Santamaria, C., J.S. Hub, and B.L. de Groot, Dynamics and energetics of solute 
permeation through the Plasmodium falciparum aquaglyceroporin. Physical Chemistry Chemical 
Physics, 2010. 12(35): p. 10246‐10254. 
14 
 

18. 

19. 

20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 

26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 

30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 

34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 

Hub, J.S. and B.L. de Groot, Mechanism of selectivity in aquaporins and aquaglyceroporins. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2008. 105(4): 
p. 1198‐203. 
Borgnia, M.J. and P. Agre, Reconstitution and functional comparison of purified GlpF and AqpZ, 
the glycerol and water channels from Escherichia coli. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 2001. 98(5): p. 2888‐93. 
Chen, L.Y., Glycerol inhibits water permeation through Plasmodium Falciparum aquaglyceroporin. 
J Struct Biol, 2013. 181(1): p. 71‐6. 
Kirkwood, J.G., Statistical Mechanics of Fluid Mixtures. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 1935. 
3(5): p. 300‐313. 
Chandler, D., Statistical mechanics of isomerization dynamics in liquids and the transition state 
approximation. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 1978. 68(6): p. 2959‐2970. 
Gilson, M.K., et al., The statistical‐thermodynamic basis for computation of binding affinities: a 
critical review. Biophysical journal, 1997. 72(3): p. 1047‐1069. 
Roux, B., Statistical Mechanical Equilibrium Theory of Selective Ion Channels. Biophysical journal, 
1999. 77(1): p. 139‐153. 
Allen, T.W., O.S. Andersen, and B. Roux, Molecular dynamics — potential of mean force 
calculations as a tool for understanding ion permeation and selectivity in narrow channels. 
Biophysical Chemistry, 2006. 124(3): p. 251‐267. 
Phillips, J.C., et al., Scalable molecular dynamics with NAMD. Journal of Computational 
Chemistry, 2005. 26(16): p. 1781‐1802. 
MacKerell, A.D., N. Banavali, and N. Foloppe, Development and current status of the CHARMM 
force field for nucleic acids. Biopolymers, 2000. 56(4): p. 257‐265. 
Brooks, B.R., et al., CHARMM: The biomolecular simulation program. Journal of Computational 
Chemistry, 2009. 30(10): p. 1545‐1614. 
Vanommeslaeghe, K., et al., CHARMM general force field: A force field for drug‐like molecules 
compatible with the CHARMM all‐atom additive biological force fields. Journal of Computational 
Chemistry, 2010. 31(4): p. 671‐690. 
Isralewitz, B., et al., Steered molecular dynamics investigations of protein function. Journal of 
Molecular Graphics and Modelling, 2001. 19(1): p. 13‐25. 
Park, S. and K. Schulten, Calculating potentials of mean force from steered molecular dynamics 
simulations. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 2004. 120(13): p. 5946‐5961. 
Chen, L.Y., Exploring the free‐energy landscapes of biological systems with steered molecular 
dynamics. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 2011. 13(13): p. 6176‐6183. 
Chen, L.Y., D.A. Bastien, and H.E. Espejel, Determination of equilibrium free energy from 
nonequilibrium work measurements. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 2010. 12(25): p. 6579‐
6582. 
Zhu, F. and G. Hummer, Theory and Simulation of Ion Conduction in the Pentameric GLIC Channel. 
Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation, 2012. 8(10): p. 3759‐3768. 
Li, H., et al., Enhancement of Proton Conductance by Mutations of the Selectivity Filter of 
Aquaporin‐1. Journal of Molecular Biology, 2011. 407(4): p. 607‐620. 
Savage, D.F., et al., Architecture and Selectivity in Aquaporins: 2.5 Å X‐Ray Structure of 
Aquaporin Z. PLoS Biol, 2003. 1(3): p. e72. 
Chen, L.Y., Glycerol Modulates Water Permeation through Escherichia coli Aquaglyceroporin 
GlpF. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) ‐ Biomembranes, 2013. 1828(8): p. 1786‐1793. 
Humphrey, W., A. Dalke, and K. Schulten, VMD: Visual molecular dynamics. Journal of Molecular 
Graphics, 1996. 14(1): p. 33‐38. 

 
15 
 

FIGURES
F

Fig.1. Cheemical-potenttial profiles of
o water and solutes along tthe permeatioon passagewaay through thee
conductin
ng pore of PfA
AQP: 3D PMF
F (kcal/mol) as
a a function of the z-coorrdinate ( Å ) oof the permeatting
16 
 

molecule. In the bulk regions, the profiles represent the 3D PMF along two straight lines: ( x1*, y1*, z )
leading from the extracellular bulk ( z  10 Å ) to the channel entry ( x1*, y1*, z1  10 Å ) and

( x2 *, y2 *, z ) leading from the channel exit ( x2 *, y2 *, z2  10 Å ) to the cytoplasmic bulk ( z  10 Å ). In
the single-file channel region ( z1  z  z2 ) , the profiles represent the 3D PMF along the most probable
path ( x * ( z ), y * ( z ), z ) .

17 
 

op panel, wateers (in vdw, colored by element name) iin and near thhe PfAQP connducting poree
Fig. 2. To
when erytthritol (vdw, black)
b
is insid
de the channeel (left) and inn the cytoplassmic bulk (rigght). Bottom ppanel,
the van deer Waals interraction energy
y between ery
ythritol and P
PfAQP (centraal) as a functiion of its centter-ofmass z-co
oordinate in th
he single-file region. Illustrrated here aree erythritol annd waters (all in vdw and
colored by
y element nam
me) lining up inside the ch
hannel when eerythritol is loocated at the cchannel entryy (left)
and at thee channel exit (right). The protein
p
is in newcartoon
n
reepresentation and colored bby residue typpe.
Graphics render with VMD[38].
V

18 
 

Suppleme
entary figu
ures to  

Healthy
H
sweet in
nhibitorr of Plasmodiuum falciiparum
aquagllyceropporin
Lia
ao Y. Chen1
1

Deparrtment of Phy
ysics, University of Texas at
a San Antoniio, One UTSA
A Circle, San Antonio, Texxas
78
8249 USA  
 
 

 
Fig. S1. All-atom
A
model of PfAQP in
i the cell meembrane. Shoown in the left
ft panel is the side view andd in
the right panel,
p
the top view. The sy
ystem is 116Å
Å×114 Å×1077 Å in dimenssion. Visible iin the both paanels
are waterss (in licorice representation
r
n), lipids (lico
orice), ions (vvdw), glycerools (vdw), andd the PfAQP
tetramer (newcartoon).
(
. All except PfAQP
P
are collored by elem
ment name. Thhe PfAQP is ccolored by ressidue
type. Grap
phics rendered with VMD (Humphrey et
e al., 1996).

S1 
 

 
Fig. S2. The center of mass of erythritol fluctuates around the minimum at  z  2 Å . Erythritol was free 
from any constraints during the equilibrium MD run of 10 ns. Its positions were sampled every 10 ps. 
 

S2 
 

 
Fig. S3. The center of mass of erythritol fluctuates around the minimum at  z  4 Å . Erythritol was free 
from any constraints during the equilibrium MD run of 10 ns. Its positions were sampled every 10 ps. 
 
 

S3 
 

 
Fig. S4. The center of mass of urea fluctuates around the minima at z  3 Å , at  z  1Å , and at 

z  2 Å . Urea was free from any constraints during the equilibrium MD run of 10 ns. Its positions were 
sampled every 10 ps. 
 
 
 

S4 
 

 
Fig. S5. The center of mass of glycerol fluctuates around the minimum at  z  1.3 Å . Urea was free 
from any constraints during the equilibrium MD run of 10 ns. Its positions were sampled every 10 ps. 
 
 
 

S5 
 

 
Fig. S6. The center of mass of glycerol fluctuates around the minimum at  z  3.5 Å . Urea was free from 
any constraints during the equilibrium MD run of 10 ns. Its positions were sampled every 10 ps. 
 
 

S6 
 

