arXiv:1307.0968v2 [q-bio.PE] 24 Sep 2014

Evolution on neutral networks accelerates the
ticking rate of the molecular clock

1

Susanna Manrubia1 and José A. Cuesta2,3
Grupo Interdisciplinar de Sistemas Complejos (GISC), Madrid
Dept. de Biologı́a de Sistemas, Centro Nacional de Biotecnologı́a (CSIC)
c/ Darwin 3, 28045 Madrid, Spain.
2
Dept. de Matemáticas, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
28911 Leganés, Madrid, Spain.
3
Instituto de Biocomputación y Fı́sica de Sistemas Complejos (BIFI)
Universidad de Zaragoza, 50009 Zaragoza, Spain.
September 26, 2014
Abstract
Large sets of genotypes give rise to the same phenotype because
phenotypic expression is highly redundant. Accordingly, a population
can accept mutations without altering its phenotype, as long as the
genotype mutates into another one on the same set. By linking every
pair of genotypes that are mutually accessible through mutation, genotypes organize themselves into neutral networks (NN). These networks
are known to be heterogeneous and assortative, and these properties
affect the evolutionary dynamics of the population. By studying the
dynamics of populations on NN with arbitrary topology we analyze the
effect of assortativity, of NN (phenotype) fitness, and of network size.
We find that the probability that the population leaves the network is
smaller the longer the time spent on it. This progressive “phenotypic
entrapment” entails a systematic increase in the overdispersion of the
process with time and an acceleration in the fixation rate of neutral
mutations. We also quantify the variation of these effects with the size
of the phenotype and with its fitness relative to that of neighbouring
alternatives.

1

Keywords: neutral evolution, homogeneous populations, assortative networks, mutation accumulation

1

Introduction

The relationship between genotype and phenotype, the ways in which this
map conditions the adaptive dynamics of populations, or the imprints that
life-histories leave in the genomes of organisms are essential questions to be
solved before a complete evolutionary theory can be achieved. Genotypes,
which encode much of the information required to construct organisms, are
occasionally affected by mutations that modify the phenotype, their visible expression and the target of natural selection. Many mutations are
neutral instead (1), varying the regions of the space of genotypes that can
be accessed by the population (2) and conditioning its evolvability (3) but
leaving the phenotype unchanged. The relation between genotype and phenotype is not one-to-one, but many-to-many. In particular, genotypes encoding a specific phenotype may form vast, connected networks that often
span the whole space of possible genotypes. The existence of these networks in the case of proteins was postulated by Maynard Smith (4) as a
requirement for evolution by natural selection to occur. Subsequent research has shown that these networks do exist for functional proteins (5),
for other macromolecules as RNA (6), and generically appear in simple models of the genotype-phenotype map mimicking regulatory gene networks (7),
metabolic reaction networks (8), or the self-assembly of protein quaternary
structure (9).
Nevertheless, systematic explorations of the topological structure of neutral networks have been undertaken only recently, despite the fact that some
of the implications of neutral network structure on sequence evolution were
identified long ago. For instance, Kimura’s neutral theory (1) postulated
that the number of neutral substitutions in a given time interval was Poisson
distributed. That assumption had an underlying hypothesis that was not
explicitly stated at the time, namely, that the number of neutral mutations
available to any genotype was constant, independent of the precise genotype,
of time, or of the expressed phenotype. In other words, neutral networks were
assumed to be homogeneous in degree. A consequence was that the variance
of the number of mutations accumulated should equal the mean, and the dispersion index (R, the ratio between the variance and the mean) must then
2

be equal to 1. Very early, however, it was observed that R was significantly
larger than 1 in almost all cases analyzed (10, 11, 12). The appearance of
short bursts of rapid evolution was ascribed to episodes of positive Darwinian
selection (12) that may reflect fluctuations in population size in quasi-neutral
environments, where epistatic interactions would become relevant (13).
The fact is that neutral networks are highly heterogeneous. Some genotypes are brittle and easily yield a different phenotype under mutation. They
have one or few neighbours within the NN. Other genotypes, instead, are robust and can stand a very large number of mutations while maintaining their
biological or chemical function. The existence of variations in the degree of
neutrality of genotypes (in their robustness) was soon put forth as a possible
explanation for the overdispersion of the molecular clock (13). Nowadays,
the distributions of robustness of the genotypes in several different NN have
been measured, turning out to be remarkably broad (14, 15, 16). The effects
of fluctuating neutral spaces in the overdispersion of the molecular clock
have been investigated in realistic models of evolution for proteins (17) and
quasispecies (18), and also from a theoretical viewpoint (19).
In this contribution, we explore three features of neutral networks whose
consequences in the rate of fixation of mutations have not been systematically
investigated. They are (i) the correlations in neutrality between neighbouring genotypes, (ii) the degree of redundancy of phenotypes (the size of NN),
and (iii) the fitness of the current phenotype in relation to accesible alternatives. First, the degree of neutrality is not randomly distributed in NN.
Thermodynamical arguments (20, 21) and analyses of full NN (22) indicate
that genotypes tend to cluster as a function of their robustness, implying
that NN belong to the class of the so called assortative networks. It is known
that populations evolving on neutral networks tend to occupy maximally
connected regions in order to minimize the number of mutations changing
their phenotype (2). In assortative networks, neutral drift entails a canalization towards mutation-selection equilibrium, progressively increasing the
rate of fixation of neutral mutations through a dynamical process that we
dub phenotypic entrapment. Second, there is abundant evidence coming from
computational genotype-phenotype maps (23, 24, 22, 9) and from empirical
reconstruction of neutral networks (25) that the average robustness of a given
phenotype grows with the size of its associated NN: here we quantify the effect of a systematic difference in average degree on the probability of fixation
of neutral mutations. Third, the difference in fitness between genotypes in
the current NN and their mutational neighbours affects the probability that
3

a mutation (be it neutral, beneficial, or deleterious) gets fixed in the population, and with it, as we explicitly show, the rate of the molecular clock
during intervals of strictly neutral drift.
With the former goals in mind, we develop an out-of-equilibrium formal
framework to describe the dynamics of homogeneous, infinite populations
on generic NN. We demonstrate that the population keeps memory of its
past history since, as time elapses, the likelihood that it visits genotypes of
increasingly higher robustness augments in a precise way that we calculate.
This is a consequence of assortativity and a dynamic manifestation of the
“friendship paradox” (26) described in social networks (your friends have
more friends than you). As a result, the probability that the population leaves
the network explicitly depends on the elapsed time. Further, the decline of
this probability with time entails a systematic acceleration of the rate of
accumulation of neutral mutations. The degree of entrapment is higher the
larger the neutral network and the broader the difference between the fitness
of the current phenotype and that of accessible alternatives. These results
are fairly general and have implications in the derivation of effective models
of phenotypic change and in the calibration of molecular clocks.

2
2.1

Dynamical model
Description of neutral networks and populations

In the forthcoming sections, we will employ terms related to dynamics on
complex networks to describe the dynamical process undergone by a homogeneous population on a NN. Genotypes are the nodes of the network, and
two nodes are linked if the corresponding genotypes can be mutually accessed
through a single mutation. Links are all identical, so we assume that the mutational process affects all genotypes in the same way. The robustness of a
node is a quantity proportional to its degree k, that is, to the number of links
leading to other nodes within the NN (or the number of neutral mutations).
For the sake of analytical tractability, we will use a mean-field-like description of the NN. This amounts to assuming that all nodes of the same degree
(robustness) are equivalent with respect to the dynamics, and therefore the
network can be characterized only through its degree distribution, p(k) (the
probability that a node has degree k, or the distribution of robustness values), and its nearest neighbour degree distribution pnn (k|k 0 ) (the probability
4

that a degree k 0 node’s neighbour has degree k), where k, k 0 = 1, . . . , z. We
are assuming that there is a maximum degree z in the NN. This is always
true if genotypes are sequences whose loci are taken from a finite alphabet
(e.g. {0, 1}, nucleotides or aminoacids). If there are A different types in the
alphabet, sequences have length L, and mutations refer just to point mutations (the most widely studied mutational process), then z = (A − 1)L.
Typically, thus, z  1.
The strength of correlation between the degree of neighbouring nodes
is measured through the degree-degree correlation coefficient r. This is a
quantity that characterizes the assortativity of a network and is defined as
the Pearson correlation coefficient (c.f. the covariance) between the degree of
nodes and the degree of their neighbours. For a network with i = 1, . . . , M
nodes, each with degree ki and whose neighbours have on average degree kinn ,
r is defined as
 nn

PM
ki − k nn
i=1 ki − k
(1)
r = qP
2 qPM
2 ,
M
nn
nn
i=1 ki − k
i=1 ki − k
P
P
with k = M −1 i ki , k nn = M −1 i kinn . The largest value of assortativity
r = 1 is achieved when the average degree of neighbours of node i equals its
degree, kinn = ki . Anticorrelations in degree yield negative values of r. By
definition, −1 ≤ r ≤ 1.
We assume that all genotypes in a NN have the same fitness, so evolution
is strictly neutral within the network. We should only take it into account
non-neutral mutations that get fixed, that is, that move the population from
a node in its current NN to a node of a different NN. As of neutral evolution,
population dynamics distinguishes two basic regimes. If µ denotes the mutation rate and Ne the (effective (27)) population size, those correspond to
low (µNe  1) and high (µNe  1) mutation rates. For high mutation rate
populations are heterogeneous and we need an ensemble of individuals coupled through replication and mutation to account for their evolution. This
is a complex situation where quasispecies dynamics comes into play, and one
has to resort to computational simulations to describe its dynamics (18). In
this study, we will work in the limit µNe  1, where every mutation either
gets fixed in or disappears from the population before a new mutation occurs, so the population is always homogeneous and its evolution is effectively
described as a single random walk (RW) on the NN.
5

2.2

Dynamics

We will describe the dynamical process that begins with the arrival of a
random walker to the NN and ends when it leaves to a neighbouring NN.
In particular, we aim at describing the entrapment effect that occurs while
the walker remains within the NN. Let us mention at this point a fact that
will become clear later on: because of frequent jumps in and out of NNs,
populations will hardly spend a time long enough within a single NN to reach
the equilibrium distribution. Therefore, the relevant process to describe is
the transient dynamics that starts with the arrival to the NN, instead of the
asymptotic behaviour within the phenotype. For this reason, we require a
good estimation of the initial probability distribution of arrival at any node
of the NN.
The process starts as soon as the walker jumps to a node of the NN
from outside. We will assume that the initial jump is equally likely to occur
through any link of the NN pointing outwards, so the probability that a node
of degree k is chosen as the entry node should be proportional to the number
of outbound links z − k and to the abundance of nodes of degree k. This
yields the initial condition
P0 (0) = 0,

Pk (0) =

z−k
p(k),
z − hki

k = 1, . . . , z.

(2)

The state i = 0 does not describe any node, but it will prove convenient
to introduce it to represent the exterior of the NN. Hence P0 (t) will be the
probability that the process ends at any time t > 0; the choice P0 (0) = 0
means that the process begins as soon as it “leaves” the exterior.
Since the mean field description assumes that all nodes of the same degree
are equivalent, the RW on the NN can be further described as a stochastic
process X(t) taking values in the set {0, 1, . . . , z}. These values represent
the degree of the node the walker is in at time t, with state 0 corresponding
to the exterior of the NN, as just described. When the walker jumps to state
0 the phenotype changes, and other considerations are needed to follow up
the evolution. For our purposes the process will end at this point, so 0 will
be an absorbing state (the only one in this process).
The stochastic process just introduced is a continuous-time Markov chain
with transition rate
Pr{X(t + δt) = k|X(t) = k 0 } = µk Wkk0 δt + o(δt) .
6

(3)

Element Wkk0 of matrix W is the conditional probability that, given that
a jump occurs when the process is at a node of degree k 0 , it ends up at a
node of degree k. Within our mean-field description, this probability can be
simply obtained as
k0
k0
pnn (k|k 0 ), k, k 0 > 0, W0k0 = 1 − , k 0 > 0, W00 = 0. (4)
z
z
As above, the rationale for this choice is that z − k 0 links of the node where
the RW is located point outside the NN and k 0 point inside, and if the process stays within the NN (probability k 0 /z), the probability that the node it
jumps to has degree k is pnn (k|k 0 ). The nearest-neighbour degre distribution
pnn (k|k 0 ) is zero if p(k 0 ) = 0 and is normalized otherwise; therefore
Wkk0 =

z
X

Wkk0 = 1, for all k 0 such that p(k 0 ) > 0.

(5)

k=0

2.3

Leaving the NN

Let us now discuss the meaning of the transition rates µk . If k > 0 the RW
jumps to a node that belongs to the NN and thus the mutation is neutral.
Hence, µk = µ because in that case the mutation rate is also the rate of
fixation of neutral mutations in a population of arbitrary size (28). On the
other hand, µ0 implies a jump outside the NN, hence a phenotypic change.
The new phenotype will have in general a different fitness, and the rate
at which non-neutral mutations go to fixation in a population of effective
size Ne is µ0 = µNe (f − 1)/(f Ne − 1), where f is the fitness of the current
phenotype relative to that of the phenotype the process jumps to (27). The
ratio φ ≡ µ0 /µ can take any value in the interval 0 6 φ 6 Ne . The lower
bound occurs if purifying selection eliminates any phenotype other than the
current one; the upper bound is the rate at which the population adopts a
highly fitter new phenotype. Neutral changes of phenotype correspond to
φ = 1.
There is a simplification implicit in the expression of φ, though. If the
neighbouring NNs are diverse in fitness values, φ should be replaced by an
appropriate average over this diversity—weighted with the probabilities of
jumping to these other NNs. In any case some factor 0 < φ < Ne will
account for the differences in fitness between the current NN and those of its
neighbouring NNs. For the discussion to come we do not need to be more
specific about its precise form.
7

2.4

Master equation

The probability distribution of the process is Pk (t) ≡ Pr{X(t) = k}, which
stands for the probability that at time t the process sits on a node of degree
k = 1, . . . , z, or is outside the NN, if k = 0. This probability satisfies the
master equation
Ṗk =

z
X
[µk Wkj Pj − µj Wjk Pk ],

k = 0, 1, . . . , z.

(6)

j=0

A few considerations transform (6) into a handier expression for further
calculations. To begin with, we can set µ = 1, i.e., measure time in units of
µ−1 . Let us also introduce the support of p(k), i.e., the set S ≡ {k : 1 6
k 6 z , p(k) > 0}. Thus, any k ∈
/ S has p(k) = 0, pnn (j|k) = 0, and, given
definition (2), Pk (0) = 0. Therefore, according to (4), for any k ∈
/ S the
master equation (6) becomes Ṗk = −[φ + (1 − φ)k/z]Pk , whose solution is
Pk (t) = Pk (0)e−[φ+(1−φ)k/z]t = 0.
Because of this result we can ignore in (6) any index k ∈
/ S, that is, those
degrees that are not represented by any node in the NN. Accordingly, if we
introduce vector P ≡ (Pk )T , k ∈ S, and matrices




j
k
,
A = pnn (k|j)
, k, j ∈ S,
(7)
F = diag φ + (1 − φ)
z
z
the master equation (6) simply becomes
Ṗ = −(F − A)P.

3
3.1

(8)

Results
Time spent on the NN

An important quantity characterizing the process is the probability that,
after a time t, the population is still on the NN. This probability can be
calculated as Q(t) ≡ 1 − P0 (t) = 1 · P(t), where 1 = (1, . . . , 1)T . For k = 0,
eq. (6) yields Q̇ = φ[κ · P(t) − Q], where κ = (k/z)T , k ∈ S, a differential
equation which can be rewritten as the integral equation
Z t
−φt
Q(t) = e + φ
e−φ(t−τ ) κ · P(τ ) dτ.
(9)
0

8

In appendix A we prove that the eigenvalues αk of matrix F − A are all
real and different. Therefore, denoting uk and vk the corresponding right
and left eigenvectors, respectively, we can write
Q(t) =

X

qk e−αk t ,

qk ≡

k∈S

[vk · P(0)](uk · 1)
,
(vk · uk )

k ∈ S.

(10)

P

(Notice that k∈S qk = Q(0) = 1.)
Equation (10) makes apparent that, in general, the life-time distribution
of the process before leaving the NN is not exponential, but displays many
different time scales, as many as elements in the set {αk }. Asymptotically,
Q(t) ∼ qmin e−αmin t , with αmin the smallest eigenvalue. Thus, the rate at
which the process leaves the NN tends to a minimum as time elapses—
in other words, it gets more and more trapped within the NN. Eventually,
mutation-selection equilibrium is reached and the process can be described
through a unique time scale, αmin .

3.2

Mutation accumulation

Perhaps the most immediate consequence of this entrapment of the evolutionary process in a NN is that the observed rate at which neutral mutations
accumulate increases with time. Together with the stochastic nature of the
dynamics, the consequence is two-fold: on the one hand, the molecular clock
gets accelerated during those periods of strictly neutral evolution; on the
other hand, overdispersion of the molecular clock varies non-monotonically
with time, as we show in the following.
In order to analyze how mutations accumulate with time, we need to
introduce Pk (m, t), the probability that the process is at time t at a node
of degree k of the NN, having undergone exactly m mutations. Introducing
T
Pm (t) ≡ Pk (m, t) , k ∈ S, the dynamic equation for this vector can be
written as
Ṗm = APm−1 − FPm ,
(11)
which is valid for all integers m if we assume Pm (t) = 0 for all m < 0.
Obviously Pm (0) = P(0)δm,0 , with P(0) the initial probability distribution
(2).
In order to extract information on the mean and variance of the number
of mutations accumulated at time t, it is useful to introduce the moment
9

generating function
G(θ, t) ≡

X

Pm (t)emθ ,

(12)

m

so that
∂r
mr (t) ≡ hmr i(t) = lim r
θ→0 ∂θ
Multiplying eq. (11) by e
equation for G(θ, t)

mθ

!
X

Gk (θ, t) .

(13)

k∈S

and summing on m we obtain the dynamic


∂
G(θ, t) = eθ A − F G(θ, t).
∂t

(14)

Setting θ = 0 shows that G(0, t) = P(t), the solution of (8), hence m0 (t) =
Q(t).
Differentiating (14) with respect to θ yields, for θ = 0,
∂
Gθ (0, t) = (A − F)Gθ (0, t) + AG(0, t),
∂t
∂
Gθθ (0, t) = (A − F)Gθθ (0, t) + A[2Gθ (0, t) + G(0, t)]
∂t

(15)

(subscripts θ denote partial derivatives).
Simultaneously solving eqs. (8), and (15), and using (13) yields m0 (t) =
Q(t), m1 (t) and m2 (t). We are not yet done, since these are not the quantities
required to estimate magnitudes related to the molecular clock: Actual measurements are always performed on extant populations, so we need the mean
m(t) and variance v(t) in the number of mutations conditioned on remaining
within the NN at time t. These are obtained as
m(t) =

m1 (t)
,
m0 (t)

v(t) =

m2 (t)
− m(t)2 .
m0 (t)

(16)

Correspondingly, the overdispersion of the molecular clock at time t should
be computed as
v(t)
m2 (t) m1 (t)
R(t) ≡
=
−
.
(17)
m(t)
m1 (t) m0 (t)

10

4

Examples

In this section we will compare analytical and numerical results for the dynamics of a RW (representing a homogeneous population) on networks differing in size, fitness, and topological features. Our aim is to better understand
the quantitative effect of these variables on the dynamics of the population,
paying particular attention to the time scales involved, to the change in
overdispersion with time, and to variations in the rate of fixation of mutations. We will analyse a random network (with near zero assortativity and
a well defined average degree) as well as two highly assortative networks
with either only two degrees or a constant degree distribution. Our final
example comes from secondary structure RNA networks, which share several
properties with other natural NN.

4.1

Random network

Despite its apparent simplicity, Eq. (8) can not be analytically solved in
general. An interesting exception is the case of a random network constructed
by randomly drawing links between pairs of nodes. In this situation, the
degree follows a Poisson distribution and, consequently, the average degree
is well defined. Even this special case is exactly solvable only for φ = 1.
In a random network there is no correlation between the degree of a given
node and that of its nearest neighbours. If the network is infinitely large, its
assortativity r = 0—though a residual assortativity will be typically obtained
when the number of nodes is finite. This lack of correlation reflects in that
the probability that a node’s neigbour has degree k only depends on its own
degree. As a matter
of fact, pnn (k|j) = (k/hki)p(k). (Here, and in what
P
follows, hk r i ≡ k k r p(k).) For this special case,


kj
p(k) ,
(18)
F = I,
A=
zhki
and deriving an expression for Q(t) is straightforward (see Appendix B). The
resulting formula is
Q(t) =

zρ − hki −t (1 − ρ)hki −(1−ρ)t
e +
e
,
ρ(z − hki)
ρ(z − hki)

ρ≡

hk 2 i
.
zhki

(19)

Despite the ease of this case, and the fact that the NN has no fitness advantage with respect to the average neighbouring NN (φ = 1), we can already
11

observe what turns out to be a generic property of heterogeneous networks:
the lifetime of the RW within the NN is not exponentially distributed. For
random networks, there are only two time scales: the “standard” one, µ−1 ,
and a slower one, with characteristic time (1 − ρ)−1 µ−1 . The reason for this
non-exponential behaviour—and for the equivalent effect that will arise in
any heterogeneous network—is that the RW comes in the NN preferentially
through nodes of low inner connectivity (high outer connectivity) and as time
passes without leaving the NN it progressively moves toward the regions of
higher connectivity (notice that the mean degree of a node’s neighbour is
hk 2 i/hki > hki), from which escaping is less probable. Thus, the first scale
corresponds to walkers which leave the network in very few steps, whereas
the second (slow) scale characterizes walkers that have spent some time in
the NN.
Further insight can be gained by calculating the overdispersion (17) (see
Appendix B), whose expression for this case becomes
R(t) = 1 +

(zρ − hki)ρte−ρt
.
(1 − ρ)hki + (zρ − hki)ρte−ρt

(20)

Figure 1 shows the probability Q(t) to remain on the network at time t,
the overdispersion R(t) of the molecular clock with time, and the mutation
rate (measured as the time derivative of the mean number of mutations)
for an Erdös-Renyi random network. In Fig. 1(a), as well as in all other
plots, Q(t) is represented as a function of the rescaled variable φt. The
reason is that, as can be seen, there is a partial collapse of all Q(t) curves
(but see the discussion for forthcoming examples). Also, the case φ = 0 is
not included, since φ = 0 implies that the RW cannot leave the NN and,
therefore, Q(t) = 1, for all t. For Erdös-Renyi random networks, the fast
time scale is barely visible, due to the fact that the RW becomes rapidly
trapped. The slow time scale actually dominates the dynamics: for the values
chosen, (1 − ρ) ' 0.47 (case φ = 1) and the coefficient of the corresponding
exponential in Q(t) is about ten times larger than that of the fast time scale.
Figure 1(b) shows the typical behavior of the overdispersion on heterogeneous NN: an initial increase up to a maximum followed by a decay to an
asymptotic value. Interestingly, even for φ = 1 (corresponding to Eq. (20))
a 4% overdispersion is reached before it decays to its asymptotic value, a
process that requires about ten mutations (t ∼ 10µ−1 ). As values of φ diminish, the asymptotic value of R(t) monotonically increases. Three features
that will show up in the remaining examples as well should be highlighted:
12

firstly, φ has a strong, nontrivial effect on overdispersion; secondly, it is in
the transient where overdispersion reaches its largest value; thirdly, the rate
of accumulation of mutations increases with φ (it therefore diminishes the
larger the difference between the fitness of the current NN and its neighbouring phenotypes).
In Figure 1(c) we can appreciate how the ticking rate of the molecular
clock undergoes an acceleration from its initial value, eventually reaching
a steady rate higher than the one it started off from. The change occurs
at a time t ∼ 10µ−1 , which corresponds to the number of mutations accumulated. Notice that, due to the heterogeneity of the network, the initial
mutation rate is already higher than µ. As we stated earlier, the stationary
state is not attained in general. Now we can quantify this statement by estimating the time t1% (φ) by which only 1% of the RWs remain on the network.
This time can be obtained by numerically solving Q(t1% ) = 0.01—it can be
approximately read from Figure 1(a). In order to estimate the range of t
values where typical trajectories on the NN should be found, we have calculated as well the time t99% (φ), when only 1% of the trajectories have left the
network. The interval (t99% (φ), t1% (φ)) is represented as a dashed line within
two arrows in Figure 1(c) (and all subsequent (c) panels). As can be seen,
the maximum variation in R(t) and in the mutation rate is achieved within
that time interval, while mutation-selection equilibrium is rarely attained.
Note that t99% (φ) and t1% (φ) decrease with increasing φ. The acceleration of
the molecular clock along neutral evolution, which is the higher the smaller
φ, is a feature that will reappear in all subsequent examples, and probably
stands as the best illustration of the phenotypic entrapment produced by NN.
Typically, most RW will leave the network before reaching the asymptotic
neutral ticking rate, and certainly before the RW has had time to explore a
significant fraction of the NN (29).

4.2

Two-degree network

Consider now a network with M nodes such that p(k) = 1/2 for k = k1 , k2
(k1 < k2 ), and 0 otherwise. The M/2 nodes of each degree are randomly connected between them, except for L links that connect (also randomly) nodes
of the two different degrees. Accordingly, pnn (ki |ki ) = 1 − 2L/(M ki ) and
pnn (kj |ki ) = 2L/(M ki ). The nearest-neighbour degree distribution clearly
reflects in this case the trapping power of more connected regions: note that
the probability of entering the group of high connectivity (k2 ) from that of
13

low connectivity is higher than the probability of leaving it, pnn (k1 |k2 ) <
pnn (k2 |k1 ). The asymmetry of pnn reflects the entrapment by progressively
more connected regions of the NN.
In terms of the variables ` ≡ 2L/(M z), κ = (k2 + k1 )/2z and δ = (k2 −
k1 )/(2z), matrix A − F becomes


φ(κ − δ) − ` − φ
`
A−F=
,
(21)
`
φ(κ + δ) − ` − φ
and the resulting probability (10) of remaining trapped within the NN at
time t is
Q(t) = q+ e−α+ t + q− e−α− t ,
(22)
where


` − (1 − κ)−1 φδ 2
1
1±
,
α± = ` + φ(1 − κ) ∓ ∆,
(23)
q± =
2
∆
p
with ∆ ≡
`2 + φ2 δ 2 . Thus, the dynamics on a two-degree network is
characterized by two time scales, with coefficients q± further determining the
relative weight of each one in the process between arriving at the NN and
achieving maximum entrapment.
Despite the formal similarity of Q(t) with the solution for an Erdös-Renyi
network, there are important quantitative differences between the two cases.
Figure 2(a) illustrates the presence of the two time scales, here clearly visible
(note the change in the horizontal scale with respect to Fig. 1(a)). The
probability to stay on this two-degree network is also significantly higher
after a fixed time, which speaks for longer trajectories in comparison to those
on a random network. The average degree does not play an essential role in
this behaviour, since it has value 16, slightly below the random network
previously studied; this nonetheless, the two-degree network is more efficient
at trapping the RW. Let us now explain why the curves for Q(t) collapse so
nicely in this case. This is due to the very low value of ` ' 5 × 10−6 for the
parameters chosen. As a result, the two time scales are well approximated
as α− ' φ(1 − k2 /z) and α+ ' φ(1 − k1 /z), thus nearly scaling with φ as
long as φ & `. Hence, the collapse of the Q(t) curves is a particular feature
of this network and does not hold in general, as the next example will show.
Differences in overdispersion between the random and the two-degree network are still more remarkable. Figure 2(b) (note the logarithmic scale in
14

the y−axis) represents R(t), showing an extraordinary increase in overdispersion with time, especially as φ decreases. Though not shown in the picture,
R(t) eventually converges to 1, albeit the time required is huge. This is
another important difference with the random network, where the overdispersion saturates at values R(t → ∞) > 1. This is due to the persistence
of heterogeneity in the degree from the viewpoint of the RW. Whereas in the
random network the walker visits nodes of different degree once mutationselection equilibrium has been reached, in the two-degree network the region
of low connectivity is mostly invisible to the dynamics, trapped in the large
cluster of high-connectivity nodes. This nonetheless, there is an enormous
dispersion in the time required for a particular trajectory to become trapped,
this fact explaining the growth of overdispersion, the delayed achievement of
its maximum value, and the slow convergence to equilibrium.
Similar differences can be observed in the mutation rate, depicted in Figure 2(c), compared to that for the Erdös-Renyi network. The acceleration of
the molecular clock for this network is very large (over an order of magnitude
with respect to the initial ticking rate). Also, as φ decreases, the acceleration
occurs at earlier times, an effect that was much milder in the Erdös-Renyi
network. As a matter of fact, these curves collapse nicely when they are
represented as a funcion of φt, as it happened with Q(t). The asymptotic
mutation rate is independent of φ because, similarly to what happens with
overdispersion, the RW does not see any difference in the degrees visited at
large times, even for different values of φ. The next example clarifies how φ
affects the trapping strength of nodes with different degree, and the resulting
variation in the asymptotic mutation rate.

4.3

Constant degree distribution network

This example shares some similarities to the previous one, but now nodes
of all degrees between a minimum kmin = 2 and a maximum value appear
in equal amounts. Also, the fraction of links connecting nodes of different
degrees is notably larger. Consider a network with a degree distribution
p(k) = 1/50, 2 ≤ k ≤ 51, N = 20, 000 nodes, and z = 52. In order to
generate an assortative network, we proceed as follows. First, we assign
an arbitrary index to the nodes (with no meaning whatsoever) and divide
them up into blocks of 400(= 20000/50) consecutive nodes. We then assign
degree 2 to the first block, degree 3 to the second block, and so on until
exhausting the nodes. Now we randomly connect the nodes, in such a way
15

that the probability to connect a pair of nodes at positions i and j is taken
proportional to exp{−d/200}, where d = |i − j|. With this procedure, nodes
with similar degree are preferentially connected, and high assortativity is
ensured. It is not possible to derive any exact expression for Q(t) or R(t),
though the results can be interpreted in the light of our previous examples.
Figure 3(a) shows the presence of many different time scales that become
dominant at different times and cause a systematic bending of Q(t). The
visibility of the different time scales is related to the presence of significant
fractions of nodes of different degrees together with the canalization of the
dynamics towards regions of increasingly higher connectivity—a consequence
of assortativity. This behaviour differs from that of the two-degree network,
where the curvature region was small and due to the cross-over between the
only two time scales involved. Overdispersion can reach very high values,
even once mutation-selection equilibrium has been reached, and so does the
mutation rate, see Figs. 3(b) and (c).
In a network of this kind, the larger φ, the less diverse is the set of different
degrees visited by the RW in the asymptotic state. This responds to the fact
that trajectories that survive for long times are preferentially concentrated in
highly connected regions. As φ decreases, nodes of lower degree become more
competent at trapping the dynamics, causing two effects. First, the asymptotic time scale αmin changes, decreasing in absolute value with φ. Secondly,
differences between the trajectories are less pronounced the larger φ, such
that the maximum in the overdispersion and the largest acceleration of the
clock are reached at earlier times. Third, the asymptotic values of R(t) decrease with φ, and those of the mutation rate increase. At mutation-selection
equilibrium, however, nodes with the highest connectivity cannot fully trap
the RW, such that nodes of lower degree are visited frequently enough to
yield R(t) > 1, attaining larger values the lower φ. In the asymptotic state,
thus, the RW is more delocalized (in terms of the visited degree) the lower
the value of φ. The fact that, at high φ, those RW remaining on the NN
preferentially visit nodes of high degree is responsible for the larger ticking
rates observed—reaching values orders of magnitude bigger than initially.

4.4

RNA networks

Secondary structure RNA neutral networks (here RNA networks for short)
are a paradigm of the genotype-phenotype map, and many important properties on their topology and on the GP mapping are known in detail. An RNA
16

network is formed in principle by all the sequences that yield the same minimum free energy secondary structure. Usually, links are drawn between pairs
of sequences in the set that differ in a single point mutation. In general, this
leads to a number of disjoint connected components. Since dynamics are well
defined on connected networks, we will assume that we work with subsets of
the GP map that fulfill this condition. Among other properties known, there
is a broad variability in the number of sequences that fold into a given phenotype for a fixed sequence length (several orders of magnitude) (6, 30); the
average degree of an RNA network grows logaritmically with its size (number
of genotypes leading to the same phenotype) (22), and RNA networks are
highly assortative, with an index r that increases on average with size and
approaches 1 (22). In this section we will discuss results obtained for RNA
networks of sequences of length 12. The GP map for this case is fully known,
with networks of sizes spanning four and a half orders of magnitude (22).
We have chosen two connected neutral networks formed by genotypes
that belong to different phenotypes. In dot-bracket notation, these are
...((.....)) and (((.....))).; the first phenotype can be obtained from
14,675 different sequences which are grouped into four different connected
subnetworks. As example we have chosen a connected component of size
M = 1, 965. The second phenotype is more abundant, corresponding to the
minimum free energy folded state of 142,302 sequences. As a second example we have chosen one of its largest 17 connected subnetworks, of size
M = 21, 908. Curves for Q(t), R(t), and the mutation rate are plotted in
Fig. 4. As can be seen, the behaviour of these networks is quantitatively comparable to the Erdös-Renyi random network. In RNA, there is a monotonic
change in the slower time scale and in the equilibrium value of overdispersion
with network size. This responds to the particular relationship between size
and degree exhibited by secondary structure RNA neutral networks, where
hki ∝ ln M . The connection between the slower time scale and average degree can be made explicit in the calculations for random networks (Eqs. 25
and 19), and despite the high assortativity of RNA networks, it also shows up
here. The degree distribution p(k) of RNA neutral networks is very peaked
for M small, though its variance increases with M faster than it does for a
Poisson degree distribution (22). Whether these differences lead, for realistic
values of M , to significant departures from the behaviour of random networks
remains to be seen.

17

5

Discussion

Certain features of the dynamics of homogeneous populations on NN are
generic, resulting from two ubiquitous topological properties: heterogeneity
and assortativity. In general, the dynamical process that begins when the
population enters the neutral network and finishes when mutation-selection
equilibrium is achieved is characterized by as many different time scales as
different degrees of robustness are found in the NN. These time scales successively show up along the transient and affect the process of mutation fixation.
As time elapses, regions of increasingly higher degree are visited, causing the
entrapment of the population. The actual time spent on a neutral network
should increase as the difference between the fitness of the current phenotype and that of neighbouring alternatives grows, since fitter phenotypes trap
populations for longer times.
Some of the features here described directly affect evolutionary dynamics
on realistic neutral networks and, therefore, quantitative properties of the
actual mutation substitution process. We have used as example RNA secondary structure neutral networks since this is the only case we are aware of
where exhaustive studies of the genotype-phenotype map encompassing the
whole space of genotypes have been performed (31, 22). Still, the networks we
may use to compute quantities such as overdispersion are limited by current
computational power. The average size of an RNA neutral network for sequences of length l grows as 0.673l3/2 2.1636l , which is an astronomically large
number even for moderate values of l (6). For instance, a natural tRNA 76nt
long should have a neutral network formed by over 1028 different sequences.
There is partial evidence that, as the length of genotypes increases, the degree
distribution of the corresponding neutral networks broadens, while assortativity grows with size (22). If this is so, several different time scales should
be visible and relevant in the dynamic process of mutation fixation in any
realistic scenario. An additional example is provided by the neutral networks
of natural proteins with known folds that have been computationally studied. Thought the techniques used only permit a partial exploration of those
immense neutral networks, the degree distributions obtained are remarkably
broad (14). There is sufficient evidence as well that protein neutral networks
are highly assortative (20).
Network heterogeneity, together with stochasticity in the appearance and
fixation of mutations, translates into potentially large values of R(t). In
most cases, overdispersion changes non-monotonically, presenting a maxi18

mum value at intermediate times, before equilibrium is reached. The value
of evolutionary time in our model yields an upper bound to the number of
mutations accumulated up to time t, since we have defined time in units of
µ−1 , where µ represents the rate of attempted mutations. Therefore, typical
trajectories accumulate between a few and a few tens of mutations before
leaving the network, a range where the strongest variation in R(t) and mutation rates occurs. The non-monotonicity of R(t) has been observed in
realistic models of protein evolution (14). In an exhaustive analysis of thousands of protein sequences in several Drosophila species (32), it has been
demonstrated that R(t) is time- and gene-dependent, and that it should be
described as a function of a phylogeny’s level of divergence. The former
observations are in full qualitative agreement with our results.
For any time t, R(t) > 1 as long as genomes with different robustness
(nodes with different degree) are visited with non-zero probability. There
might be some extreme cases, as the two-degree networks we have analysed, when only nodes with the same degree are visible to the population
at mutation-selection equilibrium. In those special situations (and, trivially,
if the network is homogeneous) R(t) = 1 is recovered, in agreement with
Kimura’s initial guess on the Poissonian nature of the substitution process.
However, this is a very atypical situation that cannot be expected to occur in
any realistic case. That network heterogeneity increases overdispersion had
already been acknowledged before (19). What had not been realized is the
fact that this effect is stronger during transients; that transients are unavoidable, because evolution on NN begins preferentially in regions of low robustness; and that—depending on the value of φ—equilibrium may be virtually
unreachable before a mutation hits a fitter phenotype, driving the process
again far from equilibrium. Indeed, the number of mutations that have to be
accumulated to attain equilibrium vary from slightly less than hundred to a
few thousands, a situation not reached by any typical trajectory unless φ is
close to 1. It would be interesting to consider other mutational mechanisms,
such as recombination, which might affect the nature of equilibrium and the
length of the transient. For example, it has been shown that, under recombination, the mutation-selection equilibria of populations replicating on NN
display a higher degree of robustness (are thus more entrapped) than those
corresponding to simple point mutations (29).
There might be some natural systems where the accumulation of mutations, and therefore the transient time before equilibrium is achieved, proceeds at a pace significantly higher than that in most genes or proteins,
19

namely RNA viruses, viroids, and miRNAs. These three systems are characterized by high mutation rates and, in RNA viruses and miRNAs, a correlation between selection for thermostability and increased robustness to
mutations has been detected (a phenomenon called plastogenetic congruence) (33, 34). Viroids, which share several structural properties with miRNAs, also increase robustness along evolution (35) and present a limited effect
of mutations on their structure (36). The higher robustness of these systems
with respect to randomized counterparts is an indirect evidence of phenotypic
entrapment and, therefore, of populational states closer to mutation-selection
equilibrium. Their corresponding phylogenies might be excellent testing beds
for the theoretical results here derived.
Evolutionary dynamics on heterogeneous and assortative networks with
phenotype-dependent size has important consequences regarding the molecular clock (37). First, there is an increase in the rate at which mutations are
fixed as time elapses, with an occasional maximum in its value during the
transient. When the population first enters the network, the probability that
it stays is relatively low. However, if it remains, the neutral mutation that
is consequently fixed does it in a typical time that depends on the robustness of the current genotype. Since robustness systematically increases along
the transient in assortative networks, the age of a population which has accumulated few neutral mutations will be systematically underestimated if a
regularly ticking molecular clock is assumed. This prediction is in agreement
with observations of a steady increase in R(t) along phylogenies (32) where,
moreover, a gene-dependent R(t) was identified. Second, the ticking rate of
the clock depends on φ, that is, on the fitness value of the current phenotype
(or NN) relative to neighbouring phenotypes: the smaller φ, the higher the
trapping power of the network, a situation that causes larger overdispersion
and lower asymptotic mutational rates. Finally, even sequences of the same
length may belong to neutral networks that differ in size in several orders
of magnitude. The ticking rate of the clock is unavoidably dependent on
robustness, which in its turn is a function of phenotype size in all genotypephenotype maps studied (9, 22, 23, 24, 25). Reliable estimations of neutral network sizes, at hand with appropriate computational algorithms (38),
should aid in the calibration of neutral evolutionary rates. This information
could be combined with knowledge of R(t) in homologous genes with the
same function (thus presumably characterized by the same NN). Finally, the
R(t) and the NN sizes of different genes in diverging lineages could be compared to disentangle time-dependent changes in R(t) from variation due to
20

phenotype sizes, extending studies such as those in (32).
The results here obtained do not contradict observations revealing a decrease in the ticking rate of the molecular clock along phylogenetic branches (39,
40), since most fixed mutations are in those cases subject to selection. In this
sense, our model addresses a partial aspect of phylogenies, namely strictly
neutral evolution. A tractable model of how NN of different fitness intermingle in the space of genomes may bring about the formulation of mean-field
dynamical models, as the one here presented, that simultaneously take into
account neutral drift and selection without discarding the complex architecture of the space of genotypes. Actually, it is plausible that the integration of
several different structural features of phenotypes may clarify why the molecular clock depends so strongly on specific cases analysed (41). Indeed, there
are several mechanisms known to affect the uniformity of rates of molecular
evolution (42). In the light of the results here presented, also the particular
topology of neutral networks, the degree of adaptation of populations, and
the abundance of the current phenotype should be taken into account when
calibrating molecular clocks.

6

Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Spanish Ministerio de
Economı́a y Competitividad under projects FIS2011-27569 and PRODIEVO
(FIS2011-22449), and of Comunidad de Madrid under project MODELICOCM (S2009/ESP-1691). They are indebted to Ricardo Azevedo and Ugo
Bastolla for constructive criticism on the ms.

A

Appendix — Solving for Q(t) in general

According to eq. (9), to obtain Q(t) we first need to compute P. Except for
very specific choices of pnn (k|j) and φ, the master equation (8) needs to be
solved numerically. We will prove here that matrix F − A has s (the cardinal
of set S) different real eigenvalues—which justifies formula (9).
Let us define M(x) ≡ F − xA, where x is a complex variable. Standard
perturbation theory (43) tells us that the eigenvalues of M(x) form a set of
analytic functions of x with constant cardinality, except for a finite set of
singular points in the complex plane—where at least two of the eigenvalues

21


coalesce. But M(0) = diag φ + (1 − φ)k/z , k ∈ S, so it has s different real
eigevalues (s being the cardinal of S), provided φ 6= 1. Therefore M(x) will
also have s different eigenvalues—hence will be diagonalizable—except when
x is one of those singular points. Now, x = 1 will not be a singular point
for almost any probability distributions p(k|j). But if p(k|j) happens to be
one of those singular distributions, then the analysis to come is still valid for
x = 1 + , for arbitrarily small  (because the singular points are isolated in
the complex plane). Thus we can eventually take the limit  → 0 without
changing the conclusions.
We now show that all eigenvalues of M(x) are real. To that aim let us
introduce the (non-singular) matrix D = diag (z/k)p(k) , k ∈ S. Then the
elements of T(x) ≡ M(x)D are [(1 − φ) + φz/k]p(k)δkj − xpnn (k, j), where
pnn (k, j) is the fractions of links of the NN joining two nodes of degrees k and
j. Hence T(x) is a symmetric matrix and therefore all its eigenvalues are real.
But then so are the eigenvalues of M(x) because M(x) = T(x)D−1 , which
has exactly the same eigenvalues as the symmetric matrix D−1/2 T(x)D−1/2 .
Let uj and vj , j ∈ S, be the right and left eigenvectors of M(1) corresponding to the eigenvalue αj . They verify the orthogonality condition
vk · uj ∝ δkj . Then, the solution
P(t) =

X vk · P(0)
k∈S

vk · uk

e−αk t uk .

(24)

Substituting this result into (9) yields (10).

B

Appendix — Q(t) and R(t) for random networks

To obtain Q(t) we left-multiply (8) by κT to get
d
κ · P = −(1 − ρ)κ · P,
dt

ρ≡

hk 2 i
,
zhki

(25)

whose solution is simply
κ · P(t) = κ · P(0)e−(1−ρ)t ,
Substituting into (9) finally yields (19).
22

κ · P(0) =

(1 − ρ)hki
.
z − hki

(26)

As for overdispersion, from eqs. (15) we can derive
ṁ1 = − m1 + G1 + κ · P,
Ġ1 = − (1 − ρ)G1 + ρ κ · P,
ṁ2 = − m2 + G2 + 2G1 + κ · P,

(27)

Ġ2 = − (1 − ρ)G2 + ρ (2G1 + κ · P).
with the initial condition m1 (0) = m2 (0) = G1 (0) = G2 (0) = 0. Combining
the former two equations and the latter two we obtain
d
(Gi − ρmi ) = −(Gi − ρmi ),
dt

i = 1, 2,

(28)

which, given the null initial conditions, yield Gi = ρmi . Therefore the four
eqs. (27) reduce to
d
m1 = −(1 − ρ)m1 + κ · P,
dt
d
(m2 − m1 ) = −(1 − ρ)(m2 − m1 ) + 2ρm1 .
dt

(29)

Using (26), this linear system can be readily solved:
(1 − ρ)hki −(1−ρ)t
te
,
z − hki
(1 − ρ)hki 2
m2 (t) =
(ρt + t)e−(1−ρ)t ,
z − hki

m1 (t) =

(30)

from which overdispersion can be obtained as (20).

References
[1] Motoo Kimura. Evolutionary rate at the molecular level. Nature, 217:
624–626, 1968.
[2] E. van Nimwegen, J. P. Crutchfield, and M. Huynen. Neutral evolution
of mutational robustness. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 96:9716–9720,
1999.

23

[3] Jeremy A. Draghi, Todd L. Parsons, and Joshua B. Plotkin. Epistasis
increases the rate of conditionally neutral substitution in an adapting
population. Genetics, 187:1139–1152, 2011.
[4] J. Maynard Smith. Natural selection and the concept of a protein space.
Nature, 225:563–564, 1970.
[5] David J. Lipman and W. John Wilbur. Modelling neutral and selective
evolution of protein folding. Proc. Roy. Soc. London B, 245(1312):7–11,
1991.
[6] P. Schuster, W. Fontana, P. F. Stadler, and I. L. Hofacker. From sequences to shapes and back: A case study in RNA secondary structures.
Proc. Roy. Soc. London B, 255:279–284, 1994.
[7] S. Ciliberti, O. C. Martin, and A. Wagner. Innovation and robustness
in complex regulatory gene networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 104:
13595–13596, 2007.
[8] J. F. Matias Rodrigues and A. Wagner. Evolutionary plasticity and
innovations in complex metabolic reaction networks. PLoS Comp. Biol.,
5:e1000613, 2009.
[9] Sam F. Greenbury, Iain G. Johnston, Ard A. Louis, and Sebastian E.
Ahnert. A tractable genotype-phenotype map for the self-assembly of
protein quaternary structure. JRSI, 11:20140249, 2014.
[10] Motoo Kimura and Tomoko Ohta. On the rate of molecular evolution.
J. Mol. Evol., 1:1–17, 1971.
[11] C. H. Langley and W. M. Fitch. An examination of the constancy of
the rate of molecular evolution. J. Mol. Evol., 3:161–177, 1974.
[12] J. H. Gillespie. The molecular clock may be an episodic clock. PNAS,
81:8009–8013, 1984.
[13] Naoyuki Takahata. On the overdispersed molecular clock. Genetics,
116:169–179, 1987.
[14] U. Bastolla, M. Porto, H. E. Roman, and M. Vendruscolo. Connectivity of neutral networks, overdispersion, and structural conservation in
protein evolution. J. Mol. Biol., 56:243–254, 2003.
24

[15] J. Aguirre, J. M. Buldú, and S. C. Manrubia. Evolutionary dynamics
on networks of selectively neutral genotypes: Effects of topology and
sequence stability. Phys. Rev. E, 80:066112, 2009.
[16] Andreas Wagner. The origins of evolutionary innovations. Oxford University Press, 2011.
[17] Ugo Bastolla, H. Eduardo Roman, and Michele Vendruscolo. Neutral
evolution of model proteins: diffusion in sequence space and overdispersion. JTB, 200:49–64, 1999.
[18] Claus O. Wilke. Molecular clock in neutral protein evolution. BMC
Genetics, 5:25, 2004.
[19] Alpan Raval. Molecular clock on a neutral network. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
99:138104, 2007.
[20] E. Bornberg-Bauer and H. S. Chan. Modeling evolutionary landscapes:
Mutational stability, topology, and superfunnels in sequence space. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 96:10689–10694, 1999.
[21] S. Wuchty, W. Fontana, I. L. Hofacker, and P. Schuster. Complete suboptimal folding of rna and the stability of secondary structures. Biopolymers, 49:145–165, 1999.
[22] J. Aguirre, Javier M. Buldú, M. Stich, and S. C. Manrubia. Topological
structure of the space of phenotypes: the case of rna neutral networks.
PLoS ONE, 6:e26324, 2011.
[23] H. Li, R. Helling, C. Tang, and N. Wingreen. Emergence of preferred
structures in a simple model of protein folding. Science, 273:666–669,
1996.
[24] Jesse D. Bloom, Alpan Raval, and Claus O. Wilke. Thermodynamics of
neutral protein evolution. Genetics, 175:255–266, 2007.
[25] Giovanni Marco Dall’Olio, Jaume Bertranpetit, Andreas Wagner, and
Hafid Laayouni. Human genome variation and the concept of genotype
networks. PLoS ONE, 9:e107347, 2014.
[26] Scott L. Feld. Why your friends have more friends than you do. Am. J.
Sociol., 96:1464–1477, 1991.
25

[27] Warren J. Ewens. Mathematical Population Genetics. Springer, New
York, second edition, 2004.
[28] J. H. Gillespie. The Causes of Molecular Evolution. Oxford University
Press, New York, 1994.
[29] G. J. Szöllősi and I. Derényi. The effect of recombination on the neutral
evolution of genetic robustness. Math. Biosci., 214:58–62, 2008.
[30] Michael Stich, Carlos Briones, and Susanna C. Manrubia. On the structural repertoire of pools of short, random RNA sequences. J. Theor.
Biol., 252:750–763, 2008.
[31] W. Grüner, R. Giegerich, D. Strothmann, C. Reidys, J. Weber, I. L.
Hofacker, P. F. Stadler, and P. Schuster. Analysis of RNA sequence
structure maps by exhaustive enumeration. I. neutral networks. Monatshefte f. Chemie, 127:355–374, 1996.
[32] T. Bedford and D. L. Hartl. Overdispersion of the molecular clock:
temporal variation of gene-specific substitution rates in drosophila. Mol.
Biol. Evol., 25:1631–1638, 2008.
[33] P. Domingo-Calap, M. Pereira-Gómez, and R. Sanjuán. Selection for
thermostability can lead to the emergence of mutational robustness in
an RNA virus. J. Evol. Biol., 23:2453–2460, 2010.
[34] G. J. Szöllősi and I. Derényi. Congruent evolution of genetic and environmental robustness in micro-rna. Mol. Biol. Evol., 26:867–874, 2009.
[35] R. Sanjuán, J. Forment, and S.F̃. Elena. In silico predicted robustness
of viroids RNA secondary structures. i. the effect of single mutations.
Mol. Biol. Evol., 23:1427–1436, 2006.
[36] S. C. Manrubia and R. Sanjuán. Shape matters: Effect of point mutations on rna secondary structure. Adv. Comp. Syst., 16:1250052, 2013.
[37] E. Zuckerkandl and L. Pauling. Evolutionary divergence and convergence in proteins. In V. Bryson and H. Vogel, editors, Evolving genes
and proteins, pages 97–166, New York, NY, 1965. Academic Press.

26

[38] T. Jörg, O. C. Martin, and A. Wagner. Neutral network sizes of biological rna molecules can be computed and are atypically large. BMC
Bioinformatics, 9:464, 2008.
[39] Sergio L. Pereira and Allan J. Baker. A mitogenomic timescale for birds
detects variable phylogenetic rates of molecular evolution and refutes
the standard molecular clock. Mol. Biol. Evol., 23:1731–1740, 2006.
[40] Simon Y. W. Ho, Robert Lanfear, Lindell Bromham, Matthew J.
Phillips, Julien Soubrier, Allen G. Rodrigos, and Alan Cooper. Timedependent rates of molecular evolution. Mol. Ecol., 20:3087–3101, 2011.
[41] Sudhir Kumar. Molecular clocks: four decades of evolution. Nature
Reviews Genetics, 6:654–662, 2005.
[42] P. Liò and N. Goldman. Models of molecular evolution and phylogeny.
Genome Res., 8:1233–1244, 1998.
[43] Tosio Kato. Perturbation Theory for Linear Operators. Springer, Heidelberg, 1980.

C

Figure caption

Short title: Neutral networks and the molecular clock

27

0

10

(a)

-1

10

Q(t)

-2

10

-3

10

-4

10

-5

10 0

5

10

15

20

25

φt
1.15

(b)
φ=0
φ = 0.01
φ = 0.1
φ = 0.5
φ =1

R(t)

1.10

1.05

1.00 -2
-1
0
10 10 10

1

10

2

10

3

10

t
Mutation rate

22.0

(c)

20.0
18.0
16.0
-2

10

-1

10

0

1

10

10

2

10

3

10

t
Figure 1: Dynamics of RWs on an Erdős-Renyi random network with M =
20000 nodes and average degree hki = 18. (a) Probability Q(t) that the
RW stays on the network after a time t. (b) Overdispersion of the network.
(c) Mutation rate or acceleration of the molecular clock. The time interval
through which the number of trajectories remaining on the network decreases
from 99% to 1% is represented as a horizontal dashed line limited by two
arrows, with the same colour as the φ curve they correspond to. The same
code is used in subsequent corresponding panels for other networks. The
measured assortativity for this finite 28
network is r ≈ 0.018.

0

10

(a)

-1

10

Q(t)

-2

10

-3

10

-4

10

-5

10 0

20

40

80

60

φt

5

10

(b)
φ=0
φ = 0.01
φ = 0.1
φ = 0.5
φ=1

4

10

R(t)

3

10

2

10

1

10

0

10 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10

t
Mutation rate

(c)
3

10

2

10

1

10

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10

t
Figure 2: Dynamics of a RW on a two-degree network with k1 = 2, k2 = 30,
L = 2, and M = 20000 nodes. (a) Probability Q(t) that the RW stays on the
network after a time t. (b) Overdispersion of the network. By construction,
the assortativity is very high, r ≈ 0.99995.

29

0

10

(a)

-1

10

Q(t)

-2

10

-3

10

-4

10

-5

10 0

20

40

80

60

φt

5

10

(b)
φ=0
φ = 0.01
φ = 0.1
φ = 0.5
φ=1

4

10

R(t)

3

10

2

10

1

10

0

10 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10

t
Mutation rate

(c)
3

10

2

10

1

10

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10

t
Figure 3: Dynamics of a RW on a network with a constant degree distribution, with parameters described in the main text. (a) Probability Q(t)
that the RW stays on the network after a time t. (b) Overdispersion of the
network. (c) Mutation rate. The assortativity is r ≈ 0.9997. For the sake of
comparison, these plots share scale with Fig. 2.
30

0

10

(a)

-1

10

Q(t)

-2

10

-3

10

-4

10

-5

10 0

5

10

15

20

25

φt
1.15

(b)
φ=0
φ = 0.01
φ = 0.1
φ = 0.5
φ=1

R(t)

1.10

1.05

1.00 -2
-1
0
10 10 10

1

10

2

10

3

10

t
Mutation rate

22.0

(c)

20.0
18.0
16.0
-2

10

-1

10

0

1

10

10

2

10

3

10

t
Figure 4: Dynamics of a RW on two different RNA secondary structure
neutral networks with z = 36. Sizes are M = 1965 (dashed lines) and
M = 21908 (solid lines). (a) Probability Q(t) that the RW stays on the
network after a time t. (b) Overdispersion of the network. (c) Mutation
rate. Time t1% (φ) is only shown for the largest network. The assortativity is
r > 0.90. For the sake of comparison, these plots share scale with Fig. 1.
31

