Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24
DOI 10.1186/s12862-015-0298-0

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A Boolean gene regulatory model of heterosis
and speciation
Peter Martin Ferdinand Emmrich1,2*, Hannah Elizabeth Roberts1,3 and Vera Pancaldi1,4

Abstract
Background: Modelling genetic phenomena affecting biological traits is important for the development of
agriculture as it allows breeders to predict the potential of breeding for certain traits. One such phenomenon is
heterosis or hybrid vigor: crossing individuals from genetically distinct populations often results in improvements in
quantitative traits, such as growth rate, biomass production and stress resistance. Heterosis has become a very
useful tool in global agriculture, but its genetic basis remains controversial and its effects hard to predict. We have
taken a computational approach to studying heterosis, developing a simulation of evolution, independent
reassortment of alleles and hybridization of Gene Regulatory Networks (GRNs) in a Boolean framework. These
artificial regulatory networks exhibit topological properties that reflect those observed in biology, and fitness is
measured as the ability of a network to respond to external inputs in a pre-defined way.
Results: Our model reproduced common experimental observations on heterosis using only biologically justified
parameters, such as mutation rates. Hybrid vigor was observed and its extent was seen to increase as parental
populations diverged, up until a point of sudden collapse of hybrid fitness. Thus, the model also describes a process
akin to speciation due to genetic incompatibility of the separated populations. We also reproduce, for the first time in a
model, the fact that hybrid vigor cannot easily be fixed by within a breeding line, currently an important limitation of
the use of hybrid crops. The simulation allowed us to study the effects of three standard models for the genetic basis
of heterosis: dominance, over-dominance, and epistasis.
Conclusion: This study describes the most detailed simulation of heterosis using gene regulatory networks to date and
reproduces several phenomena associated with heterosis for the first time in a model. The level of detail in our model
allows us to suggest possible warning signs of the impending collapse of hybrid vigor in breeding. In addition, the
simulation provides a framework that can be extended to study other aspects of heterosis and alternative evolutionary
scenarios.
Keywords: Heterosis, Gene regulatory network, Boolean network, Simulation, Speciation, Dominance, Overdominance,
Epistasis

Background
Heterosis, or hybrid vigor, is the phenomenon by which
the offspring of crosses of individuals from compatible
but genetically distinct populations of the same or different species show enhanced characteristics valuable to
breeders [1]. Increases in fertility, biomass production,
grain number and total yield have been described [2].
* Correspondence: peter.emmrich@jic.ac.uk
1
Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, CB2 3EA
Cambridge, UK
2
Current address: John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4
7UH, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

This effect has been known for a long time among breeders,
and scientific descriptions date back to Charles Darwin [3].
One important aspect of heterosis is the difficulty of fixing
the favorable properties of the hybrids into a true breeding
line, making repeated crosses from inbred lines the most
practicable method of harnessing the benefits of heterosis.
Hence the study of heterosis is of economic as well as biological significance. The phenomenon has long been utilized
in the breeding of crops such as maize [4] and is also known
to be important in natural evolution, through inbreeding depression. Recent progress in understanding the underlying
genetic and metabolic factors have provided breeders with
methods to predict levels of heterosis [5]. With the advent

© 2015 Emmrich et al; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24

of cheaper genome-wide profiling technologies, both at the
RNA and proteomic level, a more quantitative picture of
heterosis is emerging, with multiple studies reporting
regulation of gene expression and protein levels that
differs between parents and hybrids [6,7].
Nevertheless, heterosis remains difficult to predict in the
absence of complete metabolic or transcriptomic profiles:
not all divergent crosses produce heterosis and there is little correlation between heterotic effects observed for different biological traits. For some traits genetic distance is
not a good a predictor of heterosis [8].
The genetic mechanisms underlying heterosis are still
controversial. In the first half of the twentieth century
several hypotheses were put forward: According to the
dominance model [9], heterozygosity is advantageous because hybrids receive a beneficial dominant alleles (which
mask deleterious recessive alleles that are homozygous in
one of the two parents) for a greater number of genes than
either of their parents. In contrast, the model of overdominance suggests that the presence of heterozygosity at
certain loci is advantageous in itself [10]. According to the
third model, pseudo-over-dominance, heterosis occurs if
the hybrid inherits reciprocal linked pairs of beneficial
dominant and harmful recessive alleles from its parents
[11]. In this case, the advantage is conferred by the presence of both dominant alleles, but due to linkage, the
dominant alleles cannot be readily recombined. In breeding, cases of pseudo-over-dominance will generate a very
similar segregation pattern to over-dominance [12]. In
addition, there may be epistatic effects [13], where the
effect of an allele at one locus depends on the allele or
alleles present at other loci, e.g. an allele improves fitness
only if a certain other allele is present at another locus.
These models are non-exclusive and all four mechanisms may contribute to heterosis [14]. Their relative importance remains the subject of intense discussion and
may differ between organisms [1,5,15-18]. Whilst evidence
suggests that all the above genetic models may play a role
in heterosis, they may not provide a full explanation of the
phenomenon. Recently, some researchers have suggested
putting them aside entirely, in favor of analyzing the quantitative traits that underlie heterosis using systems biology
approaches, focusing on regulatory interactions and multigenic effects [1,5,19-22].
Accordingly, Andorf and colleagues proposed a network model of heterosis which they initially presented in
a simulation study and then successfully validated using
experimental data [5,19,20]. Their main hypothesis is
that hybrids perform better than parents because there
are more regulatory interactions in the hybrid networks
representing the individuals than in those of the parent
and this additional complexity increases adaptability in
changing environments. They define the networks based
on partial correlations between experimentally measured

Page 2 of 15

gene expression and metabolite levels and they demonstrate
that these networks are more densely interconnected in
hybrids. Such findings relate the topology of the network
(a systems property) to heterosis.
Simpler models considering the role of macromolecular
complexes and dominant negative interactions have also
been proposed as explanations for heterosis [23].
Unfortunately, large scale experimental studies over evolutionarily relevant timescales and with detailed network
reconstruction for each individual are not feasible [24].
We have therefore produced a realistic simulation of such
a study in which we aimed to reproduce the following
well-studied experimental observations associated with
heterosis [25-27]:
1. The offspring of crosses of individuals from separate
populations perform better than inbred offspring in
several quantitative traits, i.e. they show heterosis.
2. The heterotic effect increases with increasing
genetic divergence of the parents.
3. This increase occurs up to a limit after which
divergence is too great and parents are not able to
produce viable offspring.
4. The heterotic effect cannot be fixed in a genetic
lineage by repeated intercrossing of heterotic
hybrids.
Inspired by literature on Gene Regulatory Networks
(GRNs) [28-32] and evolutionary systems simulations
[33], we simulated evolution and hybridization of GRNs
using Boolean networks. Boolean network modeling was
first applied to the study of GRNs in the 1960s [34] and
has since been used extensively for the simulation of networks in molecular biology [35-41]. Kauffman’s approach
considered each cell to be represented by a random network and associated the attractors of the Boolean network
to the different cell-types, thus explaining how a single
genotype (the network) could lead to multiple phenotypes
(the attractors would be seen as different cell types in a
multi-cellular individual). Recently, a three-gene Boolean
regulatory network was used to simulate a genotypephenotype relationship in a study of multi-functionality in
biological systems, demonstrating the potential of the
framework [42].
In our approach we similarly modeled the genome and
regulatory interactions within an individual as a Boolean
network. The dynamics of this network, that is the
changes of the network node states, represents the regulatory response of the network to environmental inputs,
while the final stable state reached by the network – its attractor – represents the phenotype. The Boolean model
assumes that a gene is either ON or OFF and that the
quantitative changes seen in real world GRNs can be produced by the state changes generated by the regulatory

Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24

interactions. We believe this is a reasonable simplifying
assumption and the Boolean logic used to simulate the
dynamics of our networks can reproduce important
characteristics of biological regulatory networks and
allow the simulation of sufficient individuals to study
evolutionary processes within reasonable computational
time. We were able to model the evolution of reasonable size networks (up to 50 nodes) in each individual
of a population and allowed the population to evolve
over thousands of generations. The quantitative fitness
score that was used to select individuals that contributed
to the next generation depended on their ability to respond to several sets of simulated environmental factors.
Our simulation was successful in reproducing the four
experimental observations outlined above. It was able to
generate hybrid vigor for offspring of crosses between
populations that had been allowed to diverge for several
generations, and it also displayed a dramatic fall in fitness as the genetic distance between parents increased
to the point of preventing the formation of viable offspring. We thus recapitulate the results of the model of
Andorf et al., which showed that there is a maximum
level of heterosis that cannot be exceeded by increasing
genetic distance between the parents [20] and the related
experimental observations that genetic incompatibility
can cause reduced fitness of hybrids [25,27]. Our model
goes beyond this earlier work by demonstrating that
hybrid vigor is quickly lost when members of the same
heterotic hybrid population are crossed, a well-known
biological phenomenon of great consequence for breeders.
In addition, the architecture of our networks and our evolutionary algorithm are designed to more closely resemble
the evolution of gene regulatory networks found in nature.
Our model thus allows us to investigate the different
mechanisms underlying multigenic heterosis, including
epistatic interactions. In summary, by simulating the
evolution of gene regulatory networks in response to
environmental inputs, we have constructed a tool for
the in silico investigation of hybrid vigor and its determining mechanisms.

Results
Our model simulates evolution and hybrid formation for
diploid organisms, using gene regulatory networks and
their response to environmental inputs.
On the individual level, we simulated the genetic and
regulatory characteristics of each diploid individual as a
Boolean network. Each phenotype is defined as the regulatory steady state that is reached by a network in response
to inputs from outside the network (environmental factors).
We calculate fitness as the similarity of the network phenotype (dynamically stable state) to the ideal phenotype under
certain environmental conditions.

Page 3 of 15

In order to prevent the predominance of networks
which simply reach the perfect output for a single specific
condition, with no advantage in maintaining the regulatory dynamics, we subject each network to three sets of
environmental factors (three environments), each requiring a specific response. The network fitness is a combined
measure of the appropriateness of the responses to each
set of environmental factors.
At the population level, we simulate the evolution of a
set of individuals (each represented by a network) through
cycles of mutation, reassortment and selection in a set of
specific environments. First, we allow several hundred
generations for the population to adapt to the environments. Then we duplicate all networks and then let them
evolve separately, forming two, initially identical populations that diverge, since they are not allowed to interbreed
(Figure 1). For the details of the simulation we refer the
reader to the Methods section and Additional file 1.
Population fitness increases stochastically

At the beginning of the simulation the population fitness is
close to zero, because the network dynamics of naïve individuals are entirely random. Whilst we generate networks to
display certain quasi-biological characteristics in their topology - such as a scale-free-like degree distribution [43] and
clustering [44] - the state of each node is just as likely to be
the correct response to a given set of environmental factors
as it is to be the opposite. Since fitness is averaged over
nodes responding correctly and nodes responding incorrectly, they tend to cancel out in a network that has not
undergone adaptation, leading to the observed fitness measure around zero. However, after mutations through evolutionary time, individuals are produced with a response
closer to the optimal one. These individuals are selected to
produce offspring, which increases the average fitness of the
population over time.
As can be seen in Figure 2, the population fitness increases
through evolutionary time, with a characteristic pattern of
punctuated equilibria. This feature of the graph represents
the fact that improvements in fitness are brought about by
rare but important mutations that produce sudden increases,
alternated by periods of more or less constant fitness where
only neutral or deleterious mutations occur. The latter are
quickly removed from the population by selection, causing
them to have little effect on the fitness of the overall population. In the very beginning, all individuals in the population
are identical, but during the adaptation period, the diversity
increases. This causes the population fitness to become
more variable over time in some runs of the simulation.
Hybrids display higher fitness than intra-population crosses

After the networks have reached a fitness plateau with
only infrequent increases in fitness (typically after 1000
generations), we duplicate the population and continue

Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24

Page 4 of 15

Figure 1 Scheme of the evolutionary algorithm and the hybrid formation. The initial network (A) is duplicated to form the initial population
(B), which evolves over hundreds of generations by mutation, reassortment and selection, to form an adapted population (C). This population is
duplicated, generating two initially identical populations (D). Both populations carry on evolving, but do not interbreed, causing them to diverge
(indicated by the orange and blue colors) (E). At regular intervals, individuals are hybridized between the populations and the fitness of the
hybrids is measured (F). The hybrid individuals are then discarded and are not used for further breeding. Over time, the two parent populations
diverge further (indicated by deeper shading) (G).

the evolution of both copies separately. Although the environments of the two populations remain the same, these
two sets of individuals start diverging, as there is no genetic
exchange between them. The evolutionary algorithm continues on both populations in the same way as before the
separation, so fitness increases may still occur in either of
the separated populations. Every few generations, we compared the fitness of offspring of crosses between individuals
of the same population and separate populations, i.e. hybrids. The fitness of forty individuals of each parent population and eighty hybrid individuals was measured and
averaged to generate the fitness values shown in Figure 3.
As seen in real-world heterosis [8], the hybrid crosses
displayed higher fitness than the intra-population ones
in most, but not all cases and the amount of heterosis

tended to increase through evolutionary time, presumably
because the parent populations continued diverging from
each other (see Figure 3A).
The fitness of hybrids collapses after prolonged separation
of parent populations

After a variable number of generations of separation
between the parent populations, the fitness of the hybrids starts decreasing (Figure 3A). This precipitates a
rapid collapse in hybrid fitness over the next few (usually
less than 50) generations. After this, the hybrid fitness
remains at a stable level far below the fitness of the parent
populations. The time at which this collapse occurs varied
greatly, between 20 and several hundreds of generations
after the separation of the parent populations.

Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24

Page 5 of 15

Figure 2 Example of a typical adaptation graph, showing three stages. Population fitness increased rapidly over the first five generations
and more slowly over the next 500. This is a stochastic increase that sometimes occurs in sharp jumps in fitness, reminiscent of punctuated
equilibria. After this, the population fitness varied around an equilibrium value for 500 generations.

Heterosis does not persist when heterotic hybrids are
crossed

We tested the fitness of crosses of between hybrids, to
establish whether second and subsequent generation hybrids could preserve the increased average fitness. As
can be seen in Figure 3B, the average fitness was not
preserved in the subsequent generations, and instead
quickly decayed back to the levels of the original parent
populations. This is consistent with what is observed in
nature, where heterotic phenotypes cannot be easily
fixed into true-breeding lines [45].
Categorizing the mechanisms underlying heterosis

Dominance and over/under-dominance (which we call
local heterozygosity effects) involve mechanisms that operate at individual loci, whereas epistasis involves non-

additive interaction between loci. In the dominance model,
best-parent heterosis (in which the hybrid performs better
than both parents) requires the additive effect of dominance at several loci (for an example see the Additional file
1: Text S1, Table S1). Over-dominance can produce bestparent heterosis even if it is only active at one locus. Our
algorithm measures the strength of local heterozygosity effects at each heterozygous locus and the strength of epistatic effects for each pair of loci. The simulation allowed
us to test the role of these different theoretical mechanisms of heterosis in contributing to fitness.
The results of an example run of the simulation are shown
in Figure 4. Figure 4A shows the fitness performance of the
two parent populations and the fitness of hybrids formed
between them, while Figure 4B and Figure 4C respectively
show the influence of local heterozygosity mechanisms and

Figure 3 Population fitness over time. A) Hybrids perform better on average than the separated parent populations for some generations.
After a variable number of generations, the fitness of newly formed hybrids collapses and does not recover. B) If hybrid individuals that exhibit
heterosis are crossed to each other, the fitness advantage does not persist. Instead, the fitness of the offspring of hybrids collapses back to the
same level as the parent populations. All fitness values are population averages of 40 (parent populations) or 80 (hybrids) individuals.

Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24

Page 6 of 15

Figure 4 Different mechanisms and their impact over time. A) Performance of parent populations and hybrids in an example run. The parent
populations evolved separately from generation 2000 onwards. Hybrids showed heterosis until generation 2150 followed by the collapse of fitness in
the hybrids. Hybridization was performed every 20 generations; red and black: average fitness of parent populations, green circles: average fitness of
hybrid population B) Effect of local heterozygosity mechanisms relative to each other; light blue: over-dominance, orange: dominance, black:
under-dominance. C) Effect of epistatic mechanisms relative to each other; dark blue: positive epistasis, yellow: negative epistasis, gray:
epistatic incompatibility.

epistasis mechanisms on the fitness of the hybrids. Local
heterozygosity effects are calculated by adding up the fitness effects of individual loci (disregarding epistasis). Epistasis effects are calculated by adding up the effect of each

combination of two alleles on separate loci (disregarding
epistasis involving more than two loci). This is only to
allow a comparison between the strengths of different
local heterozygosity effects or different epistasis effects,

Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24

and does not allow an absolute estimate of the influence
of these mechanisms on fitness. Therefore, we speak of
‘relative fitness effects’ in the following.
Relative contributions of local heterozygosity mechanisms
to heterosis

Figure 5 shows data from 11 runs of the simulation (880
networks per time-point) for hybrid populations exhibiting
heterosis, undergoing fitness collapse, and reaching a low
fitness level after the collapse. The randomness of the
process causes the collapse to occur very late in some
cases (average 5.6 hybridizations, standard deviation 3.4).
Hybridisations were performed at 20-generation intervals.
We calculated the relative strength of the effects of dominance, over-dominance and under-dominance (Figure 5A);
see Methods for details on the calculation of each of these
effects.
The effects of dominance are minor up until the point
of collapse in hybrid fitness. During and after the collapse they become stronger, but remain very variable. In
most networks, dominance does not contribute to the
fitness at all. Over-dominance has a very strong effect
right from the start in almost all networks. Underdominance is absent at the start, but rapidly increases in
strength (i.e. its effect becoming more negative) at the
point of collapse. Curiously, it then weakens again, but
remains stronger than dominance and over-dominance
combined.

Page 7 of 15

effects can involve alleles on more than two loci. Calculating the effects of epistasis between alleles on three or more
loci would be prohibitively computationally challenging.
In a case where there is a positive epistatic interaction
between alleles on three loci (e.g. three nodes in a regulatory chain), where two are from parent 1 and one is from
parent 2, losing just one of them would cause the loss of
the function provided by their interaction. If only alleles
on pairs of loci are considered for epistasis, this one instance of epistasis would be counted twice (once for each
parent 1 allele paired with the allele of parent 2). Therefore,
summing the effects of epistasis of loci pairs is likely to overestimate the true strength of epistasis and its contribution to
heterosis. However, the effects of different kinds of epistasis
can be compared to each other (Figure 5B).
Positive epistasis (e.g. the two genes considered are part of
the same pathway) is weak before the collapse and remains
at an intermediate level after. Negative epistasis (e.g. genes
are part of parallel pathways) is relatively weak throughout
the simulation. Epistatic incompatibility (meaning that the
presence of both alleles reduces fitness) starts off near zero,
but becomes very strong during the collapse and then dissipates again to an intermediate level, following the same
pattern as under-dominance.
In our simulation, positive epistasis is almost absent before
the collapse and dominance is weak and over-dominance
appears to be the main contributor to heterosis. The collapse of hybrid fitness is caused by both under-dominance
and epistatic incompatibility.

Relative contributions of epistatic mechanisms

When we calculate epistasis, we consider the interaction
of the paternal allele of one locus with the maternal allele of another. The strength of the effects of epistasis
cannot be directly compared to the values of dominance,
over-dominance and under-dominance because epistatic

Early signs of hybrid fitness collapse

The collapse in hybrid fitness occurs very suddenly and
there is no apparent slow build-up of deleterious mutations.
Instead, the patterns of under-dominance and epistatic incompatibility suggest that individual mutations cause the

Figure 5 Relative effects of heterosis mechanisms on the fitness of hybrids. Data of 11 runs is pooled. Data from each run was shifted so
the fitness collapse coincides after the 5th hybridization (red dashed line). A) Effects of local heterozygosity mechanisms. B) Effect of epistatic
mechanisms. Please note that only gene pairs were considered for epistasis, allowing multiple counting of effects in cases of epistasis involving
several genes. For this reason, epistatic and local heterozygosity mechanisms cannot be directly compared.

Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24

fitness collapse by sweeping through one of the parent populations. The mutation must be beneficial in the population
in which it arose or else it would not be selected. In the hybrids, however, it causes strongly reduced fitness. The transition from high (heterotic) fitness to low fitness is binary
for each individual network. Thus, even before the average
fitness of the hybrids drops catastrophically, there are individual hybrid networks with very low fitness. These alleles
would not normally be removed by selection, as their effects
in the background of the parent populations are neutral or
positive. The appearance of hybrid individuals with very low
fitness can indicate imminent incompatibility, if the responsible alleles sweep through the parent population.

Discussion
We have presented a model that can reproduce many
biological observations associated with hybrid vigor
[1,8]. This includes the observation that vigor increases
as the parents diverge genetically up to a point where
the parent populations become incompatible [46] and
hybrids between them are at a severe disadvantage, as
well as demonstrating the difficulty of fixing the hybrid
trait in a true-breeding line [45].
Our model considers diploid organisms and it implements independent reassortment of alleles. We take a
similar approach to the network model of Andorf et al.
[5,19,20] in that our phenotype (and hence the levels of
heterosis) are directly related to the networks’ topologies.
However, we have a more sophisticated definition of the
regulatory interactions between the genes, which makes
our model more biologically realistic. The main focus of
Andorf’s work evolves around the assumption that a significant component of heterosis is determined by structural properties of the network. We do not explicitly use
this and actually trying to test this hypothesis we observed
that for small networks, like the ones we can consider
(30–50 nodes), the definition of network statistical properties is not particularly meaningful. Furthermore, we have
used simulations of entire populations of individuals
evolving in time to explore the emergence of heterosis at
the population level, allowing us to investigate the importance of the different genetic mechanisms that have been
suggested to explain the phenomenon.
Moreover, we have provided a novel definition of fitness, which is based on a combination of the individual’s
genotype and environment. The approach represents a compromise between a very detailed simulation of the genotype
or of the phenotype. For example, [47] model the emergence
of functional gene clustering explicitly considering the physical distribution of genes along chromosomes, accounting
for linkage and other factors as well as considering the corresponding protein interaction network. However they
employ a definition of fitness which is very different from
ours and mostly focuses on the individuals’ network

Page 8 of 15

characteristics rather than their interaction with the environment (based on optimizing the number of cells or the
number of cell types). On the other hand, other interesting
models have used a more sophisticated definition of
phenotype, sacrificing accuracy in the representation of
the genotype [48], but these were not aimed at studying
heterosis. Our work focuses on a realistic representation
of the gene regulatory dynamics, which gives rise to a natural definition of the phenotype, importantly, related to
the environment.
Although we don’t explore this here, this framework
could be used to study the impact of different types of
environment in shaping the phenotype. For example, the
environments in which the individuals are selected
could be changed periodically and the time scale of
these changes is likely to affect the evolution of the
populations and the extent of the hybrid vigor observed.
Further investigation should lead to the identification of
features of the environment and of the regulatory network
of the parents that determine the extent and robustness of
the hybrid vigor. In addition, further work will aim to identify the signs of the impending collapse in hybrid vigor.
Continued separate evolution produces a speciation-like
event

We hypothesized that the two parent populations would
diverge over time, as each accumulates unique mutations.
While this genetic difference between the populations
gives rise to heterosis [49]. Yet, once two parent individuals have evolved to become so different that combining
their regulatory networks causes problems, the fitness of
hybrids will be reduced. We thus expected to see heterosis
to decrease again after the parent populations had evolved
separately for some time. In the simulation, we observed
this decrease as a drastic collapse of hybrid fitness. It is
worth noting that this is not an intended function of the
simulation, but rather an emergent behavior of the evolutionary algorithm. The number of generations after the
population split at which this collapse occurred varied
widely, between ten and several hundred generations. In
biological terms, this would describe an event akin to speciation [50]. Hybrids that form between the two populations after this event would be at a severe disadvantage
(Figure 3A). Although our model does not have a spatial
component, the two populations are prevented from interbreeding, as they would be through spatial separation.
After the collapse, the separation of the two populations
would be reinforced by their genetic incompatibility, even
if they were to mix again. It should be noted that the two
populations, while being kept separate, were subject to the
same environments and were under exactly the same selective pressure. This observation closely resembles the
findings of the ecological study on the fitness of intra- and
inter-population hybrids performed by Drury and Wade

Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24

[51]. As in our simulation, individual genes that had
emerged in the separated populations of red flour beetles
had weak advantageous effects in the background of their
own population, but caused a drastic fitness reduction in
hybrids.
It is interesting to note the sharpness of the hybrid fitness collapse. In most cases, the average hybrid fitness
dropped to a steady level far below the fitness of the parents in a space of less than ten generations. This suggests
that a very small number of mutations cause the incompatibility between the parent populations. These mutations
may be advantageous in one of the parent populations and
sweep through it rapidly. In conjunction with genes from
the other parent population, however, they disrupt the
regulatory network, leading to low fitness. It is possible that
some of the mutated alleles that cause heterosis are also involved in causing the fitness collapse, but our simulation
does not presuppose this.
Over-dominance is an important mechanism of heterosis
in our model

In our simulation, over-dominance is the mechanism with
the greatest contribution to network fitness during the
generations in which heterosis is observed. We are aware
that this result could be influenced by the assumptions of
our model, such as the binary nature of Boolean networks
and our definition of fitness and environments. Whether
and to what extent overdominance contributes to heterosis
observed in biology is a highly controversial topic [14].
Experimental evidence in support of the overdominance
model has been found in rice [52] reviewed in [15], sorghum [53], tomato [54] and oil palm [55], among others.
In the model, under-dominance and epistatic incompatibility both contribute to the observed collapse in hybrid fitness. Positive epistasis and epistatic incompatibility almost
always appeared together, with their increasing and decreasing fitness effects directly opposite to each other and
in similar magnitude, with incompatibility normally being
somewhat stronger. This observation mirrors the finding
in the simulation of Yukilevich et al. [56], where mutations
with large fitness effects caused both synergistic and antagonistic effects. The framework here introduced could easily
be extended to simulate different evolution and selection
scenarios to test the generality of our findings.
An experimental approach to heterosis research has been
that of predicting the levels of heterosis using available
genetic and phenotypic data about the parents, for example
metabolic profiling [5,57]. This study showed that genetic
markers, metabolic markers and more general phenotypes
such as parental biomass carried complementary information necessary to predict heterosis [57]. This finding would
confirm the role of epistatic effects in heterosis. Another
study using a metabolic network as a representation of the
individuals also concluded that epistasis plays a fundamental

Page 9 of 15

role in heterosis [58]. Further analysis of epistasis in our
simulated hybrids could potentially shed more light on the
importance of multigenic effects in determining vigour.

Parallels between local heterozygosity effects and epistasis

The mechanisms of dominance, over-dominance and
under-dominance can be considered at a single locus
level (though several cases of dominance would be necessary to explain heterosis by this mechanism alone).
Epistasis is the interaction between alleles of separate
genes, and thus cannot be explained without at least
looking at pairs of genes. However, there are notable
parallels between the three mechanisms of epistasis and
the local heterozygosity mechanisms. In both dominance
and negative epistasis, at least one allele can be removed
from the network without a loss in fitness, as the other
allele of the pair compensates for its function. In both
over-dominance and positive epistasis, the interaction
between the two alleles leads to a greater fitness, while
in the case of under-dominance or epistatic incompatibility, removing either allele increases fitness. As shown
in Figures 5 and 6, the local heterozygosity effects show
largely the same pattern as the epistatic effects, with the
exception of over-dominance, which is strong from the
start, contrary to positive epistasis.

Figure 6 Fitness of the hybrid population in an example run.
Fitness collapse occurs after the 5th hybridization (red dashed line).
Just before then, individual networks with very low fitness appear,
indicating imminent collapse. Even after the collapse, a number of
networks maintain high fitness, but the fitness average (green line)
has dropped to a low level.

Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24

Robustness of the model to the choice of parameters

Our simulation is based on a number of parameters governing the generation of the initial networks, the choice of
modules for fitness calculation, the size of each network
and the size of the populations, the relative rates of different mutation mechanisms and the overall mutation rate as
well as the number of generations allowed for initial adaptation. We experimented with different values for all these
parameters to ensure that the results we observed were
not artifacts of the specific parameters we chose. Because
of the stochasticity at the center of our simulation and the
computational challenge of running it under many different conditions, we have left a formal parameter space
exploration as a topic for further publications.
One of the most interesting parameters is the overall mutation rate. It is very difficult to give a realistic estimate for
this value in biological organisms, as it is likely to vary markedly between species (and between environments) and because only the mutations that are not removed by selection
are easily observable. When the same number of mutations
was spread out over a greater number of generations in the
initial adjustment period, the fitness equilibrium reached by
the adjusted population was higher. We observed that lower
mutation rates produced more pronounced heterosis, and
we interpret this to there being more time for selection to
remove deleterious alleles between the appearance of new
mutations events, and even weakly advantageous mutations
are able to spread through the population. Also, the collapse
in hybrid fitness took place within a similar number of generations, regardless of the mutation rate, suggesting that a
single mutation, or a very small number of mutations, is responsible for the collapse, rather than a slow build-up of
different alleles in the two populations.
We also performed simulations using two environments
(rather than three) which produced substantially the same
results, except for a generally higher fitness level reached
by the population. For more detail, see Additional file 1:
Text S3, Figures S3A and S3B.
An interesting direction for future work will be the exploration of the role of the network topology and logic
functions in determining the speed of adaptation, the
levels of hybrid vigor achievable and the number of generations for which hybrid vigor can be sustained. Given that
our model produces hybrid vigour simply based on the
network characteristics of the individuals, it could be used
to test and refine models of how the topology features
affect the levels of epistasis [59].
Validation of the simulation using biological data

Although so far the model hasn’t been validated with
biological data, the networks that we use to represent
our individuals could be easily compared to regulatory
networks for different species and parallels between real
organisms and our networks could be established. The

Page 10 of 15

topological properties of our networks are in line with
the currently available biological regulatory networks
and the results we presented are likely to be general
enough to provide insight on the real biological systems.
Reproducing in vivo the experiments performed in our
simulation requires the breeding of separate populations
of individuals in specific environments for hundreds or
thousands of generations with repeated analysis of the operating genetic regulation networks, which would imply a
near-impossible effort even in the simplest and fastest
evolving organisms, such as bacteria. However, the analysis
of the genetic makeup and phenotype in hybrids created
by nature itself could be a first tool to verify how well our
simulation reproduces biological hybrid vigor. For example,
recent research has focused on the genetic and phenotypic
characterization of large sets of wild isolates of yeast [60-63].
It would be interesting to identify within these collections
sets of individuals that are the result of hybridization of
strains at different points in time. This type of data could be
used to establish a parallel between a real organism and our
simulation, possibly leading to further biological insights.
Although excellent results have been achieved in predicting heterosis levels with a combination of genetic and
metabolic information [5,57], simulations of the type presented here will be useful to test mechanistic explanations
of the different aspects of hybrid vigour that underlie the
observed metabolic changes. In our simulation, no specific
assumption about the role of the nodes in the network is
made. The general framework of the simulation can be
used as a way to look for how the genetic and metabolic
aspects of the organism fitness are related through a multitude of different regulatory interactions. For example, extensions to the simulation could specifically look for the
role of genomic and epigenetic mechanisms that have also
been implicated in heterosis [21,64].

Conclusion
Our simulation is able to reproduce heterosis in evolving
populations of gene regulatory networks. It predicts the
rise in hybrid fitness as parent populations diverge, as well
as the collapse in hybrid fitness due to allelic incompatibility and the instability of the heterotic fitness in subsequent
crosses of hybrids. All these phenomena are observed in
nature. The modelling framework allows us to measure the
effects of different genetic mechanisms that may cause heterosis and shows overdominance and positive epistasis to
be the strongest effects. Our model is more detailed and
less abstract than previous network-based models of heterosis and lends itself to modifications and extensions that
could enable the study of haploid organisms, allopolyploidy
and other aspects of evolutionary theory. The emergence
of genetic incompatibility between diverging population
means that the simulation might even be applied to model
processes of speciation.

Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24

Methods
The simulation was written using R version 2.13.2. The
following packages were used BoolNet version 1.4,
igraph version 0.5 and sfsmisc version 1.0-19.
Summary of the evolutionary algorithm

Each individual in the simulation is represented by a network composed of components inherited from two parents.
The fitness of this network is measured as its response to a
set of three environments, which are defined by the fixed
states of certain nodes. For each environment we define a
subset of nodes (a module) which is to be turned ON, while
the other modules are to be turned OFF, to achieve ‘perfect’
fitness. Based on their fitness, networks are selected to
reproduce according to a Metropolis-Hastings algorithm
(see below and Additional file 1: Text S7). From each selected individual, a number of “gametes” are formed, which
are lists of alleles inherited from either parent of the selected
individual. Two “gametes” are combined to generate a
new diploid network. For more information of each
step in this cycle, see the Additional file 1: Text S4-S7,
Figures S4 and S5.
The individual: networks, Boolean logic and attractors

Our simulation uses regulatory networks in which nodes
represent genes or gene products and directed edges represent regulatory interactions (Table 1). In biological
terms, these interactions can result from many mechanisms such as transcription factor regulation of targets,
regulation of an mRNA by an RNA binding protein, posttranslational modifications in signaling cascades or any
other relation that produces an effect of the product of
one gene on the product of another. The initial random
networks were generated to ensure their statistical resemblance to biological regulatory networks, namely they were
built to display realistic degree distributions (in-degree,
out-degree) and to have modules, subsets of nodes that
are highly interconnected but less connected with nodes
outside of the module.
Table 1 Simulated genetics in an individual
Biological entities

Our simulation

Gene

Node

Gene activity (e.g. expression,
Binary node state
post-translational modification, etc.)

Page 11 of 15

The Boolean framework imposes binary values on the
state of each node (gene), allowing them to be either
ON or OFF. The state of a node at a further time step in
the simulation is given by logic transition functions depending on the states of the nodes that the node receives
inputs from. The logic functions are constructed of
AND, OR and NOT relations and are allowed to mutate
during evolution. These logic functions were assigned
randomly to each node in the initial network.
Iteratively updating the states of the network causes the
network to reach a repeated combination of states. This is
the attractor of the system, which can be either a single
state (fixed point) or a cyclically repeating group of states
from which no more transitions are possible. Multiple
attractors can exist for a single network (individual) that
can be reached starting from different initial conditions
(initial gene states). In our model, we used synchronous
updating, i.e. all nodes were assigned their new state simultaneously, rather than one at a time. Our preliminary tests
showed no major differences in the attractors generated by
synchronous and asynchronous updating (see Additional
file 1: Text S8), due to the fixed states of the environment
nodes and the limited size of our networks. Synchronous
updating is much faster, so we decided to use it for our
model.
Network generation

For the initial generation of the networks, we used an algorithm first described by Holme and Kim [65] consisting of
preferential attachment and triad formation (to increase the
clustering, or modularity, of the network), and adapted it
for directed networks using ideas from Prettejohn et al.
[66]. The resulting algorithm had two tuning parameters
which allowed limited control over the network topology.
These parameters were fixed such that the algorithm best
reproduced observed degree distributions as well as ultrasmall-world and modular properties that have been seen in
biological networks [31]. Throughout evolution, the networks acquired more realistic properties, such as having a
few nodes with many outgoing connections (hubs) and
many more nodes with very few connections (data not
shown). This suggests that evolution was not compromising the properties of the networks that were built into them
in the beginning.

Regulatory interaction

Connection (edge) between nodes

Calculating phenotype and fitness

Allele

logic function and potential for
in- and out-going connections that
determine the state of a node and
its function in the dynamics of the
network

Gamete

Haploid list of alleles selected at
random from a diploid individual,
combined with another gamete,
forms a new diploid

The capacity of the network to correctly respond to external conditions was used as a biologically meaningful
and generic measure for fitness.
To use a simplistic example, one could define for a plant
three binary parameters that can be measured for a specific
environment, like day-length with regard to a threshold, infection by a pathogen and presence of frost. Environments
can then be defined based on combinations of these

Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24

parameters, so different environments could for example
represent different seasons. The individual’s phenotype
emerges in response to the present environment (e.g. a tree
losing its leaves in autumn).
Hence three nodes were arbitrarily selected from the initial network and defined as ‘environment nodes’ (see
Figure 7). These nodes have fixed states, which cannot be
altered dynamically during the simulation. These nodes
represent factors of the environment that the organism
may be able to perceive (e.g. the presence of a pathogen).
Any incoming connections these nodes gained during network creation are erased but out-going connections to
other nodes (which represent the organisms means of perceiving its environments, e.g. receptor proteins) are
retained. The networks may evolve new connections to
these environment nodes or lose old ones through subsequent mutations. A specific combination of states for
these three nodes was termed an ‘environment’. We perform the fitness calculation for three different environments (different combination of states of the same three
environment nodes). In order to represent groups of genes
involved in responding to each environment, we chose
three modules from our network (sub-networks where the

Page 12 of 15

nodes are particularly highly interconnected within the
sub-network) and assigned each to one environment. We
then specified that under a specific environment, the ideal
network response (i.e. the ideal phenotype) is achieved
when in the network attractor all the nodes of the corresponding module are turned ON, whilst all the other
nodes are OFF.
To calculate the fitness under one environment, a single
value for each module is formed by averaging the states of
the nodes contained in the module. Then the average of
the values of all the modules that are not associated with
this specific environment is subtracted from the value of
the associated environment. This is repeated for each
environment.
The average fitness in all three environments is the overall
fitness of the individual. This resulted in a fitness value between 1 (a perfectly responding network), and −1 (a network
that responds in exactly the wrong way to every environment). We chose this method of defining fitness rather than
the related, but somewhat simpler methods used in [67] and
[19], because it allows greater freedom in the network evolution, including the complete loss and duplication of nodes.
For more information, see the Additional file 1: Text S2.
Selection based on fitness

Selection was then performed to choose the individuals that
will produce offspring in the following generation (Table 2).
The probability of individuals being selected increased with
their fitness, such that the population evolved better adaptation to the environments. For this, we used a MetropolisHastings algorithm (see Additional file 1: Text S7). This
could be visualized as climbing to the top of mountains in
the evolutionary fitness landscape, through small steps
that increase fitness. However, to prevent the population
from getting trapped onto local peaks from which the fitness cannot increase any further, low fitness individuals
were also included in the selection, with much lower probability, allowing the population to descend towards a valley
that might allow it to climb up a different, potentially
higher, mountain.
To go back to our example, plants that can adapt their
phenotype to the seasons correctly will stand a greater
chance of surviving and generating offspring, which will
Table 2 Population simulation
Population
Figure 7 Schematic representation of the definition of
environments and their corresponding modules. The two
shaded sub-networks are the modules that have been associated to
two specific environments (see top). In an ideally adapted network,
under Environment 1 in steady state all nodes of Module 1 are ON,
while all nodes of Module 2 are OFF, while under Environment 2,
Module 1 is OFF and module 2 is ON. Not all nodes are members
of modules.

Group of 40 networks (reduced to
10 in every round of selection)

Regulatory dynamics The network passes through different states
depending on environment and wiring, until
it arrives at a stable or recurring attractor state
Phenotype

Steady state or state cycle of the states of the
network’s nodes (attractor) caused by the network
dynamics under a certain environment

Fitness

Similarity between phenotype and ideal
phenotype in a specific environment

Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24

lead to better and better adaptation of the population to
its environment.
Initially, the definition which module should be switched
ON in each environment is entirely arbitrary. This only
serves to provide a highly imperfect initial situation that
allows adaptation by the evolutionary algorithm and is not
intended to represent a situation found in biological evolution. At the end of the initial adaptation phase, however,
the networks have evolved to process the inputs (i.e. states
of the externally controlled environment nodes) into
environment-specific outputs. Each module can now be
seen as representing a fitness-enhancing (i.e. biologically
useful) response to a specific environment.
Calculation of local heterozygosity effects

The initial networks were generated with 22 nodes plus
three nodes with only outgoing connections, which represent environmental factors (environment nodes). Over the
course of evolution, genes can be lost or duplicated, so the
number of nodes in each diploid network varies. In
addition, each heterozygotic locus is represented by two
nodes, while homozygotic loci are only represented by one
node. This is a valid simplification, as two identical nodes
have the same effect on network dynamics as a single node.
If a network included two identical alleles, they would
have the same inputs and the same logical function. As a
consequence they would always be assigned the same
state, both ON or both OFF. In addition, they would have
the same outputs, so any other node that receives an input
from them will receive inputs from both, connected by an
OR-gate. However, as the state of the two nodes is always
the same, the result of the OR gate will always be the same
as the state of the two nodes. Thus, by representing homozygous loci by only one node, the computation can be
simplified without affecting the network dynamics.
We define an allele as the information describing one
node in a network. This includes the genes it can receive
inputs from and the genes it can output to and the logical function used to assign the node’s state.
To examine dominance, we considered each heterozygous gene in a network, i.e. each gene for which the alleles inherited from each parent were not identical. For
each gene, we measured network fitness in the complete
network as well as the two networks in which the alleles
from either parent were removed, as described above,
these networks represent individuals that are homozygotic for the other allele, respectively. We defined a dominance effect as the difference between the fitness of the
complete (heterozygotic) network and the average fitness
of the two homozygotes. The network dominance score
is then the sum of scores of all heterozygous loci at
which dominance occurs. To exclude numerical error,
only effects of more than 0.5% of the whole network fitness
were counted. Only cases where the complete network

Page 13 of 15

fitness was greater than the average of the homozygotes
were counted towards the dominance effect. If the fitness
of the complete network was lower than the average of the
homozygotes (e.g. if the dominant allele was deleterious)
the effect was counted as under-dominance (see below).
Over-dominance was measured as the difference between the complete network and the average fitness of the
homozygotes, in cases where the fitness of both homozygotic networks was lower than the fitness of the complete
network.
Under-dominance describes the opposite of overdominance, i.e. a case in which the presence of two different alleles of one gene causes lower fitness than the
presence of either allele in homozygous form. Thus,
under-dominance is opposed to heterosis and is one of
the mechanisms involved in the collapse of hybrid fitness and subsequent hybrid incompatibility. For examples of these mechanisms, see the Additional file 1.
Calculating the effects of epistasis

To measure epistasis, we need to assess the fitness effect
of an allele in different genetic backgrounds, i.e. in the
presence or absence of another allele of a different locus.
Consider a diploid network that contains the alleles G1,
G1’, G2 and G2’, where G1 and G2 have been inherited
from one parent and G1’ and G2’ from the other. In order
to measure epistasis between the alleles G1 and G2’*, we
estimate the fitness the network would be expected to
have if the two alleles were independent (i.e. no epistasis)
and compare it to the fitness of the actual network with all
alleles present. We calculate the fitness of the complete
network, the network from which G1 was removed (i.e.
where G1’ is homozygous, but both G2 and G2’ are
present), the network where G2’ is removed (homozygous
for G2, but both G1 and G1’ are present) and the network
with neither G1 nor G2’ (homozygous for G1’ and G2).
The epistasis between the two alleles G1 and G2’ is then
calculated as the difference between the fitness of the
complete (double heterozygote) network and the predicted
network fitness in the absence of epistasis: the product of
the fitness values of the two single homozygote networks
divided by the fitness of the double homozygote network.
epG1xG20 ¼ F complete −

F w=o G1  F w=o G20
F w=o G1;G20

*These calculations are always done for alleles of different loci. G1 and G1’ are an allelomorphic pair, so their
interaction would fall under dominance, overdominance
or underdominance. G1 and G2 are inherited from the
same parent. While there may be epistasis between
them, it would also be present in the parent that the two
alleles are from, so it is irrelevant for heterosis. The
same applies to epistasis where at least one of the alleles

Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24

involved is homozygous. The interaction between G1’
and G2 has to be calculated separately.
An epistatic interaction was classed as positive, if the fitness of the double heterozygote network was greater than
the predicted one. One mechanism would be that the two
loci were involved in some common function and the absence of a particular allele at one locus disrupts that function. As such epistatic interactions increase the fitness of
the hybrid, they can generate heterosis.
If the measured fitness of the double mutant is lower
than the prediction, either negative epistasis (as defined by
[68]) or epistatic incompatibility (c.f. [69,70]) is present. In
negative epistasis the two alleles have redundant functions, so removing either one does not affect fitness but
removing both does. Negative epistasis cannot cause heterosis, since both parents would have the function from
the allele they handed down to the hybrid. But it can prevent heterosis from occurring, e.g. if the interaction exists
between two dominant alleles.
Alternatively, having both alleles could disrupt some
function. In this case, the fitness of both single mutants
is higher than the fitness of the complete network, leading to an even higher prediction for the double mutant.
This would be a case of epistatic incompatibility, which
is strongly opposed to heterosis. This kind of interaction
appears to be the prime cause of the fitness collapse
observed in the hybrids.

Availability of supporting data
We make the code available to the community through
a GitHub repository at https://github.com/VeraPancaldi/
Heterosis-GRN-simulation and hope that it will become
a useful tool for further computational analysis in the
field. This version may be improved or expanded in the
future. In addition, we provide a static version of the
source code on figshare under http://figshare.com/articles/Heterosis_GRN_simulation/1247499.
Additional file
Additional file 1: Text S1. Examples of heterosis by different
mechanisms. Text S2. Calculating network fitness. Text S3. Simulation
results using two environments. Text S4. Generating alleles and building
diploid networks. Text S5. Implementation of mutations. Text S6.
Implementation of independent assortment. Text S7. Implementation of
selection. Text S8. Synchronous versus asynchronous updating.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
PMFE and HER designed the algorithm and wrote the code for the core
simulation. HER performed the analysis of network structures. PMFE
performed the simulation runs, and participated in drafting the manuscript
and analysed the resulting data. VP conceived this study and drafted the
manuscript. All authors have approved the final manuscript.

Page 14 of 15

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the European Commission FP7 Revolution
project (grant number 233325) and a FEBS fellowship to V.P. and was
partially carried out by P. M. F. E. and H. E. R. as a project for the Part III
course in Systems Biology at Cambridge University supervised by V.P. in
the laboratory of David C. Baulcombe. We thank David C. Baulcombe and
Krystyna A. Kelly for critical reading of the manuscript.
Author details
Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, CB2 3EA
Cambridge, UK. 2Current address: John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park,
Norwich NR4 7UH, UK. 3Current address: The Nuffield Department of Clinical
Medicine, Oxford University, Peter Medawar Building for Pathogen Research,
Oxford OX1 3SY, UK. 4Current address: Structural Biology and BioComputing
Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Calle Melchor
Fernández Almagro, 3, Madrid E-28029, Spain.
1

Received: 27 September 2014 Accepted: 27 January 2015

References
1. Birchler JA, Yao H, Chudalayandi S, Vaiman D, Veitia RA. Heterosis. Plant Cell.
2010;22(7):2105–12. doi:10.1105/tpc.110.076133.
2. Sreenivasulu N, Schnurbusch T. A genetic playground for enhancing grain
number in cereals. Trends Plant Sci. 2011;17(2):91–101. doi:10.1016/j.
tplants.2011.11.003.
3. Darwin C. The effects of cross and self fertilisation in the vegetable
kingdom. 1878.
4. Duvick DN. Biotechnology in the 1930s: the development of hybrid maize.
Nat Rev Genet. 2001;2(1):69–74. doi:10.1038/35047587.
5. Gärtner T, Steinfath M, Andorf S, Lisec J, Meyer RC, Altmann T, et al.
Improved heterosis prediction by combining information on DNA- and
metabolic markers. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5220. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0005220.
6. Bell GDM, Kane NC, Rieseberg LH, Adams KL. RNA-Seq analysis of allele-specific
expression, hybrid effects, and regulatory divergence in hybrids compared with
their parents from natural populations. Genome Biol Evol. 2013;5(7):1309–23.
doi :10.1093/gbe/evt072.
7. Guo B, Chen Y, Zhang G, Xing J, Hu Z, Feng W, et al. Comparative
proteomic analysis of embryos between a maize hybrid and its parental
lines during early stages of seed germination. PLoS One. 2013;8(6):e65867.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0065867.
8. Flint-Garcia SA, Buckler ES, Tiffin P, Ersoz E, Springer NM. Heterosis is
prevalent for multiple traits in diverse maize germplasm. PLoS One. 2009;4
(10):e7433. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007433.
9. Bruce AB. The mendelian theory of heredity and the augmentation of vigor.
Science. 1910;32(827):627–8. doi:10.1126/science.32.827.627-a.
10. Crow JF. Alternative hypotheses of hybrid vigor. Annu Rev Genet. 1948;33(5):477.
11. Jones DF. Dominance of linked factors as a means of accounting for
heterosis. Annu Rev Genet. 1917;2(5):466.
12. Lamkey KR, Edwards J. Quantitative genetics of heterosis. In: Genetics and
exploration of heterosis. 1999.
13. Powers L. An expansion of Jones’s theory for the explanation of heterosis.
Am Nat. 1944;78(776):275–80.
14. Lippman ZB, Zamir D. Heterosis: revisiting the magic. Trends Genet. 2007;23
(2):60–6. doi:10.1016/j.tig.2006.12.006.
15. Goff SA, Zhang Q. Heterosis in elite hybrid rice: speculation on the genetic
and biochemical mechanisms. Curr Opin Plant Biol. 2013;16(2):221–7.
doi:10.1016/j.pbi.2013.03.009.
16. Larièpe A, Mangin B, Jasson S, Combes V, Dumas F, Jamin P, et al. The
genetic basis of heterosis: multiparental quantitative trait loci mapping
reveals contrasted levels of apparent overdominance among traits of
agronomical interest in maize (Zea mays L.). Annu Rev Genet. 2012;190
(2):795–811. doi:10.1534/genetics.111.133447.
17. Li Z, Luo L, Mei H, Wang D, Shu Q. Overdominant epistatic loci are the
primary genetic basis of inbreeding depression and heterosis in rice. I.
Biomass and grain yield. Annu Rev Genet. 2001;158:1737–53.
18. Reif J, Hallauer A, Melchinger AE. Heterosis and heterotic patterns in maize.
Maydica. 2005;50:215–23.
19. Andorf S. A systems biological approach towards the molecular basis of
heterosis in Arabidopsis thaliana. 2011. OPUS-IDN/5117.

Emmrich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology (2015) 15:24

20. Andorf S, Gärtner T, Steinfath M, Witucka-Wall H, Altmann T, Repsilber D.
Towards systems biology of heterosis: a hypothesis about molecular
network structure applied for the Arabidopsis metabolome. EURASIP J
Bioinformatics Syst Biol. 2009:147157. doi:10.1155/2009/147157
21. Groszmann M, Greaves IK, Fujimoto R, James Peacock W, Dennis ES. The
role of epigenetics in hybrid vigour. Trends Genet. 2013;29(12):684–90.
doi:10.1016/j.tig.2013.07.004.
22. Kaeppler S. Heterosis: many genes, many mechanisms—end the search
for an undiscovered unifying theory. ISRN Botany. 2012;2012(4):1–12.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1207726109.
23. Veitia RA, Vaiman D. Exploring the mechanistic bases of heterosis from the
perspective of macromolecular complexes. FASEB J. 2011;25(2):476–82.
doi:10.1096/fj.10-170639.
24. Edmands S. Heterosis and outbreeding depression in interpopulation
crosses spanning a wide range of divergence. Evolution. 1999;53(6):1757–68.
25. Bikard D, Patel D, Le Metté C, Giorgi V, Camilleri C, Bennett MJ, et al. Divergent
evolution of duplicate genes leads to genetic incompatibilities within a.
thaliana. Science. 2009;323(5914):623–6. doi:10.1126/science.1165917.
26. Cox TS, Murphy JP. The effect of parental divergence on F2 heterosis in
winter wheat crosses. Theor Appl Genet. 1990;79(2):241–50.
27. Moll RH, Lonnquist JH, Fortuno JV, Johnson EC. The relationship of heterosis
and genetic divergence in maize. Annu Rev Genet. 1965;52(1):139.
28. Barabási A-L, Oltvai ZN. Network biology: understanding the cell’s functional
organization. Nat Rev Genet. 2004;5(2):101–13. doi:10.1038/nrg1272.
29. Davidich M, Bornholdt S. The transition from differential equations to
Boolean networks: a case study in simplifying a regulatory network model.
J Theor Biol. 2008;255(3):269–77.
30. de Jong H. Modeling and simulation of genetic regulatory systems: a
literature review. J Comput Biol. 2002;9(1):67–103. doi :10.1089/
10665270252833208.
31. Dehmer M, Emmert-Streib F. Networks for systems biology: conceptual
connection of data and function. IET Syst Biol. 2011;5(3):185–207.
doi:10.1049/iet-syb.2010.0025.
32. Karlebach G, Shamir R. Modelling and analysis of gene regulatory networks.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2008;9(10):770–80. doi:10.1038/nrm2503.
33. Papp B, Notebaart RA, Pál C. Systems-biology approaches for predicting
genomic evolution. Nat Rev Genet. 2011;12(9):591–602.
34. Kauffman SA. Metabolic stability and epigenesis in randomly constructed
genetic nets. J Theor Biol. 1969;22(3):437–67.
35. Akman OE, Watterson S, Parton A, Binns N, Millar AJ, Ghazal P. Digital clocks:
simple Boolean models can quantitatively describe circadian systems. J R
Soc Interface. 2012;9(74):2365–82. doi:10.1126/science.220.4598.671.
36. Bornholdt S. Boolean network models of cellular regulation: prospects and
limitations. J R Soc Interface. 2008;5(Suppl_1):S85–94. doi:10.1016/S0955-0674
(03)00017-6.
37. Handorf T, Klipp E. Modeling mechanistic biological networks: an advanced
boolean approach. Bioinformatics. 2012;28(4):557–63. doi:10.1093/
bioinformatics/btr697.
38. Sanchez L, Thieffry D. A logical analysis of the drosophila gap-gene system.
J Theor Biol. 2001;212(1):127.
39. Steggles LJ, Banks R, Shaw O, Wipat A. Qualitatively modelling and
analysing genetic regulatory networks: a Petri net approach. Bioinformatics.
2007;23(3):336–43. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btl596.
40. Wang R-S, Saadatpour A, Albert R. Boolean modeling in systems biology: an
overview of methodology and applications. Phys Biol. 2012;9(5):055001.
doi:10.1088/1478-3975/9/5/055001.
41. Wollbold J, Huber R, Pohlers D, Koczan D, Guthke R, Kinne RW, et al.
Adapted Boolean network models for extracellular matrix formation.
BMC Syst Biol. 2009;3(1):77. doi:10.1186/1752-0509-3-77.
42. Payne JL, Wagner A. Constraint and contingency in multifunctional gene
regulatory circuits. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9(6):e1003071. doi:10.1371/
journal.pcbi.1003071.
43. Barabasi AL. Scale-free networks: a decade and beyond. Science. 2009;325
(5939):412–3. doi:10.1126/science.1173299.
44. Rives AW. Modular organization of cellular networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci.
2003;100(3):1128–33. doi:10.1073/pnas.0237338100.
45. Uddin MN, Ellison FW, O’Brien L, Latter B. The performance of pure lines
derived from heterotic bread wheat hybrids. Aust J Agr Res. 1994;45(3):591.
doi:10.1071/AR9940591.
46. Orr HA. The population genetics of speciation: the evolution of hybrid
incompatibilities. Annu Rev Genet. 1995;139(4):1805–13.

Page 15 of 15

47. Yerushalmi U, Teicher M. Examining emergence of functional gene
clustering in a simulated evolution. Bull Math Biol. 2007;69(7):2261–80.
doi:10.1007/s11538-007-9219-8.
48. Inoue M, Kaneko K. Cooperative adaptive responses in gene regulatory
networks with many degrees of freedom. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9(4):
e1003001. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003001.
49. Zhang T, NI X-L, Jiang K-F, Deng H-F, HE Q, Yang Q-H, et al. Relationship
between heterosis and parental genetic distance based on molecular
markers for functional genes related to yield traits in rice. Rice Sci. 2010;17
(4):288–95. doi :10.1016/S1672-6308(09)60029-9.
50. Wu C-I, Ting C-T. Genes and speciation. Nat Rev Genet. 2004;5(2):114–22.
doi:10.1038/nrg1269.
51. Drury DW, Wade MJ. Genetic variation and co-variation for fitness between intrapopulation and inter-population backgrounds in the red flour beetle, Tribolium
castaneum. J Evol Biol. 2011;24(1):168–76. doi:10.1111/j.1420-9101.2010.02151.x.
52. Luo X, Fu Y, Zhang P, Wu S, Tian F, Liu J, et al. Additive and over-dominant
effects resulting from epistatic loci are the primary genetic basis of heterosis
in rice. J Integr Plant Biol. 2009;51(4):393–408.
53. Ben-Israel I, Kilian B, Nida H, Fridman E. Heterotic Trait Locus (HTL) mapping
identifies intra-locus interactions that underlie reproductive hybrid vigor in
Sorghum bicolor. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38993. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0038993.
54. Krieger U, Lippman ZB, Zamir D. The flowering gene single flower truss
drives heterosis for yield in tomato. Nat Genet. 2010;42(5):459–63.
doi:10.1038/ng.550.
55. Singh R, Low E-TL, Ooi LC-L, Ong-Abdullah M, Ting N-C, Nagappan J, et al.
The oil palm shell gene controls oil yield and encodes a homologue of
Seedstick. Nature. 2013;500:340–4. doi:10.1038/nature12356.
56. Yukilevich R, Lachance J, Aoki F, True JR. Long-term adaptation of epistatic
genetic networks. Evolution. 2008;62(9):2215–35. doi:10.1111/j.15585646.2008.00445.x.
57. Riedelsheimer C, Czedik-Eysenberg A, Grieder C, Lisec J, Technow F, Sulpice
R, et al. Genomic and metabolic prediction of complex heterotic traits in
hybrid maize. Nat Genet. 2012;44(2):217–20. doi:10.1038/ng.1033.
58. Fiévet JB, Dillmann C, de Vienne D. Systemic properties of metabolic
networks lead to an epistasis-based model for heterosis. Theor Appl Genet.
2010;120(2):463–73. doi:10.1007/s00122-009-1203-2.
59. Szappanos B, Kovács K, Szamecz B, Honti F, Costanzo M, Baryshnikova A,
et al. An integrated approach to characterize genetic interaction networks
in yeast metabolism. Nat Genet. 2011;43(7):656–62.
60. Brown WRA, Liti G, Rosa C, James S, Roberts I, Robert V, et al. A
geographically diverse collection of schizosaccharomyces pombe isolates
shows limited phenotypic variation but extensive karyotypic diversity.
G3 (Bethesda). 2011;1(7):615–26. doi:10.1534/g3.111.001123.
61. Cubillos FA, Billi E, Zörgö E, Parts L, Fargier P, Omholt S, et al. Assessing the
complex architecture of polygenic traits in diverged yeast populations.
Mol Ecol. 2011;20(7):1401–13. doi:10.1111/j.1365-294X.2011.05005.x.
62. Liti G, Carter DM, Moses AM, Warringer J, Parts L, James SA, et al. Population
genomics of domestic and wild yeasts. Nature. 2009;458(7236):337–41.
doi:10.1038/nature07743.
63. Warringer J, Zörgö E, Cubillos FA, Zia A, Gjuvsland A. Trait variation in yeast
is defined by population history. PLoS Genet. 2011;7(6):e1002111.
64. Chen ZJ. Genomic and epigenetic insights into the molecular bases of
heterosis. Nat Rev Genet. 2013;14(7):471–82. doi:10.1038/nrg3503.
65. Holme P, Kim BJ. Growing scale-free networks with tunable clustering.
Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2002;65(2 Pt 2):026107.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.65.026107.
66. Prettejohn BJ, Berryman MJ, McDonnell MD. Methods for generating
complex networks with selected structural properties for simulations: a
review and tutorial for neuroscientists. Front Comput Neurosci. 2011;5.
doi:10.3389/fncom.2011.00011.
67. Repsilber D, Martinetz T, Björklund M. Adaptive dynamics of regulatory
networks: size matters. EURASIP J Bioinfo Sys Bio. 2009;2009:618502.
68. Macía J, Solé RV, Elena SF. The causes of epistasis in genetic networks.
Evolution. 2012;66(2):586–96. doi:10.1111/j.1558-5646.2011.01451.x.
69. Bomblies K, Weigel D. Hybrid necrosis: autoimmunity as a potential
gene-flow barrier in plant species. Nat Rev Genet. 2007;8(5):382–93.
doi:10.1038/nrg2082.
70. Mizuno N, Hosogi N, Park P, Takumi S. Hypersensitive response-like reaction
is associated with hybrid necrosis in interspecific crosses between tetraploid
wheat and Aegilops tauschii coss. PLoS One. 2010;5(6):e11326. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0011326.

