(version 25 May 2014, cite as arXiv:1310.2063 [q-bio.PE])
Active causation and the origin of meaning
J. H. van Hateren
Johann Bernouilli Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands
email: j.h.van.hateren@rug.nl

Abstract Purpose and meaning are necessary concepts for understanding mind and culture, but appear
to be absent from the physical world and are not part of the explanatory framework of the natural
sciences. Understanding how meaning (in the broad sense of the term) could arise from a physical
world has proven to be a tough problem. The basic scheme of Darwinian evolution produces
adaptations that only represent apparent (“as if”) goals and meaning. Here I use evolutionary models
to show that a slight, evolvable extension of the basic scheme is sufficient to produce genuine goals.
The extension, targeted modulation of mutation rate, is known to be generally present in biological
cells, and gives rise to two phenomena that are absent from the non-living world: intrinsic meaning
and the ability to initiate goal-directed chains of causation (active causation). The extended scheme
accomplishes this by utilizing randomness modulated by a feedback loop that is itself regulated by
evolutionary pressure. The mechanism can be extended to behavioural variability as well, and thus
shows how freedom of behaviour is possible. A further extension to communication suggests that the
active exchange of intrinsic meaning between organisms may be the origin of consciousness, which in
combination with active causation can provide a physical basis for the phenomenon of free will.
Keywords Emergence · Evolution of meaning · Agency · Consciousness · Free will
1 Introduction
Science maintains two different views on the world. The natural sciences see a physical world
composed of energy and matter, whereas the fields studying mind and culture see a human world
composed of purposeful behaviour and meaning (in the broad sense of the term, see Sect. 5). While
the physical world is thought to be governed by mechanistic processes without purpose, the human
world can only be understood when meaning and the active pursuit of goals are acknowledged as real
phenomena. Darwin's theory of evolution showed how complex life-forms can evolve from simpler
ones (Darwin 1859), and thus promised to connect the physical and human worlds. However, the
origin of purpose and meaning is still not understood. The fundamental problem is that Darwinian
evolution itself is a physical process, devoid of meaning. It is not clear if and how a physical process
can generate phenomena that appear to be non-physical.
Here I present a toy model that generates meaning and goal-directedness as adaptations
evolvable by Darwinian evolution. The model is intended as a proof of concept, not as a specific
model of the processes involved. It contains the bare minimum required for Darwinian evolution,
highlighting its causal structure. Lacking molecular details, the model should be equally applicable to
chemically different life-forms that may have evolved on other planets than Earth (Bedau and Cleland
2010; van Hateren 2013).
Although the model only has direct empirical support from known molecular processes that
regulate the mutation rate of biological cells, its basic mechanism (an evolutionary controlled
feedback process modulating randomness) can be extended to shorter timescales than those of
evolution. In particular, behavioural modifications that take place within the lifespan of an organism
can be controlled by a similar mechanism, which thus leads to goal-directed behaviour with some
degree of freedom, i.e., a form of agency. Extending the mechanism to communication between
organisms suggests a plausible link with consciousness and free will.

1

The article is organized as follows, in order to enhance readability. The main ideas are presented
primarily through text and figures in Sect. 2 (“Results”), Sect. 3 (“Discussion”), and in Figs. 1-3.
Equations, and figures that illustrate or extend the main ideas (Figs. 4-10) are in Sect. 4 (“Methods”).
Terminology is discussed in some depth in Sect. 5 (“Appendix”). In places in Sect. 2 and 3 where is
referred to equations and figures in Sect. 4, this is not essential for following the line of argument, and
the reader may prefer to skip these forward references on first reading.
2 Results
In this section the origin of meaning and active causation is first explained for hereditary change on an
evolutionary timescale, with as unit the organismal lineage (here defined as a particular line of
descent of organisms). Subsequently, these ideas are extended to behavioural change on the timescale
of an organism's lifetime, with as unit the single organism. In the latter case, active causation takes the
form of agency, the property of organisms that their behaviour is neither fully determined nor random,
but changes in a way that is at the same time unpredictable and under control of the organism itself,
thus providing the organism with a limited form of behavioural freedom (Heisenberg 2009; Brembs
2011).
2.1 Active causation of heredity
The basic Darwinian model of evolution (Fig. 1a) assumes a population of organisms, with n(h,t) the
number of organisms of hereditary type h at time t. Each organism has a typical lifetime τH and
produces, on average per lifetime, f offspring, with f(h,t) defined here as the organism's fitness. Note
that fitness thus defined is a predictive, probabilistic variable, which varies during the lifetime of a
particular organism, for example when circumstances deteriorate or improve. It can best be seen as an
instantaneous reproductive rate, normalized by lifetime. The number of organisms of type h is
multiplied by f and thus gradually changes. Without mutation, the number of type h would rise
exponentially as long as h has f>1, whereas f<1 leads to decline and eventual extinction. The positive
feedback loop (I) is the main engine of life because of its potential for exponential growth, but it is
inherently unstable. A second, negative feedback loop (II) provides stabilization: because of limited
resources, the fitness of all types declines when the total number of organisms N approaches the
environment's carrying capacity, for example when food or space becomes scarce. The fitness of some
types h consequently drops below one and the numbers of those types decrease, with steady or
increasing numbers of the other types (natural selection). The result is a change in distribution of
types h.
The model has two external inputs, an environmental variable E and a mutation rate λH. E(t)
varies randomly over a wide range of temporal scales (Sect. 4, Fig. 4), both slower and faster than τH.
The fitness of type h declines with the distance between h and E (Sect. 4, Eq. (2)), and E(t) therefore
drives changes in n(h,t). Types h can change into other types by mutation at a rate λH, spreading a
particular type h gradually to neighbouring types.
The organismal lineage has only a passive role in basic Darwinian evolution. It is driven by
mechanistic feedback loops (I and II) and by external influences beyond its control (E and stochastic
processes producing mutations). Changes in fitness, heredity, and type distribution are produced, then,
by forms of causation that are passive from the point of view of the organismal lineage. Moreover, the
evolutionary process has no foresight or goal. When it produces organisms with adaptations matched
to their current environment, it is because such adaptations happened to promote fitness in previous
environments and E(t) contains slow components remaining approximately the same over many τH.
Although adaptations may be perceived, post hoc, as goal-directed ones produced by a goal-directed
process, either goal-directness is only apparent (“as if”). It is sometimes assumed that basic Darwinian
evolution implies that high fitness and survival are genuine intrinsic goals of organisms, or even that
self-maintenance as such is an intrinsic goal of life. However, this tacitly assumes that existing is
better than not existing, a value judgment inapplicable to regular physical systems (Davies 2009), as
they lack value to themselves.
The above analysis changes dramatically, however, when the basic Darwinian scheme is slightly
extended. This extension provides the organisms of a lineage with some control over their own
2

Fig. 1 Population models of basic and extended Darwinian evolution. (a) Basic model. Fitness f modifies the
number of organisms n multiplicatively (symbol ×), a mutation rate characterized by λH modifies the
distribution of types (convolution symbol ∗), and τH is the typical lifetime of an organism. See text for
further explanation and Sect. 4.1 for details. (b) Modulating λH as a comb function of h (lower panel)
produces a comb-like population density (upper panel). The goal-function is such that one in four values of
h has λH=0.5, and the others λH=3.5. The figure shows the result after 1000 time steps (10τH), typical of the
result for any time after an initial spin-up time of a few τH. Labels at the tick marks (h: 10, 20, 30; λH=0, 2,
4; n: 0, 500, 1000) are partly suppressed for the sake of clarity. (c) Extended model. An estimate of its own
fitness made by the organism, fˆ , is used to modulate λH. See text for explanation and consequences, and
H

Sect. 4.2 for details. (d) Ratios of population numbers N of 100 pairs of competing populations, one always
following the extended model and the other the basic model over a range of λH,fixed. Results after 300τH
(open grey symbols) and 600τH (black dots). The results show that the extended model is evolvable

mutation rate. Such controls exist as a general feature of cells (Galhardo et al. 2007), observable as
increased mutation rates in cells under stress, for example because of a shortage of nutrients or the
presence of toxins. Although a higher mutation rate produces many nonviable offspring, it also
increases the probability of a mutation that lets its carrier survive the stress, multiply, and thereby
increase the chances that at least one of its lines of descent will survive (Ram and Hadany 2012). Note
that this internal form of controlling mutation rate during the organism's lifetime is different from
mutator alleles being selected (Taddei et al. 1997), which is externally driven (see further Sect. 3).
The consequences of a mutation rate under control of the organisms in a lineage can be
understood from the following, hypothetical example. Suppose that the mutation rate is controlled by
a function g, so it is given by λH(g). In principle, g can take any form. Suppose it depends on heredity
h, with h not only determining fitness, but also another property unrelated to fitness. For example, at
regularly spaced positions along the h-axis organisms are slightly larger than for other h. If the former
values of h produce a smaller λH than the latter (Fig. 1b, lower panel), the population accumulates at
the former ones because mutation away from those values is slower than from the other ones (Fig. 1b,
upper panel). Even though the size variations produce no fitness change and the mutations are
undirected (not changing h in a specific direction), there is a clear, directed effect on the distribution
of types h. The function g, which is intrinsic to the organisms of a lineage, thus determines the
probability of obtaining specific values of h. It can therefore be viewed as an implicit goal of the

3

organism and its lineage, because g influences the future heredity of the organismal lineage in a
directed way.
The above example is unlikely to evolve because it does not increase fitness. Even if it would
evolve by chance, it would be unsustainable on an evolutionary time scale, because it is at a
disadvantage relative to lineages that do not spend resources on a property that is irrelevant to fitness.
An evolvable and sustainable goal-function must improve fitness, and in its purest form must make λH
a function of an estimate fˆH of the fitness of the organism, thus λ H ( fˆH ) (Fig. 1c). This is indeed an
evolvable strategy: taking a mutation rate λH that decreases as a function of estimated fitness fˆH (high
fitness implies low mutation rate, and vice versa, Sect. 4, Eq. (6)) produces a population of organisms
that outperforms populations with λH fixed (Fig. 1d). For each value of λH,fixed in Fig. 1d, a simulation
was performed with two competing populations, one population following the extended model (with
modulated λH) and the other the basic model (with fixed λH). The ratio of the total number of
organisms in each population fluctuates, but gradually the organisms of the extended model drive
those of the basic model to extinction (thus the ratio Nλ,fixed/ Nλ,modulated goes to zero, as illustrated by
the ratio after 300 and 600 lifetimes, circles and dots, respectively; results are for 100 different
simulations for a range of values of λH,fixed). The function fˆH thus produces a goal-directedness in the
lineage and its organisms that is itself evolvable by the basic Darwinian scheme. The goal evolves in
the extended Darwinian scheme by piggybacking on the basic scheme, and aligning itself with it.
The true fitness f is unlikely to be known exactly to a real-world organism (i.e., more realistic
than the toy organisms modelled here), because for that it would need to make an accurate simulation
of itself and its interactions with other evolving organisms and the environment. Although organisms
indeed appear to spend a significant part of their physiological and neural resources on inferring the
states of themselves and their environment, for example their internal nutritional state or dangerous
external factors, producing the estimate fˆH ultimately requires evolved heuristics (short-cuts and
rules of thumb). Nevertheless, fˆH is under selection pressure to provide an estimate as close to f as
possible, given the physiological constraints of the organism. The model calculations presented here
assume that the toy organisms can make an estimate fˆH that is arbitrarily close to f (by knowing or
observing their own type h, by having evolved a sensor that measures E(t), and by approximating the
mapping of Eq. (2) by an evolved physiological or neural model), but this is not a crucial assumption.
Even if fˆH is not optimal and deviates somewhat from f, similar results as in Fig. 1d are obtained
(Sect. 4.2; see further Sect. 3 for discussion). Note that f (and by implication fˆH ) is not a constant but
a function of time, changing continually because it depends on the momentary environment E(t) and
the variable population size N(t) (Sect. 4, Eq. (2)). Both f and fˆH are predictive variables, related to
an expected reproductive rate of each organism, with actually realized reproduction varying
stochastically.
The extended Darwinian scheme not only produces a goal-directedness in the organisms of a
lineage, but also changes the nature of the causality of the process. Causation in nature can be quite
complex, but it is useful to distinguish two basic variants, deterministic and stochastic causation. In
deterministic causation, systems evolve in a predictable way, with one part of the system influenced
by and influencing other parts through fixed relationships. Chains of causation are mere continuations
of existing chains, no new chains are started. In stochastic causation, new chains of causation are
initiated by definition, because the stochastic variables have no specific (identifiable) cause. Physical
sources of stochastic causation are thermal and quantum noise (see also Sect. 4), and thermal noise is
indeed the primary source of stochasticity for mutations. The mutations as produced by λH in the basic
Darwinian scheme of Fig. 1a are the result of stochastic causation. In contrast, the modulated
mutation rate λ H ( fˆH ) of the extended Darwinian scheme (Fig. 1c) is rather special, producing what
might be called modulated stochastic causation. Effectively, it is equivalent to a non-negative
deterministic variable ( fˆH ) modulating the expected variance of the resulting mutations (in the toy
model here along a single dimension, in reality in some high-dimensional space). Only the variance is
modulated, not the mean, because modulating the mean would imply a directionality for which the
4

organism would have no justification (the organism cannot foresee the effects of mutations on
fitness).
The modulated stochastic causation produced by λ H ( fˆH ) mixes deterministic causation (through
fˆH driving variance) and stochastic causation (through random mutation). This would be rather

uninteresting, were it not that it occurs in a feedback loop operating at the scale of an organismal
lineage. The random mutations change an organism's descendant such that fitness is (usually) changed
as well, such a fitness change is then reflected in the descendant's estimate of its own fitness, this selfestimated fitness subsequently influences the expected variance of mutations, the resulting mutations
subsequently change the fitness of the next descendant in a lineage, and so on and so forth. The result
is that the deterministic and stochastic causation become thoroughly entangled: fitness at a particular
point in time is dependent on the complete fitness history of the lineage (and thereby on the history of
the environment E) and on the complete history of the realizations of mutational stochasticity.
Because mutational stochasticity depends on fitness, it therefore also depends, at a particular point in
time, on the complete history of fitness, on E(t), and on previous stochastic realizations. This is in
stark contrast to the mutational stochasticity in the basic Darwinian scheme of Fig. 1a, which is not
modified by fitness (i.e., not by fitness f or fˆH as the predictive, probabilistic variables defined here,
although it may depend on fitness outcomes, actual realizations of fitness, for example when mutator
alleles are promoted, in hindsight, by natural selection). The common assumption made in modelling
that noise is independent from realization to realization (or has a limited correlation time as in
coloured noise), and that it is independent of the signal, is thus strongly invalidated by this scheme.
The effect is that fitness and mutations become strongly intertwined, and the causation should
therefore be seen as a unique form, midway between deterministic and stochastic. The regular forms
of deterministic and stochastic causation one finds in nature can be called “passive”, because things
just happen as they do, either in a determined or spontaneous way. In contrast, the entangled form of
causation described here will be called “active causation”, because of the crucial role the organisms of
a lineage play in steering stochasticity and therefore in steering the resulting hereditary trajectories, as
shown below. Hereditary trajectories describe the path that subsequent organisms in a lineage take
through hereditary space. In Sect. 5 the use of the terms “active” and “passive” is discussed further.
In summary, the basic idea that underlies active causation is that mutation rates (resulting in
random fluctuations) are actively determined by an estimated fitness function such that mutation rates
are greater in areas of low expected fitness. Heuristically, this causes the dispersion of phenotypes
from regimes with low fitness thereby ensuring that these regimes are avoided (like evacuation by
local diffusion, as illustrated in Fig. 1b). This means that active causation can prescribe regions of
fitness space that are more likely to be occupied – regions that have a low dispersion (a low mutation
rate) because of their high estimated fitness.
The difference between causation in the basic and extended Darwinian schemes can be
illustrated by simulating the evolution of lineages (Fig. 2a), and comparing how lineages would
evolve under the two schemes. When a specific hereditary change ∆h occurs, it could be the result of
either the extended Darwinian scheme (λH,modulated) or the basic one (λH,fixed). The likelihood ratio is the
ratio of the probability of ∆h given modulated λH, P(∆h| λH,modulated), and the probability of ∆h given
fixed λH, P(∆h| λH,fixed). This likelihood ratio is expected to be larger than one, on average, if ∆h was
actually produced by the extended rather than the basic scheme, but for individual steps in ∆h the ratio
is too variable to show the difference. However, for an organismal lineage the sequence of individual
steps produces a total likelihood ratio that is the product of the likelihood ratios of individual steps.
The likelihood ratio of hereditary trajectories (10log shown in Fig. 2b) typically rises to high values,
more quickly so at times when fitness is low. This means that h-trajectories produced by the extended
scheme could not have been produced by organisms that keep λH fixed. Such an h-trajectory is
therefore partly, but observably, caused by how the organisms of the lineage estimate fˆH , and not any
more only the result of passive causes as in the basic Darwinian scheme. Calling this form of
causation active emphasizes this difference. Each step is random, and thus provides an element of
unpredictability, but the trajectory as a whole is not random. It is the result of permanent changes in
heredity continually guided by a feedback loop acting through h and fˆH , and is thus dependent on

5

Fig. 2 Organismal lineages are partly determined by
fˆ . (a) Equivalent of Fig. 1c for computing hH

trajectories, with an h-trajectory the trajectory through
hereditary space of a lineage, a line of descending
organisms. R are random generators, ∆n is the realized
number of offspring of an organism, ∆h the change in
heredity (relative to the parent) of a particular
descendant, and ∆tH the lifetime of that organism.
When ∆n=0 the trajectory dies, when ∆n >1 it splits.
For details see Sect. 4.3. (b) Likelihood ratios of htrajectories Π∆hP(∆h| λH,modulated)/ P(∆h| λH,fixed)
typically rise to high values. Grey lines: 167
trajectories at end point, black line: mean, broken line:
mean of theoretically expected likelihood ratios (Eq.
(7)). The increasing likelihood ratios show that htrajectories gradually become nearly completely
determined by the goal function fˆ , even if this only
H

involves random hereditary changes. See text for
further explanation and Sect. 4.4 for details

previous (unpredictable) changes in h as well as on the goal function fˆH . A trajectory is therefore
neither completely predictable, because of the stochastic nature of mutation, nor completely
unpredictable, because it is partly determined by each organism in the lineage through its estimate fˆH
of its own fitness. The computation of the likelihood ratio as performed here is not an essential part of
the model, but simply serves to show that the influence of the goal function fˆH on h-trajectories is not
instantaneous, but gradually increases, up to a point where it is fully obvious.
Because the organismal lineage has an active role in determining an h-trajectory, the intrinsic
goal-directedness produced by fˆH should be seen as a genuine goal. By internalizing the true fitness f
as an estimate fˆH , and utilizing that estimate in a feedback loop as explained above, the “as if” goal
of basic Darwinian evolution is transformed into a genuine goal. Note, however, that this only applies
to the intrinsic goal-directedness of the organisms in a lineage, the other parts of the evolutionary
process remain invariably without goal. The above analysis shows that letting λH depend on fˆH has
two consequences. First, it makes high fitness a genuine goal of the organisms in a lineage, and
second, it gives them, through their lineage, an active role in its destiny. Actively pursuing a goal
implies that reaching that goal is important to the organisms. The goal is embodied in the detailed
form of fˆH and is denoted here by the term “intrinsic meaning”. Meaning is used here not in the
narrow sense (as in the meaning of a word) but in the broad sense (as in the meaning of an action or
the meaning of life), implying significance, value, import, and purpose (see Sect. 5 for a discussion of
this terminology).
2.2 Active causation of behaviour and dialogue
Hereditary variations only allow adaptations to variations of E(t) much slower than τH. An organism
can adapt to faster changes of E(t) as well by changing during its lifetime. Such changes are called
here “behaviour”, used broadly, including changes that occur within cells and in immobile organisms.
Active causation and intrinsic meaning are produced by analogy with the extended Darwinian scheme
(Fig. 3a). Different behaviours b have a typical lifetime τB (<<τH) and lie along the same scale as h
and E, with fitness depending on the distance between (h+b) and E(t) (Sect. 4, Eq. (8)). Variation in
behaviour is driven by λB, which may originate from molecular stochastic processes (Faisal et al.
6

Fig. 3 Behavioural extension of active
causation. (a) Behaviour b adapts during the
lifetime of an organism, in addition to the
adaptation of h on an evolutionary timescale.
The probability density of b for each h, P(b|h,t)
is varied through λ ( fˆ ) , with fˆ ( h, b, t )
B

B

B

fitness estimated by the organism; τB is the
typical lifetime of a specific behaviour, with for
the calculations defaults τB=4 and τH=100 (in
time step units). (b) Likelihood ratios of btrajectories Π∆bP(∆b| λB,modulated)/ P(∆b| λB,fixed)
typically rise to high values. Shown are
observed (grey) and expected (black) ratios of
all b-trajectories in a 5τH interval of three
different h-trajectories. The increasing
likelihood ratios show that b-trajectories
gradually become nearly completely determined
by the goal function fˆ , even if this only
B

involves random behavioural changes. See text
for explanation and Sect. 4.5 for details

2008). The probability distribution of b given h and t determines which behaviours are present in the
population. Populations that modulate λB using a fitness estimate fˆB outperform populations with
fixed λB (Sect. 4, Fig. 6), and the scheme is therefore evolvable. The b-trajectories (consisting of
consecutive behaviours) of particular organisms (model shown in Fig. 5, Sect. 4) are only compatible
with modulated λB (Fig. 3b). This shows that the organism determines the trajectory in a decisive way,
through fˆB , even if the details of the behaviour are unpredictable. Because, similarly to fˆH , also fˆB
is under evolutionary pressure to align itself with f, high fˆB represents a goal for the organism. The
feedback scheme also produces active causation as before, but now on a behavioural timescale. This
produces a form of agency in the organism, with some behavioural freedom produced because the
unpredictability of behaviour associated with stochasticity is modulated, and thus partly controlled, by
the organism itself, through fˆB . The organism therefore actively pursues genuine goals on a
behavioural timescale similarly as the organismal lineage does on an evolutionary timescale.
Although the overall goal is high fˆB (and, by implication, high f), this will in practice consist of a
package of sub-goals, such as finding food and avoiding danger, all expected to contribute to the
overall goal.
Organisms with advanced nervous systems can go one step further by first simulating the
expected fitness consequences ( fˆM ) of behavioural alternatives m before choosing a specific
behaviour b (model shown in Fig. 7, Sect. 4). Again, populations that actively modulate λM
outperform populations that do not (Sect. 4, Fig. 8), and display active causation (Sect. 4, model in
Fig. 9 and trajectories in Fig. 10). Because the consequences of potential behaviours are evaluated
beforehand, the behaviour can be viewed as purposeful rather than just goal-directed.
Finally, organisms may communicate in order to coordinate their behaviour and thereby increase
fitness. One possibility is to communicate through stereotypical signs that the other organism uses as
auxiliary input to its fˆM , with its behaviour influenced by the resulting change in the value of fˆM .
Communication in insects, such as by the honey-bee's dance, is presumably of this type. No intrinsic
meaning is transferred, the communicated signs merely utilize the other organism's fˆM , with its
implied intrinsic meaning.

7

A more sophisticated possibility is letting communication modify the very form of fˆM .
Changing the form of fˆM implies changing the intrinsic meaning it embodies. This type of
communication then exchanges, in effect, intrinsic meaning between organisms, entangling their
active causation. An example is presumably the nonverbal dialogue accompanying mother-offspring
bonds in mammals, and particularly in humans (Trevarthen and Aitken 2001). Intrinsic meaning is a
real phenomenon, on a par with any other aspect of the physical world, even if it only occurs in
specialized, living forms of matter. In most organisms, it is presumably present only implicitly,
distributed over many variables. However, once it becomes part of a dialogue, it needs to be made
explicit and coded into behaviour, and the other organism needs to perceive and decode it, and
assimilate it into its own intrinsic meaning. I conjecture that the process of extracting and assimilating
intrinsic meaning during dialogue manifests itself as consciousness. The intuition here is that transfer
of a real physical phenomenon (intrinsic meaning) gives rise to another real physical phenomenon
(consciousness), somewhat analogous to how transfer of charge gives rise to a magnetic field even
without an actual current (as in Maxwell's displacement current). Initially occurring only between two
individuals, it may gradually extend, through development and learning, to more complex forms
(Reddy 2003), such as nonverbal dialogue with another individual about objects (Tomasello and
Carpenter 2007), nonverbal dialogue with internalized versions of others and the shared world, and
with an internalized version of the self (Mead 1934). The scope for exchanging intrinsic meaning
obviously expands considerably once the transition from nonverbal to verbal dialogue is made (van
Hateren 2014). Finally, the combination of consciousness and active, goal-directed behaviour and
dialogue can provide a physical mechanism for free will.
3 Discussion
The models presented here show how life can evolve two phenomena that are absent from the nonliving world, but appear to be present in all current life-forms (van Hateren 2013). First, it evolved an
active form of causation, enabling organismal lineages and organisms to initiate and pursue
trajectories of heredity, behaviour, planned behaviour, and dialogue. Second, life evolved intrinsic
meaning as embodied in the way organisms estimate their own fitness. Serving only as proofs of
concept, the models ignore many aspects of existing life that are known to be important in evolution
(Pigliucci and Müller 2010), development, and learning (Dehaene and Changeux 2000). Analysing the
consequences and validity of the ideas presented here for more realistic models, and performing
experimental tests, is evidently an extensive research program. However, the concepts of active
causation and intrinsic meaning are based on such fundamental considerations that confidence in their
robustness is justified.
The arguments presented here suggest that agency and intrinsic meaning are emergent properties
when hereditary or behavioural variability is based on an organism's estimation of its own fitness.
With respect to hereditary variability, this is closely related to second-order selection, selection for
properties enhancing evolutionary potential (see e.g. Kauffman 1993). However, when this selection
works for example on mutator alleles (Taddei et al. 1997), with the hindsight of natural selection, the
causation is merely passive. In the extended scheme of Fig. 1c, causation is active because it involves
a predictive estimate of fitness, made by the lineage's organisms themselves and utilized in a feedback
loop that transforms the randomness of hereditary change into goal-driven hereditary trajectories.
Similarly, a behavioural feedback loop incorporating self-estimated fitness leads to goal-driven
behavioural trajectories of an organism. Although the simulations used an estimate fˆ identical to f,
the scheme is still fundamentally different from one implementing passive second-order selection. In
passive second-order selection, the mutation rate (as set by mutator alleles) is established by natural
selection, thus after the fact (based on a realized fitness outcome, not a predictive one). In contrast, the
fitness fˆ in the scheme of Fig. 1c is an estimate of a predictive, probabilistic variable, f, and it is
therefore also predictive and probabilistic, with “as if” foresight. The foresight is not real, of course,
because that would conflict with causality. Rather, it is based on implicit statistical knowledge the
organismal lineage has acquired through previous natural selection (or, for behaviour, through
previous development and learning as guided by criteria acquired through previous natural selection).
8

In this article it was assumed that organisms evolved reasonable estimates fˆ of their true fitness
f, through regular evolutionary mechanisms. For the toy model it was assumed that fˆ could be
approximated by f (as would indeed be easy for the toy organisms given the simplicity of their fitness
function), but it is likely that also organisms in the wild can readily evolve practical ways to estimate
and internalize f. Nevertheless, it is a deep and interesting question if there are optimal ways for
organisms to make estimates of f, if such estimates are subject to theoretical bounds, and to what
extent actual organisms reach those bounds. An organism can obtain high fitness by two basic factors,
self-maintenance and reproduction. When self-maintenance is too weak, the organism will die before
it can reproduce. When reproduction is too weak, the organism will be the last of its lineage. Selfmaintenance is related to homeostasis and autopoiesis, and, according to the good regulator theorem
(Conant and Ashby 1970), a good regulator (or homeostat) has to model its environment and how it is
affected by it. It is clear that such a model must, implicitly, play an important role in estimating fitness
as well. Thus internalizing f as a model fˆ that can predict the environment, as part of its capabilities,
is consistent with regulating well. Indeed, there is a venerable research tradition in neuroscience and
machine learning that focusses on making such inferences by utilizing Bayesian methods. A recent
formulation in terms of minimizing free energy (Friston and Stephan 2007; Friston 2010) unifies
earlier approaches with respect to sensory perception (such as predictive coding and maximization of
mutual information) with action (behaviour) as a means of increasing perceptual predictability. An
interesting possibility is that the feedback schemes presented here might be used as effective
mechanisms for optimising variational free energy through selection at evolutionary or somatic
timescales. This would require that fitness can be specified by the states that constitute an organism's
goals. Alternatively, minimizing free energy may then be seen as an optimal strategy by which an
organism could estimate its own fitness, an upper bound that can be compared with the (possibly
contingent) strategy actually realized in the biological system. A caveat here is that informational
approaches, such as the free energy principle, generally assume ergodicity, whereas the current
schemes presumably produce organismal lineages and organisms with non-ergodic properties: their
state space changes over time as organisms innovate by reconstructing themselves through genetic,
physiological, and social mechanisms. Reconstructing fˆ by social bonding is conjectured (Sect. 2.2)
to be associated with consciousness.
The word “active” is quite general, and it is used here in a more restrictive sense than in related
work where the term is also used. In particular, approaches stressing homeostasis and autopoiesis (Di
Paolo 2005) view an organism that is autonomous and adaptive, and that appears to act on its own
behalf (Kauffman 2003), as having agency and being active. Similarly, in the free energy approach,
when an organism maintains internal homeostasis by acting on its environment and modifying its
sensory inputs, this is called active inference (essentially because it involves the part of the free
energy formalism that describes action). However, systems described in these approaches will usually
involve only regular deterministic and stochastic causation, which is called passive here (see also
Sect. 5). Only the entangled form of causation described in Sect. 2, produced by a feedback loop
involving estimated fitness and modulated stochastic causation, is called active here, and it is only that
specific feedback loop, or more complex versions of it, that is able to generate genuine meaning (as an
emergent property evolved by natural selection).
The models presented here took inspiration from so-called two-stage models of free will,
proposed by many researchers going back at least to William James (reviewed in Doyle 2013). In
these models, a first stage generates random behavioural options, one of which is subsequently
selected by a deterministic second stage. Such models and variants of them (Tse 2013) are themselves
inspired by Darwin's evolution theory, and conform to the model of Fig. 1a. They are therefore
restricted to passive causation and do not embody intrinsic meaning, essentially because they do not
let the randomness λ be a function of a self-estimated fitness fˆ , in a feedback loop and with fˆ under
evolutionary pressure to align itself with the true fitness f. A similar restriction applies to the theory of
neuronal group selection (Edelman 1993) and to work in the functionalist tradition (e.g., Pugh 1976),
which also conform to or rely on the basic Darwinian scheme, and therefore lack the active causation
and intrinsic meaning produced by fˆ in the extended behavioural scheme (Fig. 3, and Sect. 4, Fig. 7).
9

Complex feedbacks between evolution and development, and between how organisms shape
their own environment and how that influences their subsequent evolution (Pigliucci and Müller
2010), are occasionally presented in wording that suggests goal-directedness. However, without a
specific term λ( fˆ ) modulating randomness, such feedback schemes are elaborations of the basic
Darwinian scheme of Fig. 1a, containing only passive causation. The goal-directedness and agency of
the organism they suggest are therefore not genuine, but merely “as if”.
It is sometimes assumed that any observed stochasticity in the world is not real, but only
apparent, caused by a lack of complete knowledge of the underlying causes of the observables. The
models and arguments presented in this article are agnostic with respect to the source and nature of
the stochasticity required, and are therefore not affected by any such assumptions. Nevertheless, at a
deeper level it might be argued that, if stochasticity is only apparent, the freedom provided by active
causation is only apparent as well. I believe that such a view is likely to be mistaken for several
reasons. First, the “as if”-stochasticity argument ignores quantum indeterminacy, which appears to be
a genuine source of randomness. Second, the argument is often based on the theoretical assumption
that current physical theories have unlimited validity, whereas these theories are known to be
incomplete, and it is not clear how far they can be extrapolated beyond the range where they have
been tested. Finally, in a classical, Newtonian universe, even Laplace's demon gets confused, within a
tiny fraction of a second, if the whereabouts of merely a single electron are unknown (Berry 1988).
Arguing that microscopic fluctuations cannot show at macroscopic scales because they average out is
not valid either, because nonlinearities can easily amplify even the smallest indeterminacies to
prominence (Berry 1988; Laskar and Gastineau 2009).
The relationship between intrinsic meaning and fitness, as well as fitness itself, is highly
complex in advanced organisms. Fitness extends to related organisms and organisms with shared
interests, and depends on feedbacks through a malleable environment. The dual inheritance system in
humans (molecular heredity alongside cultural inheritance) further complicates matters (Boyd and
Richerson 1985; Boyd et al. 2011), as cultural flexibility makes human fitness a moving target. Fully
reducing human meaning to fitness is therefore almost certainly intractable (Anderson 1972), although
it may be possible to derive broad generalities relating the two. This article does indeed not intend to
advocate such a reduction, but rather to show how the phenomena of meaning and goal-directed
initiative can be understood, at least in principle, from existing scientific knowledge.
4 Methods
4.1 Basic model (Fig. 1a)
For simplicity, n(h,t) is taken to be continuous. The dynamics of the primary feedback loop I is
governed by a first-order low-pass filter with time constant τH
τH

dn ( h , t )
= Λ ∗ ( f ( h , t ) n ( h , t )) − n ( h , t ) ,
dt

where the asterisk denotes convolution along the h-coordinate. Λ is a normalized Gaussian with
coordinate h and standard deviation λH. Fitness is given by
f ( h , t ) = f max exp( − ( h − E (t )) 2 / 2σ E2 ) exp( − N (t ) / K ) ,
with N (t ) =

∑

h

(1)

(2)

n(h, t ) , fmax the maximum fitness, σE determining the width of the fitness function, and

K the carrying capacity of the environment (for simplicity not taken as a hard limit, but one that produces
a gradually decreasing fitness). For all calculations τH=100, fmax=3, σE=5, and K=10000 are used (units
in discrete time steps and units of h). The value of K is only nominal, because continuous n implies an
effectively infinite population size. The environmental variable E(t) has units of h and is taken as filtered
Gaussian white noise, using as filter a normalized sum of low-pass filters, with pulse response (for t≥0;
for t<0 h(t)=0) given by
k

h(t ) =

∑τ
i =1

ai

e−t / τ i ,

i

with
10

(3)

τi = r i−1τz
ai = τ iq

∑

k

(4)

τq
i =1 i

.

(5)

The noise is generated with a standard deviation of 1000 per time step, and the filter parameters are
τz=4, r=4, k=6, and q=1. Figure 4a shows an example of E(t) (for computational convenience shifted
to positive values only), and Fig. 4b its power spectral density. The latter follows approximately a
power law, with a slope of about -1.8. The power-law behaviour reverts to a flat spectrum for
frequencies much smaller than 1/τ6 (=1/4096; not shown in the figure), which means that the power
spectral density is integrable. For the results presented in
this article, the precise form of E(t), for example as steered
by q, is not critical, as long as it contains sufficient power
at low frequencies such that adaptation of h with a
relaxation time τH increases fitness, and at the same time
sufficient power at high frequencies such that adaptation of
b with a relaxation time τB increases fitness as well.
In the calculations, heredity h is discretized to integer
values, and calculations are started with K organisms
(either in one population or evenly divided between two
populations) of type h=E(0) convolved with Λ. Low-pass
filters (here and below) are implemented as autoregressive
filters yi=f1yi-1+f2xi, with x input, y output, and the
coefficients given by f1=exp(-1/τ) and f2=1-f1 (van Hateren
2008). Models are implemented in R, with calls to Fortran
routines at places critical to keep computation times
manageable. Sources are available at
https://sites.google.com/site/jhvanhateren/ or upon request
from the author.
Simulations show that for basic Darwinian evolution
populations can adapt to E(t), provided the mutation rate
λH is chosen suitably. However, if λH is chosen too small,
Fig. 4 Properties of environmental
fast changes in E(t), which occur unpredictably, strongly
variable E. (a) Example of E(t) for 8192
reduce
the population size because the new types h
time steps. (b) Power spectral density of
required
are not generated fast enough. If λH is chosen too
E(t), periodogram average of the spectra
large,
types
h that are well adapted to E(t) mutate away too
of 100 realizations of E(t) of length 8192
time steps each; a.u.: arbitrary units
quickly, again strongly reducing the population size. For
the E(t) used here, a value of λH=2 was found to be close to
optimal to sustain a viable population, and this value is therefore used as default for simulations with
fixed λH.
The overall structure of the model has some resemblance to the quasispecies theory of Eigen and
Schuster (1977) and other approaches to evolutionary dynamics (Page and Nowak 2002), but is
different in details. In particular the way heredity and changes in heredity are handled and the
relationship between E(t), h, and fitness are highly simplified, with mutations, though undirected,
always on the same scale as h and E(t) and therefore never completely lethal (but possibly of low
fitness).
4.2 Extended model (Fig. 1c, d)
As a reasonable choice an inverse relationship between fˆH and λH is used with empirically chosen
parameter values that proved to work well. Quite likely, other relationships and different parameter
values will work even better, but as the aim of the model computations is only to provide a proof of
concept, and the model is a mere toy model, this was not investigated further. The default value of
λH=2.0 is multiplied by a factor as
(6)
λ H ( fˆH ) = 2 .0 × 1 .8 /( fˆH + 0 .1) ,

11

which is a factor fairly close to one for values of the fitness fˆH in the typical high fitness range of
1.3-2.3, and fairly large (limited by the 0.1 in the denominator) for values of fˆH close to zero. For
large values of λH some of the resulting h values can fall beyond the range of h considered, and those
organisms are removed from the computation (becoming extinct). For simplicity, the model
calculations use an estimated fitness fˆH identical to the true fitness f, with similar assumptions for fˆB
and fˆM below. However, the model calculations are not very sensitive to this assumption:
deliberately introducing errors in fˆH still produces results similar to those of Fig. 1d (in Eq. (2), with
f as used for fˆH in Eq. (6), 10% increases or decreases of fmax or σE, or shifting h-E(t) by one unit,
corresponding to errors in observing h or E(t)).
Evolvability of the extended model (Fig. 1d) was evaluated as follows. Two populations
nλ,modulated (according to the extended model) and nλ,fixed (according to the basic model) are interacting
and competing by using as N in Eq. (2) N=Nλ,modulated+Nλ,fixed, with Nλ,modulated=Σhnλ,modulated and
Nλ,fixed=Σhnλ,fixed. The figure shows the results of 100 such computations, with λH,modulated always
according to Eq. (6) and λH,fixed systematically varied from 0.5 to 3.5. In all cases the extended model
outperforms the basic model, yielding a ratio Nλ,fixed/ Nλ,modulated that fluctuates, but gradually declines
with time.
4.3 Trajectory version of the extended model (Fig. 2a)
Figure 2a is the equivalent of Fig. 1c for individual h-trajectories. Collections of h-trajectories
produce results consistent with the population calculations (as is also the case for the b-trajectories of
the b- and m-models below). Trajectories are calculated alongside with the population n(h,t), from
which N(t) is used for calculating fitness as needed for the trajectory calculations. Fitness determines
the number of offspring by a Poisson random generator (Rpoisson, with parameter f), yielding 0, 1, 2, or
more offspring (split arrows at ∆n in the figure). With ∆n=0 the trajectory (lineage) becomes extinct,
and is removed from the computation. With ∆n=1 the trajectory just continues (with a new step in
heredity ∆h , thus h becomes h+∆h, where the new h lasts for a time ∆tH before new offspring is
generated). With ∆n>1 the trajectory splits in two or more, each of which trajectories is subsequently
treated separately. The steps in heredity are generated by a normal (Gaussian) random generator
(Rnormal, with parameter λH), and the lifetime ∆tH by an exponential random generator (Rexp, with
parameter τH). Such a random process is the equivalent of the first-order low-pass filter in the
population model (symbolized by τH in Fig. 1c).
4.4 Likelihood ratio of h-trajectories (Fig. 2b)
The likelihood ratio as a function of time t is calculated as the product Π∆hP(∆h| λH,modulated)/ P(∆h|
λH,fixed) over all steps ∆h of a particular trajectory up to time t. Whereas P(∆h|λH,modulated) is given by a
normal distribution with standard deviation λ according to Eq. (6), the choice of λH,fixed is somewhat
arbitrary, but influences the likelihood ratio. Therefore the λH,fixed producing the minimum mean end
value of the likelihood ratios of all h-trajectories computed in a simulation was determined
numerically, and that value of λH,fixed is used for the figure.
Because the mathematical forms of P(∆h| λH,modulated) and P(∆h| λH,fixed) are known (both
Gaussians), it is possible to compute an expected likelihood ratio function B(t). This only requires
λH,modulated as a function of time rather than the series of random realizations of ∆h produced by the
Rnormal of Fig. 2a. We write λ0 for λH,fixed and λi, i=1..L for the successive λH,modulated of L organisms in a
trajectory, and we need to integrate over P(∆h1,..,∆hL|λ1,..,λL) if the ∆hi are actually produced by the
extended scheme:

12


log( B ) = d∆h1 P ( ∆h1 | λ1 )... d∆hL P ( ∆hL | λ L ) log


∫

∫


= d∆h1 P ( ∆h1 | λ1 )... d∆hL P ( ∆hL | λ L )


∫

=

∫

L

∑ ∫ d∆h

i

i =1

=

∑

L

i

i

0

i

i =1


∑ log(P(∆h | λ ) / P(∆h | λ ) )
L

i

i

i

0

i =1


 1
λ
1
1
exp(−( ∆hi ) 2 / 2λ i2 ) log 0 − ( ∆hi ) 2  2 − 2
λi
2π λ i
 2λ i 2λ 0



λ
1 1 λ i2
 log 0 − +

λ i 2 2 λ 02
i =1 
L


∏ (P(∆h | λ ) / P(∆h | λ ))







.



(7)

The result gives the expected natural logarithm of the likelihood ratio, which is converted to the
logarithm base 10 for the figure.
4.5 Extended model with behaviour (Fig. 3a, b)
Fitness is now given by
f ( h , t ) = f max exp( − ( h + b − E (t )) 2 / 2σ E2 ) exp( − N (t ) / K ) ,

(8)

with the probability of b for each h given by P(b|h,t). The h-loop on the left of Fig. 3a uses a fitness
estimate fˆH (h, b, t ) , but eventually produces n(h,t) as summed over b. With P(b|h,t) this is
subsequently converted to n(h,b,t)= n(h,t)P(b|h,t). Typical lifetime of a behaviour b is τB (defaulted to
4), and new b are generated by convolution with a normalized Gaussian with standard deviation λB.
Calculations are started with the population at b=0 convolved with this Gaussian. For the modulated
scheme λB is driven by a fitness estimate fˆB (h, b, t ) according to
λ B ( fˆB ) = 0 .5 × 1 .8 /( fˆB + 0 .1) ,

(9)

again determined empirically as a suitable choice. The allowed range of b is taken as -bmax..bmax. If
bmax is small compared with σE and λH, behaviour has little effect on fitness, and all adaptation occurs
by changes in h. If bmax is large, all adaptation can be done quickly by behavioural changes, and the
distribution over h will tend to change little. A choice of bmax=10 produces a well balanced
combination of h and b adaptations, and is used in the calculations. When convolution with λB
produces values of b beyond the allowed range, values are replaced as in circular convolution
(continuing on the other side of the range). Qualitatively similar results are obtained when folding b
back as if reflected at the boundary of the allowed range.
Fig. 5 Equivalent of Fig. 3a
(which provides N) for
computing single h- and btrajectories, with a b-trajectory
the trajectory (through
behavioural space) of
consecutive behaviours of a
particular organism. R are
random generators. Details are
given in Sect. 4.5

For computing the likelihood ratios of b-trajectories the same methods were used as described
above for Fig. 2b. The equivalent of Fig. 3a for trajectories (Fig. 5) shows how b-trajectories are
generated within each h-trajectory. For simplicity, the trajectories are generated asynchronously, as is
implicitly the case for the population model of Fig. 3a as well. This implies that a new h-trajectory
may continue, for a relatively short time (τB=4 relative to τH=100), with the previous b value, which
subsequently can diffuse away quickly to other b values.

13

Fig. 6 Ratios of population numbers N of 100 pairs of
competing populations, one always following the model of
Fig. 3a (with λB,modulated) and the other the corresponding
model with fixed λB, over a range of λB,fixed. Results after
30τH (open grey symbols) and 60τH (black dots). The
results show that the extended model is evolvable also for
behaviour. Details are given in Sec. 4.6

4.6 Evolvability of the modulated behavioural model (Fig. 6)
Two populations nλ,modulated (according to the model with modulated λB and modulated λH) and nλ,fixed
(according to the model with fixed λB, but modulated λH) are interacting and competing by using as N
in Eq. (8) N=Nλ,modulated+Nλ,fixed. The figure shows the results of 100 such computations, with λB,modulated
always according to Eq. (9) and λB,fixed systematically varied from 0.01 to 0.6. In all cases the
modulated model outperforms the fixed model. The limit for small λB,fixed is in fact identical to the
model without behavioural adaptations (Fig. 1c), which indicates that the ability to produce
behavioural adaptations is evolvable (depending on the fitness costs of behaviour, such as more
resources needed for operation, longer maturation times, and so on).
Fig. 7 Motor planning extension of active
causation. The probability density of motor
plan m for each h is varied through λ ( fˆ ) ,
M

M

with fˆM (h, m, t ) fitness estimated by the
organism. P(b|h,t) is a low-pass filtered
version (with τB>τM) of P(m|h,t). Because the
motor planning is simulated, and can be
implemented in parallel in the nervous system,
it can be faster than actual behaviour, and the
effect of a specific behaviour can be
simulated, based on fˆM (h, m, t ) , before it is
actually executed. For the calculations,
defaults are τM=1, τB=4, and τH=100

Fig. 8 Ratios of population numbers N of 100 pairs of
competing populations, one always following the model of
Fig. 7 (with λM,modulated) and the other the corresponding
model with fixed λM, over a range of λM,fixed. Results after
20τH (open grey symbols) and 40τH (black dots). The results
show that the extended model is evolvable also for planned
behaviour

4.7 Trajectory version of the motor planning model and b-trajectories (Figs. 9 and 10)
Figure 9 shows how first P(m|h,t) is generated (in parallel, because there is no requirement to generate
serial trajectories as all operations take place within individual organisms). P(m|h,t) is subsequently
converted to P(b|h,t) through the behavioural low-pass filter τB, and from P(b|h,t) b-trajectories are
generated within each h-trajectory. For computing the likelihood ratios of b-trajectories (Fig. 10) only
14

Fig. 9 Equivalent of Fig. 7 (which provides N) for computing single h- and b-trajectories. R
are random generators. Because m is computed and evaluated within single organisms, the
model performs that part of the computation in parallel. The computation of h and b is serial
as before. For details see Sect. 4.7

Fig. 10 The likelihood ratios of b-trajectories, computed with
the m-model of Fig. 9 as Π∆bP(∆b| λM,modulated)/ P(∆b| λM,fixed),
typically rise to high values. Shown are observed ratios of all
b-trajectories in an 5τH interval of three different h-trajectories.
The increasing likelihood ratios show that b-trajectories
gradually become nearly completely determined by the goal
function fˆ , even if this only involves a neural simulation,
M

made by the organism, of random behavioural changes. For
details see Sect. 4.7

the direct method Π∆bP(∆b| λM,modulated)/ P(∆b| λM,fixed) could be used (not the expected B(t) as in Eq.
(7)), because there is no analytical expression for P(m|h,t) available. Planned behaviour m is evaluated
as fˆM (h, m, t ) and produces λM according to Eq. (9) (with B replaced by M). The typical lifetime of m
is τM=1.
Acknowledgements I would like to thank the anonymous reviewers of the manuscript for thoughtful
comments and suggestions.
5 Appendix: Terminology
Several of the terms used in this article, such as “meaning”, “active”, and “freedom” are veterans of
natural language for describing human affairs, and they are therefore, as common in natural language,
somewhat broad, vague, and ambiguous. In this section I will try to explain a bit more accurately than
in the main text as to how I use them, in order to reduce their ambiguity within the present context.
The main point of this article is that an internalized fitness estimate, fˆ , is used in feedback
loops as in Fig. 1c and Fig. 3a for modulating hereditary and behavioural variability. This estimate
and its form represent what is designated by the term “intrinsic meaning”. This use of the word
“meaning” is close to that given by the Oxford English Dictionary (OED online, accessed May 22,
2014) as [meaning, n.2, 1], for example as used in expressions like the meaning of an action or the
meaning of life. It implies significance, import, value, and purpose. Such a broad spectrum of
denotations is appropriate here, because using fˆ is presumably a feature of all forms of life (van
Hateren 2013), and it represents at the same time a goal-directedness (as in life striving for high
fitness in order to survive and reproduce), a value in the form of high fitness, and, through the form of
fˆ (i.e., of which parameters it is a function, and in what form) which aspects of the environment and
itself the organism takes into account for estimating its own fitness. Those aspects are the ones that
represent significance and import to the organism. For most organisms the goal-directedness is merely
15

an implicit drive in the direction of appropriate, though underdetermined end-points (together
producing high fitness). However, in organisms where fˆ becomes so complicated and flexible that it
gives rise to planned behaviour (Figs. 7 and 9), consciousness, and language (van Hateren 2014), endpoints may be produced by simulation or even conscious deliberation, and thus evolve into genuine
purposes.
It is important to stress that “meaning” is used here not in the more narrow linguistic sense as in
the meaning (signification) of a word [OED, meaning n.2, 2], and also not as a means for
categorization and symbolic generalization. Nevertheless, it is likely that this more narrow sense can
be understood as derivable from the broad sense, as the end result of an as yet not completely resolved
chain of reasoning (sketched in van Hateren 2014). The term “intrinsic meaning” is also different
from “value” in the sense of the variable defining a value-driven decision process: “intrinsic meaning”
is not a single number, but includes the form of the estimated fitness function and the fact that there is
an implicit drive towards high estimated fitness.
Apart from “intrinsic meaning”, the feedback loops of Fig. 1d and Fig. 3 also give rise to a
special form of causation, because stochasticity is continually modulated by the goal-directedness of
fˆ and thus produces hereditary and behavioural trajectories that are unpredictable, but not random.
This form of causation is designated by the term “active causation”, with the meaning of “active”
close to that given in [OED, active, 2], i.e., capable of acting on something, originating action,
spontaneous, voluntary. Active causation is contrasted with deterministic causation, which cannot
originate anything new because systems subject to deterministic causation passively follow internal or
external influences, like a clockwork. It is also contrasted with stochastic causation, which does
originate new events and does so spontaneously (not caused by internal or external influences), but
cannot be seen as producing action (because it lacks a goal-directedness) nor doing so voluntarily
(because it lacks purpose). Both deterministic and stochastic causation are therefore designated by the
term “passive causation” here, because either lacks several of the defining characteristics of “active”.
The feedback loops of Fig. 1c and Fig. 3a entangle deterministic and stochastic causation in such a
way that all defining characteristics of “active” are produced: there is the capability to originate and
initiate in a spontaneous way (because of the stochasticity), but also in a way that can be seen as
acting and performing action, because of the intrinsic goal-directedness produced by the feedback
loops. For advanced organisms with reasoning and consciousness (van Hateren 2014), the acts can be
deliberate and voluntary.
The ability to originate and perform action is a form of “freedom” for the organism, because its
behaviour is neither dictated by a determined chain of causation, nor by the arbitrariness of
randomness. This sense of freedom is close to [OED, freedom, 5], i.e., the power of selfdetermination (but without the mental or spiritual connotations), which can be seen as an absence of
necessity [OED, necessity, 2], i.e., an absence of “constraint or compulsion having its basis in the
natural order or constitution of things, esp. such constraint perceived as a law prevailing throughout
the material universe and within the sphere of human action.”
References
Anderson PW (1972) More is different. Science 177:393-396
Bedau MA, Cleland CE (2010) The nature of life: classical and contemporary perspectives from
philosophy and science. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Berry MV (1988) The electron at the end of the universe. In: Wolpert L, Richards A (eds) A passion
for science. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 39-51
Boyd R, Richerson PJ (1985) Culture and the evolutionary process. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago
Boyd R, Richerson PJ, Henrich J (2011) The cultural niche: why social learning is essential for human
adaptation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:10918-10925
16

Brembs B (2011) Towards a scientific concept of free will as a biological trait: spontaneous actions
and decision-making in invertebrates. Proc R Soc B 278:930-939
Conant RC, Ashby RW (1970) Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that system. Int.
J. Systems Sci. 1:89–97
Darwin C (1859) On the origin of species by means of natural selection. John Murray, London
Davies PS (2009) Subjects of the world: Darwin's rhetoric and the study of agency in nature.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 86-87
Dehaene S, Changeux JP (2000) Reward-dependent learning in neuronal networks for planning and
decision making. Prog Brain Res 126:217-229
Di Paolo EA (2005) Autopoiesis, adaptivity, teleology, agency. Phenomenol Cogn Sci 4:429–452
Doyle RA (2013) The two-stage model to the problem of free will. In: Suarez A, Adams P (eds) Is
science compatible with free will?: Exploring free will and consciousness in the light of quantum
physics and neuroscience. Springer, New York, pp 235-254
Edelman GM (1993) Neural Darwinism: selection and reentrant signaling in higher brain function.
Neuron 10:115-125
Eigen M, Schuster P (1977) The hypercycle – A principle of natural self-organization. A. Emergence
of the hypercycle. Naturwissenschaften 64:541–565
Faisal AA, Selen LPJ, Wolpert DM (2008) Noise in the nervous system. Nature Rev Neurosci 9:292303
Friston KJ (2010) The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature Rev Neurosci 11:127-138
Friston KJ, Stephan KE (2007) Free-energy and the brain. Synthese 159:417-458
Galhardo RS, Hastings PJ, Rosenberg SM (2007) Mutation as a stress response and the regulation of
evolvability. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 42:399-435
Heisenberg M (2009) Is free will an illusion? Nature 459: 164-165
Kauffman S (1993) The origins of order: self‑organization and selection in evolution. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Kauffman SA (2003) Molecular autonomous agents. Phil Trans R Soc Lond A 361:1089-1099
Laskar J, Gastineau M (2009) Existence of collisional trajectories of Mercury, Mars and Venus with
the Earth. Nature 459:817-819
Mead GH (1934) Mind, self, and society. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Page KM, Nowak MA (2002) Unifying evolutionary dynamics. J Theor Biol 219:93-98
Pigliucci M, Müller GB (2010) Evolution – The extended synthesis. MIT Press: Cambridge Mass.
Pugh GE (1976) Human values, free will, and the conscious mind. Zygon 11:2-24

17

Ram Y, Hadany L (2012) The evolution of stress-induced hypermutation in asexual populations.
Evolution 66:2315-2328
Reddy V (2003) On being the object of attention: implications for self-other consciousness. Trends
Cogn Sci 7:397-402
Taddei F, Radman M, Maynard-Smith J, Toupance B, Gouyon PH, Godelle B (1997) Role of mutator
alleles in adaptive evolution. Nature 387:700-702
Tomasello M, Carpenter M (2007) Shared intentionality. Dev Sci 10:121-125
Trevarthen C, Aitken KJ (2001) Infant intersubjectivity: Research, theory, and clinical applications. J
Child Psychol Psychiat 42:3-48
Tse PE (2013) The neural basis of free will: criterial causation. MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
van Hateren JH (2008) Fast recursive filters for simulating nonlinear dynamic systems. Neural
Comput 20:1821-1846
van Hateren JH (2013) A new criterion for demarcating life from non-life. Orig Life Evol Biosph
43:491-500
van Hateren JH (2014) Consciousness results when communication modifies the form of selfestimated fitness. arXiv:1401.6761 [q-bio.NC] http://arxiv.org/abs/1401.6761

18

