Early warning signs for saddle-escape transitions
in complex networks
Christian Kuehn∗ and Gerd Zschaler† and Thilo Gross‡

arXiv:1401.7125v2 [nlin.AO] 8 Jan 2015

January 9, 2015
Abstract
Many real world systems are at risk of undergoing critical transitions, leading to sudden qualitative
and sometimes irreversible regime shifts. The development of early warning signals is recognized as a
major challenge. Recent progress builds on a mathematical framework in which a real-world system
is described by a low-dimensional equation system with a small number of key variables, where the
critical transition often corresponds to a bifurcation. Here we show that in high-dimensional systems,
containing many variables, we frequently encounter an additional non-bifurcative saddle-type mechanism
leading to critical transitions. This generic class of transitions has been missed in the search for earlywarnings up to now. In fact, the saddle-type mechanism also applies to low-dimensional systems with
saddle-dynamics. Near a saddle a system moves slowly and the state may be perceived as stable over
substantial time periods. We develop an early warning sign for the saddle-type transition. We illustrate
our results in two network models and epidemiological data. This work thus establishes a connection
from critical transitions to networks and an early warning sign for a new type of critical transition. In
complex models and big data we anticipate that saddle-transitions will be encountered frequently in the
future.

The low-dimensional systems that are commonly investigated in the context of critical transitions (or
tipping points)[1, 2] typically settle to stable, but not necessarily stationary, states[3]. The defining features
of such states is that the system returns exponentially to the state after sufficiently small perturbations[4].
When environmental parameters change, a critical transition may occur when thresholds are crossed,
where the system becomes unstable to certain perturbations. Low dimensional systems then typically
depart quickly from the original state before approaching another, possibly distant, state. The thresholds
at which such transitions occur are called bifurcation points[5] and the corresponding transitions are local
bifurcations [6, 3]. Warning signs for such bifurcation-induced transitions detect the loss of exponential
restoring dynamics either through its impact on the statistics of noise-induced fluctuations[1, 7, 8] or
by direct measurement of recovery rates[9, 10]. Thus, bifurcation-induced critical transitions are well
understood, and the corresponding warning signs have been analyzed mathematically[11] and tested in
experiments[12, 13].
For understanding the alternative mechanism of critical transitions that is the focus of the present
paper, consider that many real-world complex systems do not reside in stable states. An intuitive example
is provided by the outbreak of an epidemic invasion in a population occuring under stable enviromental
conditions. Although the precise mechanism for spreading after invasion can be very complex[14], many
examples show that introducing a certain new or previously extinct pathogen into an unprepared population
can have drastic consequences. This illustrates that the original state of the system, in which the pathogen
is absent, was unstable with respect to a specific perturbation, corresponding to the introduction of the
∗

Institute for Analysis and Scientific Computing, Vienna University of Technology, 1040 Vienna, Austria.
TNG Technology Consulting, 85774 Unterföhring, Germany.
‡
University of Bristol, Merchant Venturers School of Engineering, BS8 1TR Bristol, UK.
§
Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems (MPI-PKS), 01187 Dresden, Germany. (The majority of this
work was carried out while all three authors worked at the MPI-PKS; hence we would like to acknowledge it here for hospitality
and financial support).
†

1

pathogen. Note that even after its introduction, the pathogen may be extremely rare for an extended
amount of time, residing in small subpopulations or animal vectors, such that on a macroscopic level a
disease-free state is still observed for significant time. We may only see a very small rise in the number of
infected individuals for a long time under fixed environmental conditions but eventually a drastic jump to
an endemic regime occurs.
The example above differs fundamentally from bifurcation-induced transitions, because the qualitative
change is not induced by a change of environmental parameters, but rather by a specific ‘rare’ perturbation.
A system is susceptible to such perturbation-induced transitions if it resides in a saddle point, a state that
is stable with respect to some perturbations, but unstable with respect to others. In the following we refer
to critical transitions caused by the departure from saddle points far from bifurcations as saddle-escape
transitions; see also (Fig. 1) for a mathematical normal form example for passage near a saddle; we remark
that this example is generic in the sense that mathematical theory guarantees that other systems with
nondegenerate saddles show the same dynamics up to coordinate changes and by using a suitable notion
of equivalence for the dynamics.
In simple low-dimensional, modular or symmetric (i.e. effective few-variable) systems that are typically
studied in the context of early-warnings signs, saddle-escape transitions may occur[15, 16] but are relatively
rare in practice, particularly in comparison to saddles in high-dimensional (many-variable) systems. To
understand this difference, first, consider the abundance of available saddle states. Whether a steady state
is an attractor, repeller, or saddle is determined by the eigenvalues of the systems Jacobian matrix, which
provides a linearization of the system around the state in question[4, 5]. A state is a repeller when all
of these eigenvalues have positive real parts, an attractor if all eigenvalues have negative real parts, and
a saddle when there are eigenvalues with positive real part and also eigenvalues with negative real-part.
In a complex heterogeneous system the eigenvalues can, to first approximation, be considered as random
variables[17] that have negative real parts with a certain probability q. Since the total number of eigenvalues
increases with the number of variables N , the proportion of attractors decreases as q N , the proportion of
repellers decreases as (1 − q)N , whereas the proportion of saddles increases rapidly with increasing system
size (see Supplementary Information, Section 1). We can therefore expect to find an abundance of saddle
states in generic complex high-dimensional heterogeneous systems.
Given the existence of saddles we may also want to to ask whether systems can even approach a
single saddle. This is possible, e.g., if a trajectory exists that connects the saddle state to itself or several
trajectories connect between different saddles. Such homoclinic or heteroclinic orbits[4, 5] exist in lowdimensional systems only if certain conditions are met exactly, e.g. parameters are tuned exactly right.
However, if we allow parameters to change dynamically, the dimension of the system increases naturally
and long-time homoclinic and heteroclinic dynamics can appear robustly (see Supplementary Information,
Section 2, for an epidemic model example). A simple example is the fold-homoclinic (or square-wave)
bursting mechanism observed in many neurons[18], where additional macroscopic slow gating variables
are frequently introduced to capture the complex processes in the neuron in addition to the usual voltage
dynamics. This leads to a robust repeated passage near a homoclinic structure. Furthermore, if there are
certain symmetries in the system, then heteroclinic behavior may occur generically as well[19, 20].
Saddle-escape can only be considered a critical transition if the system resides in the saddle for a
sufficiently long time such that the saddle is perceived as the natural state. The residence time of a
system near a saddle can be long as the system moves slowly near steady states (see Supplementary
Information, Section 1, for a standard calculation of the residence time). When the system is subject to
a small perturbation, its response can be decomposed into different fundamental modes. Some of these
modes decay quickly, restoring the system to the steady state. However, at least one mode exists that
once excited initially grows exponentially, and thus leads to an escape from the saddle. Here we consider
the state where the initial perturbations from those growing modes are very small or entirely absent, since
otherwise the system would depart very quickly from the saddle.
In full mathematical generality we would usually expect that a typical perturbation of the system
excites all modes to some degree, and thus triggers departure from the saddle point. Based on this

2

reasoning we would expect that already the first perturbation of a system residing in a saddle launches
it into exponential departure. However, in real high-dimensional systems the situation is not so simple.
For example, hidden symmetries or constraints may exist that effectively decouple certain variables from
perturbation of other variables. The most important constraint is the absolute nature of the zero line.
Consider again the example of a rare pathogen introduced into a population. Here it is immediately
apparent that a perturbation cannot excite the exponential growth of the infected population, unless it
already involves the introduction of at least some infected individuals. Furthermore, the perturbation
direction to the saddle may initially be very weak in comparison to the strong stable directions, which also
leads to long residence times near saddle points (see Supplementary Information, Section 2, for a simple
compartmental epidemic model illustrating this effect). Finally, in many models stochastic effects cannot be
ignored close to the steady state (see Supplementary Information, Section 2). For instance it is well known
that small populations that are feasible in the deterministic limit may still go extinct due to fluctuations in
populations size, a phenomenon known as demographic extinction[21]. These mechanisms, i.e., micro-level
stochastic extinction, slowness of departure and decoupling of perturbation modes, can effectively stabilize
the saddle state for a long time until a particular perturbation, or series of perturbations, launches the
system on an escaping trajectory. Considered together, the well known-arguments presented above suggest
that saddle-escape may play a role as a critical transition, particularly in high-dimensional systems.
Let us now ask whether warning signs for saddle transitions can exist. Because saddle-escape is triggered
by the occurrence of a certain perturbation, which is inherently unpredictable in the context of the model,
we cannot hope to detect the saddle escape far before the exponential departure from the saddle starts.
However, consider that in contrast to bifurcation-induced transitions, saddle escape will generally occur at
states that are far from bifurcations. Such states are said to be hyperbolic, and perturbations to these states
grow or decline exponentially depending upon the perturbation direction. The departure form the saddle
is initially slow and dynamics around the saddle are often perceived as meta-stable. Phenomenologically,
the transition therefore appears very similar to a bifurcation-induced critical transition, showing first a
slow drift, followed by a sharp spike. Arguably, in many applications it should thus be possible to restore
the system to the saddle during the initial phase where the intrinsic dynamics are still slow. Our aim is
thus to detect the saddle-escape after the critical perturbation has occurred, but before the system has
moved so far from the saddle that the dynamics has accelerated too much. In fact, if we know, a priori,
the system is approaching a saddle, not just a fully stable state, then the warning sign described below
may help to detect a potential critical transition already at the very beginning of the metastable phase;
otherwise, we can apply it during the metastable phase.
In our mathematical treatment we consider a scenario where the system starts from some initial point,
then approaches the saddle and stays for a significant time in the vicinity of the saddle point before
departing again. For detecting the onset of the departure we exploit the exponential form of the departure
trajectory. Between two time points t1 and t2 the logarithmic distance along a trajectory close to the
saddle point x∗ will eventually be dominated by a scaling of the form
ln kx(t2 ) − x(t1 )k ≈ λu t2 + k0 ,

(1)

where λu > 0 is the real part of the largest eigenvalue of the Jacobian and k0 is a constant (see Supplementary Information, Section 2), i.e., the logarithmic distance increases linearly in forward time. Although
saddles generically have positive eigenvalues, the influence of λu , which can be estimated by Eq. 1, on the
overall system dynamics is small as long as the system is approaching the saddle sufficiently close to its
stable directions. In this case, the dynamics does not yet involve a significant component in the direction
of unstable eigenvectors or the system would not approach the saddle at all.
Let us illustrate this again by the epidemics example. While the pathogen is absent the variable that
captures the density of the infected population remains fixed to zero, since there are no dynamics in the
infected population variable we only measure a stable eigenvalue with real part λs < 0 via an analogous
logarithmic scaling relation as Eq. (1) (see Supplementary Information, Section 2), where the logarithmic
distance decays linearly in forward time. Only after the pathogen is introduced and the infected population
3

3

3

x2

-2

x1,2

(a)

d

(b)

(c)
-4

2
2

-6
1
1
-8
0

B
-0.5
-0.5

0
0

1

x1

2

3

-10
0

4

t

8

12

0

4

t

8

12

Figure 1: Dynamics near a planar saddle with small noise. (a) Phase space (x1 , x2 ) with a trajectory
(black) passing near the saddle point. The stationary state (dark green dot) and a circle (gray) of radius
r = 0.5 indicate a neighborhood of the stationary state outside of which the trajectory is shown as a
dashed curve. (b) Time series for x1 (red) and x2 (blue). The gray vertical lines indicate entry and exit
to the ball B = {x ∈ R2 : x21 + x22 < r 2 }. The black squares are predicted values from the warning signals
obtained inside B. (c) Plot of the logarithmic distance reduction d(T ) as crosses; (see Supplementary
Information, Section 2). The red/blue linear interpolants yield two approximations for the stable eigenvalue
λs ≈ −1.10, −0.99 and the black lines for the important unstable eigenvalue λu ≈ 0.51, 0.57; the true values
are (λs , λu ) = (−1, 0.5). The black squares in (b) can be obtained from x1,2 ∼ eλu t . Note that the choice
of B is a choice of sliding window length (or lead time) for prediction as in the case for bifurcation-induced
tipping.
starts growing, we start to pick up the positive eigenvalue λu associated to the exponential growth.
Hence, we may use logarithmic distances between points as a measure to determine, which eigenvalue
λ is currently dominating as shown in (Fig. 1 (b)–(c)). If we find negative λ this signals that we are in a
regime dominated by a stable direction and approach the saddle, whereas a positive λ signals a departure.
Therefore, the emergence of positive λ beyond a certain threshold can provide a warning signal for saddleescape transitions. If we know, a priori, that we are approaching a saddle, not just a fully stable state,
then the warning sign already detects the saddle when the logarithmic distance reduction decays linearly.
If it could be a stable or saddle state, we can only apply the logarithmic distance reduction warning sign
during the metastable phase near the saddle.
To illustrate the saddle-escape mechanism for critical transitions and to test the proposed early-warning
signal we consider two recent adaptive-network models in which critical transitions as well as saddle-type
behavior play key roles in the dynamics and an epidemiological data set. The first system is a model
from evolutionary game theory, in which the evolution of cooperative behavior in a network of interacting,
self-interested agents is studied[22].
The model describes a network of agents, connected by social contacts. Each agent pursues one of
two possible strategies, which we call cooperate and defect. The agents engage in pairwise interactions
with their neighbors, which are modeled as a snowdrift game[23]. In this game the highest social payoff
in produced by mutual cooperation. However, for the individual agent, defecting yields a higher payoff
when the agent is interacting with a cooperator. In time both the agents’ strategies and the network
of interactions change as agents switch to the strategy that performs optimally in the population, and
also rewire their connections to other agents following the more successful strategy (see Supplementary
Information, Section 3).
Previous work[22] has shown that in the limit of infinite population size the system robustly approaches
the state of full cooperation, where the probability that a randomly drawn agent follows the cooperative

4

strategy is one. In large, but finite, networks a state of almost full cooperation is reached that is disrupted
by large outbreaks of defection (see Supplementary Information, Section 3).
1

1

(a3)
(a1)

x1,2

x1,2

0.5

0
0.1

(a2)

x1,2

0.5

0.5

0.2

p

0
0.4

0.3

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.93

0.8

0.94

p

0.95

0.96

p
2

1
T

(b11)
0

-3

0.3

d1

0.25

V1
2

0.2

0

0.15

5

(b2)

-6

0.1

(b12)

(b32)

-3

d2

0.05

0

(b31)

V2
0

5
0
0.1

-0.05
0.6
0.2

0.3

p

-6
0.7

0.8

p

0.9

1

p

Figure 2: Critical transitions for an evolutionary game. (a) Time series for the density of cooperators x1
(red) and the density of defectors x2 (blue); note that we slowly increase the parameter p in time at a
constant rate, i.e., p can be viewed as a time variable. In (a1)-(a2) the minima and maxima of a moving
average are shown whereas (a3) shows the actual time series. The vertical dashed curve (thin black) in (a1)
indicates the theoretically-predicted transition to oscillations; see (Supplementary Information, Section 3).
In (b1) the variances for x1,2 are calculated using a moving window technique up to the gray vertical lines;
note that the scaling of the V1,2 -axis is 10−5 . Observe that x1 does not show a clear scaling law while
the scaling of x2 can be used for predicting the transition from steady state to oscillations using classical
variance-based warning signs. The predicted transition point from extrapolating the increasing variance
scaling law [11] is marked as vertical dashed line (black) in (a2); note that there is a delay in the Hopf
bifurcation point so the predicted critical transition to matches, from a practical viewpoint, the data better
than the second-order moment closure theory [22]. In (b2) the period T of the oscillation is measured and
1/T is linearly interpolated to approximate the period blow-up[5] point (yellow). This is used to predict the
transition point (green) from a periodic to a saddle-type/homoclinic regime; note that this period blow-up
is not the saddle-mechanism we focus on in this paper but another new warning sign we just note as an
interesting related result. The predicted transition is marked by the dashed vertical line (green) in (a3).
Then we also show the logarithmic distance reduction measured from (a3) in (b3). The ellipses in (b31)
indicate the regime where the decay-scaling for the saddle-approach breaks down. Note that the ellipses
are there to guide the eye. If one would want to give an explicit warning sign, a threshold for λu has to
be specified, which is not done in this qualitative example. A detailed quantitative analysis of thresholds
is carried out for a data set below using ROC analysis. Here we just want to point out the existence of
saddles and the qualitative change in the distance reduction near the saddle, i.e. the parts (a3) and (b3)
illustrate the main ideas for saddle-escape warning signs.
5

We now explore whether the logarithmic scaling discussed above is capable of providing early-warning of
these outbreaks. We build on full agent-based simulation but our analysis focuses on a pair of observables.
In particular, we study the density of cooperators, x1 , i.e., the proportion of agents whose current strategy
is cooperation, and the density of links (per agent) that exist between cooperators and defectors, x2 . Note
that per-capita densities of populations are also frequently the only natural variables available in data, so
they are a natural choice to detect critical transitions and warning signs.
First, let us establish that the outbreaks of defection are indeed triggered by a saddle-escape transition.
Although bifurcation-induced transitions are not the main focus of this paper, we provide a brief description
of the known bifurcation structure here as a parameter is varied and consider the dynamics as a function
of the rewiring p, which measures the relative time scale of structural changes of the network to internal
changes in the agents strategy. This rewiring rate was previously identified as a key parameter of the
system (see also Supplementary Information, Section 3).
Increasing p at a constant rate from a small initial value, we observe two main dynamical changes.
First, a stationary solution turns into stable oscillations, which increase in amplitude and period. Here
we observe the classical increase in variance before a Hopf bifurcation[1, 11] (Fig. 2 (b1)), which is a good
predictor for the transition from random fluctuations to small deterministic oscillations. Second, critical
transitions occur at larger rewiring rates, where the cooperator density x1 (t) drops sharply to lower values
before rising again slowly. These transitions are associated to the presence of a homoclinic loop in the
system[22], which is attached to the fully cooperative state x∗1 = x∗2 = 1.
In (Fig. 2 (b2)), we show that the period T of the oscillations may grow rapidly in finite time, indicating
a global bifurcation that gives rise to the homoclinic loop (see Ref. [5] for further background on homoclinic
bifurcations). Trajectories close to the homoclinic loop remain near the saddle point for a long time before
making a fast excursion. Locally, near x∗1 = x∗2 = 1, this is precisely the situation of saddle-escapes. The
logarithmic distances d1,2 are shown in (Fig. 2 (b3)). As a warning sign to predict the rapid drops in x1 in
the range of p ∈ [0.93, 0.96], we assume that we know an eventual saddle-instability will happen so we just
have to look for a change of linear scaling induced by stable directions for d1 during the phases when x1
is gradually increasing. These changes can be seen for p ≈ 0.944 and p ≈ 0.957 as predicted by the theory
see (Fig. 2 (b3)). Note that the complex saddle-escape dynamics occurs in the regime of relatively large
re-wiring rate, when the dynamical process of node update and re-wiring act on similar time scales, while
the bifurcation-induced warning signs worked for low re-wiring in a quasi-stationary scenario.
As a second example, we consider a susceptible-infectious-susceptible (SIS) epidemiological model on
an adaptive network[24, 25]. The network consists of susceptible (S) and infectious (I) agents. An infection
spreads along S-I-links with probability p per unit time, infectious agents recover with probability r, and
susceptible agents try to avoid infectious ones by rewiring S-I-links to S-S-links with a probability that is
proportional to the total number of infectious agents (see Supplementary Information, Section 4).
In simulations of this system the number of infectious agents shows distinguished peaks in time, which
can be interpreted as epidemic outbreaks (Fig. 3). In (Fig. 3 (b)) the logarithmic distances between
consecutive points are shown for the density of I-nodes and S-I-links. Despite the strong fluctuations away
from the peaks, both warning signals show three phases after a peak: (1) strong stabilization, (2) plateauor noise-type behavior and (3) a trend towards instability before the next spike (see Fig. 3 (a2)). In fact,
similar phases can also be observed for the first model in (Fig. 2 (b3)).
Furthermore, we note that the logarithmic distance increases much earlier for the S-I-links than for the
I-nodes, so that monitoring the links between infectious and susceptible agents provides an earlier warning
signal for epidemic outbreaks (Fig. 3). This is in accordance with the intuitive idea that knowledge about
the contact dynamics among infectious and susceptible agents should allow to predict epidemic outbreaks
more easily.
The two models suggest that there are regions in parameter space where saddle-escapes play a key role.
However, it is also known that epidemic network models can exhibit bifurcation-induced critical transitions
with classical warning signs critical transitions[11, 26]. However, in those cases one usually assumes that
a parameter, e.g. the infection rate, is very slowly varying and this causes the critical transition. This

6

1

1

I

SI

(a1)
0.7

(b1)
0.5

0.4
0

0.5

0

1

0

0.5

t

t

1

0

-1

(1)

(a2)

(b2)

dSI

dI

-3.5

-5

(3)
(2)
-7

-9
0

0.5

t

0

1

0.5

1

t

Figure 3: Epidemic outbreaks and prediction in an adaptive SIS model. (a) Normalized time series for
the infected density I (red) and the susceptible-infected link density SI (blue). (b) Logarithmic distances
for I and SI are shown as well (see Supplementary Information, Section 2). The linear interpolations
(black) indicate the expected linear upward trend before a saddle-escape; the slopes of the four black lines
(from left to right) are approximately 7.364, 12.516, 5.466 and 3.461 respectively. The three ellipses in (a2)
highlight the three typical regimes between spikes discussed in the text and are there to guide the eye as
in (Fig.2). Parameter values for this figure are p = 0.0058, r = 0.002 and w0 = 0.6.
directly motivates the question whether there are data sets available where epidemics are driven by saddle
escapes.
Here we focus on repeated measles outbreaks documented biweekly between 1944 and 1966 in 60 cities in
the United Kingdom[27, 28]. The time series of the proportion of infected individuals shows long repeated
periods of low disease prevalence interspersed with large, but very short, outbreaks. This strongly indicates
that a saddle-type mechanism may be at work (Fig. 4 (a)). We use a receiver-operating-characteristic
(ROC) curve[29, 30] to quantify the performance of our warning sign for saddle escapes. We briefly recall,
how ROC curves are calculated. First, one defines a scalar precursory variable X to be computed from
observations before the transitions and considers a threshold δ such that if X > δ an alarm is given. Then
the two ratios of correct alarms to the total number of actual tipping events and false predictions to the
total number of non-tipping events are calculated for various thresholds δ. This provides a quantitative
indicator for the ability of the precursor variable to detect tipping points (see Supplementary Information,
Section 6, for more background on ROC curves and their interpretation).
For the ROC curves in our case, we compute a least squares fit of the parameter λu =: X from equation
(1) within a time window of k data points as a precursory variable. We give an alarm for an imminent
outbreak at the end of the time window when λu > δ for some threshold δ. This prediction is considered
correct if the disease prevalence exceeds 0.1 within the next 5 data points, which corresponds to an outbreak
of at least ten percent of the maximum outbreak coming up within the next 2.5 months. In (Fig. 4 (b))
we show two ROC curves relating the rate of correct predictions to the rate of false positives for different
7

1

1

rc

I
(a)

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

(b)
0.2

0.2

0
1944

0
1949

1954

1959

0

1964

t

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

rf

Figure 4: Measles epidemics in the UK between 1944 and 1966. (a) Typical time series of a city (here:
Birmingham) for the infected population I; the series has been normalized by the maximum outbreak. (b)
ROC curves for a five (dots) and ten (stars) data point prediction averaged over all cities. The diagonal
is shown as well. Blue corresponds to a precursor volume with δ > 0 and red to a precursor volume with
δ < 0. A prediction time window of 5 months is indicated by ’stars’ while a time window of 2.5 months is
indicated by ’dots’.
threshold values δ. Both curves lie above the diagonal, indicating that our method is better than a purely
random prediction. Moreover, the predictions using positive threshold values δ are, on average, better
than the ones using δ < 0, as the former produce a ROC curve farther away from the diagonal. This is a
natural result, because δ > 0 corresponds to the detection of an actual instability while 0 > δ ≫ −1 only
corresponds to the detection of a weakly stable direction. Clearly, very short prediction times (small k) are
problematic as they increase the error in λu leading to false alarms. Long prediction times (large k) lead
to very few correct predictions because the exponentially stable approach to the saddle strongly dominates
on long time scales. Although the ROC results show that we can potentially improve the prediction of
epidemic outbreaks, the situation is far from ideal. The ROC curve is still quite far from the top-left corner
in (Fig. 4 (b)), which would be perfect prediction. Hence, there is substantial work to be carried out to
try to increase the practical performance of the warning sign.
Note that, although we demonstrated many factors which strongly indicate a saddle-escape mechanism
in measles data, it is unlikely that a test exists which can guarantee detailed knowledge of the underlying
dynamical mechanisms based on just a relatively short uni-variate time series of the epidemic. However,
there is evidence from several epidemic models, which do display saddle states[31, 32]. It then remains as
an open problem to link our warning sign analysis of measles data to particular models of measles[33, 34],
which we leave as a challenge for future work. Furthermore, we remark that although the indicator we
have used seems reasonably efficient, its robustness will strongly depend on the noise level in the system.
As a general comment, we note that the exact mechanism by which a critical transition occurs may well
lie in the eye of the beholder. A given critical transition observed in nature may appear as a bifurcationinduced transition in one model and as a saddle-escape in a different model describing the same phenomenon
with different variables.
In summary, we have identified a new type of critical transitions that could be relevant for real-world
complex many-variable saddle-type systems. We proposed a simple, intuitive early warning signal for these
transitions, and demonstrated the application of this warning signal in two adaptive network models and
8

real-world data. We believe that this warning signal will be useful for detecting saddle-escape transitions
in network models and data sets, for instance for ecological and socio-economic systems. Because the
underlying mechanism considered here differs from the ones typically studied in critical transitions, the
proposed early warning sign is complementary to existing approaches.
It is crucial to point out that significant additional research is necessary to make warning signs, for
saddle-escape as well as the classical bifurcation-induced tipping scenarios, more applicable for many realworld applications. The first main issue is to connect results to a more detailed statistical analysis, which
is currently work in progress by several groups[30]. A second challenge is to link qualitative modelling
results better to quantitative warning signs. Indeed, both necessarily depend on each other for saddleand bifurcation-mechanisms. In both cases the predictions are tremendously improved if one knows a
priori that the current dynamical evolution of the system may be towards a destabilizing tipping scenario
and one just does not know where the system tips, on what time horizon it happens, and which precise
mechanism occurs. A third challenge is to keep new potential applications in perspective and there has
been significant recent progress in this direction in realistic systems for bifurcation-induced transitions, for
example in ecology[10]. Various models in neuroscience[18] and in ecology[16] suggest that saddle points
can occur, which are bound to be preceeded by the generic logarithmic distance reduction we use as a
warning sign. In an ecological context a natural future test case could be bio-invasions[35, 36].
Acknowledgements: C.K. would like to thank the Austrian Academy of Sciences (ÖAW) for support
via an APART fellowship as well as the European Commission (EC/REA) for support by a Marie-Curie
International Re-integration Grant. The majority of this work was carried out while all three authors
worked at the Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems (MPI-PKS); hence we would like
to acknowledge it here for hospitality and financial support.

Supplementary Information
1
1.1

Metastability Near Saddle Points
Abundance of Saddles in Complex Systems

Our main assumptions on complex networks is that steady states are “frequently” saddle points. In this
section, we provide a mathematical justification for this assumption. Suppose we are given a large system
of ODEs
x′ = f (x)
(2)
for x ∈ Rn and n ≫ 1. Assume x∗ is a steady state (or equilibrium point, f (x∗ ) = 0) for (2). Denote
the linearization (or Jacobian) Df (x∗ ) by An ∈ Rn×n which generically provides the local stability of x∗
using the Hartman-Grobman Theorem[4]. Eigenvalues of An with negative/positive real parts correspond
to stable/unstable eigendirections. Under the hypothesis that the system is complex, heterogeneous and
its size is large it is reasonable to assume[17] that An is a random matrix with independent identically
distributed (iid) entries given by a complex random variable z with mean zero and variance σ 2 . Let {λi }ni=1
denote the eigenvalues of An and define the empirical spectral distribution µn of An by
µn (s, t) :=

1
#{k ≤ n : Re(λk ) ≤ s and Im(λk ) ≤ t}.
n

where # denotes the cardinality of a set. Recently it has been proven (see[37] and references therein) that,
under suitable boundedness assumptions on the moments of z, the circular law conjecture holds which
states that µn converges to the uniform distribution over the unit disk
µ∞ (s, t) :=

1
mes({w ∈ C : |w| ≤ 1, Re(w) ≤ s and Im(w) ≤ t})
π
9

where ’mes’ denotes Lebesgue measure. Hence, asymptotically as n → ∞, if λ is an eigenvalue of An then
P(Re(λ) < 0) =

1
= P(Re(λ) > 0).
2

This implies that x∗ is stable with probability (1/2)n , completely unstable with probability (1/2)n and a
saddle point with probability 1 − (1/2)n−1 . Therefore, the probability that x∗ is a saddle point tends to
one as n → ∞.
It is extremely important to note that the argument here is based upon certain mathematical assumptions to make it rigorous. However, it is strongly expected that if we weaken the assumptions in various
ways, we still find saddle points frequently in high-dimensional systems. In fact, let us point out that the
idea to characterize instability in large-scale systems using random matrix theory is well-known[38] but is
still a topic of very recent interest[39]. However, previously one only had the semi-circular law available
that required the symmetry of An or one had to rely on structured matrices, for example certain types of
food webs[17]. These assumptions are usually too strong for complex dynamical networks, which can be
highly heterogeneous and yield unstructured, non-symmetric ODEs. This makes the recent progress on
proving the full circular law conjecture important in our context. As discussed above, one expects that
the results can be generalized even further to include even larger classes of complex systems. Furthermore,
note carefully that even if n is small, one may still have saddles, which may be relevant for the dynamics, i.e., the assumptions we make are sufficient to prove saddle existence with high probability but the
assumptions may not be necessary to find saddles at all.

1.2

Residence Times

Another main point of our argument is that the systems can spend a much longer time near saddle points
than away from them. This leads to metastable behavior near saddle points. This can be illustrated with
the simplest two-dimensional case given by the ODEs
x′1 = λs x1 ,
x′2 = λu x2 ,

(3)

where λs < 0 < λu . Note carefully that it is justified to reduce the dimension of the system after the large
dimensionality of the system has led to saddle points; the mathematically rigorous reduction just follows
from center manifold theory [4]. The system (3) decouples with solution
x1 (t) = x1 (0)eλs t

and

x2 (t) = x2 (0)eλu t .

Suppose we start with some x1 (0) = κ > 0 and want to reach a small neighborhood of the origin with
x1 (T ) = δ ≪ κ. This takes a time T = λ−1
s ln(δ/κ). Viewing T as a function of κ shows that the
time increases logarithmically. Therefore, a trajectory spends a much longer time near the equilibrium in
comparison to the approach towards the equilibrium. Similarly, we can require a trajectory to start in a
small neighborhood of the saddle with x2 (0) = δ > 0 and end at x2 (T ) = κ > 0. Then T = λ−1
u ln(κ/δ)
and the same arguments apply to show that the initial time spend near the equilibrium is much longer
than the escape time. Although we have only worked with a linear system (3), similar conclusions apply
for the nonlinear case as long the passage near the hyperbolic saddle occurs sufficiently close to its stable
and unstable manifolds[4].

2
2.1

Saddle Point Warning Signs
Basics

Locally near a hyperbolic saddle point, which we can assume without loss of generality to be at x =
(0, 0, . . . , 0) =: 0, we can work with the linearization so that
x′ = Ax
10

(4)

for some matrix A ∈ Rn×n with eigenvalues λi ∈ C for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n} and associated eigenvectors vi .
We are going to assume that the eigenvalues are distinct which is generic within the space of matrices.
Standard linear algebra gives a coordinate transformation P : Rn → Rn , x = P y, so that


B1


..
P −1 AP = B = 

.
Bk

where the k matrices B1 , . . . , Bk are the usual Jordan blocks and P maps the standard basis vectors to
the basis {vi }. Since the eigenvalues are distinct we have Bj ∈ R or Bj ∈ R2×2 . It is straightforward to
observe that the escape near saddles is governed by the weakest stable and the strongest unstable directions.
More precisely, we will only consider at most four eigenvalues λs , λs , λu , λu where overbar denotes complex
conjugation so that
0 > Re(λs ) > Re(λk ),
0 < Re(λk ) < Re(λu ),

for all k 6= s such that 0 > Re(λk ),
for all k 6= u such that 0 < Re(λk ).

(5)

It is extremely important to highlight again the logic in the previous derivations: First, we start with
a large-dimensional system, where it can be shown that saddle points are frequent. For each hyperbolic
saddle point, there are many eigenvalues. However, for the dynamical approach or departure of the
saddle point, the dynamics is locally governed by the weakest stable and strongest unstable directions, i.e.,
stronger stable directions damp out very quickly, while weak unstable directions are generically dominated
by the strongest unstable mode. Hence, we may develop a local theory for high-dimensional hyperbolic
saddles by focusing on the leading directions in the stable and unstable manifolds, which are generically
low-dimensional.

2.2

The Planar Saddle

We start with the case n = 2 and λs,u ∈ R. Setting x = P y gives y ′ = P −1 AP y = By with solution
y(t) = y(0)etB or x(t) = P y(t) so that
x(t) = y1 (0)eλs t v1 + y2 (0)eλu t v2 .
for vectors v1,2 that can be calculated explicitly. Since we want to approach the saddle point and stay near
it for some significant amount of time we must have that |y2 (0)| =
6 0 is small so that a solution starts close
s
to the stable manifold W (0) = {ρv1 : ρ ∈ R}. Let k · k denote the usual Euclidean norm. Observe that
the term ky1 (0)eλs t v1 k → 0 as t → ∞ and, if y2 (0) 6= 0, ky2 (0)eλu t v2 k → ∞ as t → ∞. Hence, initially
kx(t)k decreases exponentially until a unique minimum and then kx(t)k increases exponentially. For times
tj > 0 such that y2 (0)eλu tj is small it follows for some t2 > t1 > 0 that
kx(t2 ) − x(t1 )k ≈ |y1 (0)||eλs t2 − eλs t1 |kv1 k = |y1 (0)|kv1 k|eλs t1 (eλs (t2 −t1 ) − 1)|
If t2 ≫ t1 then eλs (t2 −t1 ) ≈ 0 so that
ln kx(t2 ) − x(t1 )k ≈ λs t1 + k1

(6)

where k1 = ln(|y1 (0)|kv1 k) is a constant that will not be of relevance here. Observe that (6) allows us
to estimate λs from data. Then we can consider it a warning sign when the logarithm of the distance
between points starts to deviate from the linear fit (6). In the regime where |y1 (0)|eλs t kv1 k is small a
similar procedure allows us to estimate the strongest unstable eigenvalues since then we find
ln kx(t2 ) − x(t1 )k ≈ λu t2 + k2

11

(7)

where k2 = ln(|y2 (0)|kv2 k). From the knowledge of λu we can predict how rapidly kx(t)k is expected to
grow. In practice, we can estimate the eigenvalues λs,u from a uni-variate coordinate time series xi (t) by
looking at a fixed time point T and a set of K previous times t1 < t2 < · · · < T to compute
di (T ) :=

K
1 X
ln |xi (T ) − xi (tk )|.
K

(8)

k=1

Computing di (T ) for different times T gives that in different regimes (stable/unstable) we have di (T ) ∼
λu,s T + K2 for some constant K2 .

2.3

Complex Eigenvalues

For the case n = 3 we will again assume that (5) holds and that the complex conjugate eigenvalue pair has
negative real part i.e. we consider λs = as + ibs , λs = as − ibs , λu with associated real eigenvectors v1,2,3 .
With x(t) = P y(t) the general solution is
 as t

e [y1 (0) cos(bs t) + y2 (0) sin(bs t)]
y(t) =  eas t [y2 (0) cos(bs t) − y1 (0) sin(bs t)]  .
y3 (0)eλu t
Writing the solution for x(t) in the basis of the eigenvectors vi gives
x(t) = eas t [y1 (0) cos(bs t) + y2 (0) sin(bs t)]v1
+eas t [y2 (0) cos(bs t) − y1 (0) sin(bs t)]v2 + y3 (0)eλu t v3 .
As before, we are going to distinguish two regimes in the time domain, starting with the assumption that
ky3 (0)eλu t v3 k is small which yields exponentially decaying oscillations in time series for each coordinate xi .
Let T be the time between successive maxima or minima then bs = 2π/T . Furthermore, if t2 > t1 > 0 as
previously and t2 − t1 = T then
kx(t2 ) − x(t1 )k ≈ k3 |eas t2 − eas t1 |
for a positive constant k3 . The last equation can then be used to estimate as as shown in Section 2.2. The
case of two complex conjugate eigenvalue pairs is similar and will not be discussed here.

2.4

Noisy Saddles

An important question is to consider the influence of noise as natural systems, and in particular the
measurement of natural systems, are often well-described by an underlying deterministic system with
additional random fluctuations. Consider the standard one-dimensional Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) x = x(t)
stochastic process generated by the stochastic differential equation (SDE)
1
dx = ax dt + σ dW
2

(9)

where W = W (t) is a standard 1-dimensional Brownian motion and the equation is interpreted in the
Itô-sense. It is well-known[40] that the solution to (9) and the resulting variance V (t) = Var(x(t)) can be
calculated

σ 2 at
V (t) =
e −1 .
a
For a < 0 it follows that V (t) → −σ 2 /a as t → ∞ and for a > 0 one gets Vt → ∞ as t → ∞. More
precisely,

ln(V (t)) = ln σ 2 − ln a + ln eat − 1 ∼ 2 ln σ − ln a + at
as t → ∞.
(10)
12

Generalizing (9) to the simplest possible saddle point yields
dx = Ax dt + σ dW

(11)

where W = W (t) now denotes a standard 2-dimensional Brownian motion and A has two eigenvalues
λs < 0 < λu . Then the same conclusion as before apply since the entries of the covariance matrix
C(t) = Cov(x(t)) are generically linear combinations of two decoupled OU-processes, one stable with
asymptotically constant variance for a = λs and one with diverging variance for a = λu . Hence one could
also attempt to use the scaling (10) to get an estimate for λu by considering a moving window analysis
of the logarithm for the variance. This could be of particular interest in case the more straightforward
logarithmic distance reduction method does not work. Most likely this will be the case only for very
particular intermediate noise strengths. For small noise the estimator based on distances works quite well
as shown in the main manuscript. However, if the noise is too large one never reaches a neighborhood of
the saddle point with high-probability so that predictions become impossible anyway i.e. the events acquire
a purely noise-induced character.

2.5

An Example from Epidemics

Saddle points also appear frequently in many applications. Here we briefly illustrate the dynamics near
saddles for a compartmental epidemic model[31, 41]. The basic model is given by
S ′ = φI 2 S/T 2 dS + ρR + bT,
I ′ = φI 2 S/T 2 (d + γ)I,
R′ = γI(d + ρ)R,

(12)

where S, I, R are the number of susceptible, infected and recovered individuals in the population (with
T := S + I + R), d and b are per capita death and birth rates, γ is the per capita recovery rate, and ρ is the
per capita loss of immunity constant. φ is the main bifurcation parameter of the model and controls the
interaction strength for the nonlinear incidence function I 2 S. Assuming d = b to keep the total population
constant, introducing the new variables
s := S/T,

i := I/T,

r = R/T,

and using the constraint 1 = s + i + r, one arrives at a two-dimensional ODE system[31]
i′ = i[φi(1ir)(b + γ)],
r ′ = γi(b + ρ)r.

(13)

The system (13) has a number of different dynamical regimes depending upon the parameter values.
Figure 5 shows a simulation of the dynamics for parameter values b = 1, ρ = 0.132051, φ = 81.88, γ = 1.4.
In the (i, r)-phase space plot in Figure 5(a) a saddle point (i, r) = (i, r) has been marked as a dot. The
trajectory approaches a neighbourhood of the saddle several times, where it only evolves slowly as discussed
above. These long periods near the saddle are then interspersed with several short periods consisting of
large epidemic outbreaks. The dynamics in this parameter regime is transient and will settle after a very
long time to a stable sink equilibrium. However, before this occurs, the saddle dynamics plays the main
role. Figure 5(b) shows a time series of the infected population density i corresponding to the trajectory
from Figure 5(a).
It is important to note that the observed effect can also occur for the case when the saddle point lies
precisely on the zero line. Indeed, if we consider a coordinate change ĩ = i − i∗ , then the saddle point lies
on the zero line {i = 0} and we observe the same saddle escape phenomenon as above.

13

0.5
0.6

(b)

i

(a)

r

0.4
0.5
0.3
0.4

0.2

0.3

0.1

0.2
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0

0.5

10

20

30

40

t

i

Figure 5: Numerical simulation for the compartmental epidemic model (13). (a) Phase space plot with
saddle point (green dot) and a trajectory segment (black curve) showing multiple epidemic outbreaks with
passages near a saddle. (b) Time series for the infected population density i corresponding to the trajectory
from (a). The i-value of the saddle point is indicated by a dashed green line. The long passages near the
saddle between larger epidemic ourbreaks are clearly visible on this time scale.

3

Cooperation Games on Networks

In this section we give a more detailed technical description of the snowdrift game network. The evolutionary game is defined between agents (nodes) that interact on an adaptive network via the links between
them[22]. The number of nodes N and number of undirected links K is fixed. However, as described
below, the adjacency matrix A = (aij ) may change in time and interacts with the dynamics. This makes
the system and adaptive, or co-evolutionary, network. An agent i interacts with an agent j at a given time
step if there is a link between i and j. The interaction takes place via a game between the two nodes. In
this game, an agent can have two possible strategies σi , cooperation C or defection D, which are the two
dynamical states of the nodes. The payoff agent i receives from agent j via an interaction is modeled via
the snowdrift game[23] with interaction matrix


b − c/2 b − c
M=
b
0
where c represents the cost of cooperation and b the benefit. M11 represents cooperation of both agents,
M22 defection of both agents and the off-diagonal entries correspond to the mixed cases where one agent
tries to cooperate but the other agent defects. The total payoff πi for node i is
X
πi =
Mij .
j:aij =1

The network is made adaptive by a probabilistic rule. After the game has been played, choose a link at
random. With probability p re-wire this link and with probability 1 − p one of the linked agents adopts
the other agent’s strategy. The two events of re-wiring and adaptation have to specified in more detail.
Define the performance φ(σ) of a strategy σ ∈ {C, D} as
1 X
πi
φ(σ) :=
nσ N
i:σi =σ

where nσ is the fraction of agents using strategy σ. If the strategy adoption event takes place agent j
adopts the strategy of agent i with probability
−1

fβ (i, j) = 1 + e−β[φ(σi )−φ(σj )]
14

and i adopts j’s strategy with probability fβ (j, i) = 1 − fβ (i, j). For a re-wiring event of a link between i
and j, delete it and select a random node k. Then the link between k and i is generated with probability
fα (i, j) and between k and j with probability fα (j, i).
The main dynamical variables we are interested in are the fraction of cooperators and defectors nC
and nD , as well as the link densities lCC , lCD and lDD . Since the number of nodes and links is constant it
suffices to restrict attention to a single node density and two link densities. Consider the parameter set
α = 30,

β = 0.1,

b = 1,

c = 0.8,

N = 50000,

K = 500000

where the re-wiring rate p is the primary bifurcation parameter that is varied between p = 0 and p = 1.
There are three main dynamical regimes, for small p the densities nCD remain almost constant and there
are just finite-size effect stochastic fluctuations. Note that for small p, the network topology is very
close to being static. Increasing p gives rise to a supercritical Hopf bifurcation to oscillations in a system,
where the population and link densities between different types of agents are taken into account[22], i.e. the
linearization at the near-homogeneous steady state has a pair of complex conjugate eigenvalues, which cross
the imaginary axis at nonzero speed upon variation of p. This leads to small-scale deterministic oscillations,
which grow in amplitude upon increasing p further. For large p the periodic dynamics approaches a nearhomoclinic orbit with saddle-type escape dynamics and long periods of high cooperation values with nC
near 1. More precisely, the period of the oscillations increases and long times are spend near a saddle
steady state and eventually the periodic orbit limits onto a homoclinic orbit, which means trajectories
come extremely close to the saddle steady state. Note carefully that high values of p mean that the
network topology can change very quickly, i.e. quickly in comparison to the changes of the dynamical
states of the agents. This leads to a highly heterogeneous complex system, which can drastically change
its entire topology and dynamical state; for a more detailed description of the dynamics we refer to[22].

4

Epidemics on Networks

In this section we provide a more detailed overview of the epidemiological network model discussed in the
main text. The total number of nodes N and links L is assumed to be fixed. Nodes can be in either
in a susceptible (S) or infected (I) state. Links between nodes represent potential transmission routes of
the disease. Loops and double-links are not allowed. At each time step an infected node recovers with
a probability (or recovery rate) r into a susceptible node. For every SI-link the disease spreads with
probability p so that the S node becomes an I node upon infection. This basic dynamics just represents
the standard susceptible-infected-susceptible model[42]. In addition, susceptibles can try to avoid contact
with infected and this is modeled via a probability w of re-wiring an SI-link. In this case, the susceptible
node S cuts its link to a node I and establishes a new link to another susceptible node.
As before, we are mainly interested in the node and link densities and their trajectories. It is natural
to view the parameters (r, p, w) as bifurcation parameters. We briefly describe the dynamics that have
been found in[24]. It is observed that cluster formation and degree correlation depend on the re-wiring
r, e.g. higher re-wiring rates lead to higher degree correlation. Furthermore, the main bifurcation point
upon varying w is the epidemic threshold corresponding to a transcritical bifurcation. Hopf bifurcations,
saddle-node bifurcations, oscillations and hysteresis can occur.
The re-wiring mechanism can be refined by introducing awareness of susceptibles to the disease. Let
ρ = i/N ∈ [0, 1] denote the infected fraction of the population. Now define w = w0 ρ where w0 is a fixed
constant. In addition to the bifurcation phenomena observed previously, a homoclinic bifurcation is found
upon varying p. The large-amplitude oscillations that occur near the homoclinic bifurcation are of interest
for our study of saddle escapes in the main text.
The parameter values used for full network simulation are p = 0.0058, r = 0.002 and w0 = 0.6 with
an initial susceptible density st=0 = 0.98. The total number of nodes was fixed to N = 105 and the total
number of links to L = 106 . These yield oscillations and their analysis using saddle-type escape dynamics
gives the results shown in (Fig. 3).
15

5

Measles Data

The data set we use for testing our methods are measles epidemic data recorded in 60 UK cities from 1944
to 1966; the data has been downloaded from the website[43, 44]. A detailed description and analysis of
this data set is given in the two papers[28, 27]. For each city the total number of cases has been reported
biweekly. Depending on the size of the city, measles is expected to occur in endemic cycles (large cities) or
in recurrent epidemics with local extinction. It is important to observe that either of those two phenomena
depends on the fact that the virus is somewhere in the total host population. Therefore, a low infected
density is generically expected to lie very close to the stable manifold of a saddle point when considered
in a sufficiently large phase space.
An interesting aspect of the modeling of Grenfell et al.[28, 27] is that, although their model is stochastic,
they recognize that during the initial phase and throughout the epidemic, the underlying dynamical system
seems to be behave deterministically. This is precisely the same behavior one can observe from a model
such as the epidemiological adaptive-network model described in the last section.

6

ROC curves

Here, we briefly review the main idea of ROC (receiver operating characteristic), also called the ROC
curve, and give the formal definitions for the general case. Denote the points in a given time series by
Ij := I(tj ) ∈ R for j = 1, 2, . . . and let Ym be a binary random variable with

1 a tipping/event occured at time m
Ym :=
0 no tipping/event occured at time m,
i.e. Ym just records whether a tipping point occured at time m or not. Ym is taken as a random variable
since we do not a priori when events occur. Consider some subset of previous observations Ik1 ,k2 :=
(Im−k1 , Im−k1 −1 , . . . , Im−k2 ) ∈ Rk1 −k2 +1 with 0 < k2 < k1 , where k1 − k2 + 1 is also referred to as the
sliding window length or observational window length.
Next, one defines a precursory variable Xm := pre(Ik1 ,k2 ), where pre : Rk1 −k2 +1 → R is a mapping,
which computes out of the observations a scalar-valued precursor. Obviously the variable Xm can depend
upon the choice of k1 , k2 and on further parameters (this problem is currently being studied by the first
author and several colleagues for the case of B-tipping). We give an alarm when Xm > δ for the event
some δ ∈ R. The precursory variable enables us to calculate the rate of correct predictions as well as the
rate of false positives
rc =

#correct predictions
#events/outbreaks

and rf =

#false positives
.
#non-events

Both rates will obviously depend upon k1 , k2 , δ and the dependence will be upon δ only if the window
length is fixed. One may also write rc and rf by using aposterior probability density functions as[29]
Z
Z
P(Xm |Ym = 0).
P(Xm |Ym = 1),
rf =
rc =
{Xm >δ}

{Xm >δ}

The ROC-curve is a plot of the rates in the (rf , rc )-plane for different values of the threshold δ; see (Fig. 4)
for an example. There are several important standard observations about ROC curves. Perfect prediction
occurs if no false positive and all true events are detected. This implies that the ROC curve should consist
just of the point (rf , rc ) = (0, 1). The point (0, 0) in the lower-left corner of an ROC curve represents a
value of δ that is so high that no alarm is given at any point while the point (1, 1) at the upper right corner
represents when alarms are given at every time step. The diagonal connecting (0, 0) and (1, 1) is precisely,
where true positive rate equals the false positive rate, which is equivalent to making random guesses. A
precursor with performance better than random guesses corresponds to a point in the upper triangle with
rc > rf .
16

References
[1] Scheffer, M. et al. Early-warning signals for critical transitions. Nature 461, 53–59 (2009).
[2] Lenton, T. et al. Tipping elements in the Earth’s climate system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105,
1786–1793 (2008).
[3] Kuehn, C. A mathematical framework for critical transitions: bifurcations, fast-slow systems and
stochastic dynamics. Phys. D 240, 1020–1035 (2011).
[4] Guckenheimer, J. & Holmes, P. Nonlinear Oscillations, Dynamical Systems, and Bifurcations of Vector
Fields (Springer, New York, NY, 1983).
[5] Kuznetsov, Y. Elements of Applied Bifurcation Theory (Springer, New York, NY, 2004), 3rd edn.
[6] Ashwin, P., Wieczorek, S., Vitolo, R. & Cox, P. Tipping points in open systems: bifurcation, noiseinduced and rate-dependent examples in the climate system. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 370, 1166–1184
(2012).
[7] Carpenter, S. & Brock, W. Rising variance: a leading indicator of ecological transition. Ecol. Lett. 9,
311–318 (2006).
[8] Boettinger, C., Ross, N. & Hastings, A. Early warning signals: the charted and uncharted territories.
Theor. Ecol. 6, 255–264 (2013).
[9] Lade, S. & Gross, T. Early warning signals for critical transitions: a generalized modeling approach.
PLoS Comp. Biol. 8, e1002360–6 (2012).
[10] Veraart, A. et al. Recovery rates reflect distance to a tipping point in a living system. Nature 481,
357–359 (2012).
[11] Kuehn, C. A mathematical framework for critical transitions: normal forms, variance and applications.
J. Nonlinear Sci. 23, 457–510 (2013).
[12] Drake, J. & Griffen, B. Early warning signals of extinction in deteriorating environments. Nature
467, 456–459 (2010).
[13] Dai, L., Vorselen, D., Korolev, K. & Gore, J. Generic indicators for loss of resilience before a tipping
point leading to population collapse. Science 336, 1175–1177 (2012).
[14] Dushoff, J. & Levin, S. The effects of population heterogeneity on disease invasion. Math. Biosci.
128, 25–40 (1995).
[15] Cushing, J., Dennis, B., Desharnais, R. & Costantino, R. Moving toward an unstable equilibrium:
saddle nodes in population systems. J. Anim. Ecol. 67, 298–306 (1998).
[16] Hastings, A. Transients: the key to long-term ecological understanding? Trends Ecol. Evol. 19, 39–45
(2004).
[17] May, R. Will a large complex system be stable? Nature 238, 413–414 (1972).
[18] Izhikevich, E. Neural excitability, spiking, and bursting. Int. J. Bif. Chaos 10, 1171–1266 (2000).
[19] Ashwin, P. & Field, M. Heteroclinic networks in coupled cell systems. Arch. Rat. Mech. Anal. 148,
107–143 (1999).
[20] Huisman, J. & Weissing, F. Biological conditions for oscillations and chaos generated by multispecies
competition. Ecology 82, 2682–2695 (2001).
17

[21] Liebhold, A. & Bascompte, J. The Allee effect, stochastic dynamics and the eradication of alien
species. Ecol. Lett. 6, 133–140 (2003).
[22] Zschaler, G., Traulsen, A. & Gross, T. A homoclinic route to asymptotic full cooperation in adaptive
networks and its failure. New J. Phys. 12, (093015); DOI:10.1088/1367-2630/12/9/093015 (2010).
[23] Doebeli, M. & Hauert, C. Models of cooperation based on the Prisoner’s Dilemma and the Snowdrift
game. Ecol. Lett. 8, 748–766 (2005).
[24] Gross, T., D’Lima, C. D. & Blasius, B. Epidemic dynamics on an adaptive network. Phys. Rev. Lett.
96, (208701) (2006).
[25] Gross, T. & Kevrekidis, I. Robust oscillations in SIS epidemics on adpative networks: coarse-graining
by automated moment closure. Europhys. Lett. 82, (38004) (2008).
[26] O’Regan, S. & Drake, J. Theory of early warning signals of disease emergence and leading indicators
of elimination. Theor. Ecol. 6, 333–357 (2013).
[27] Bjørnstad, O., Finkenstädt, B. & Grenfell, B. Endemic and epidemic dynamics of measles. I. Estimating epidemiological scaling with a time series SIR model. Ecol. Monogr. 72, 169–184 (2002).
[28] Grenfell, B., Bjørnstad, O. & Finkenstädt, B. Endemic and epidemic dynamics of measles. II. Scaling
predictability, noise and determinism with the time-series SIR model. Ecol. Monogr. 72, 185–202
(2002).
[29] Hallerberg, S. & Kantz, H. Influence of the event magnitude on the predictability of extreme events.
Phys. Rev. E 77, 011108 (2008).
[30] Boettinger, C. & Hastings, A. Quantifying limits to detection of early warning for critical transitions.
J. R. Soc. Interface 9, 2527–2539 (2012).
[31] Derrick, W. & den Driessche, P. V. Homoclinic orbits in a disease transmission model with nonlinear
incidence and nonconstant population. Discr. Cont. Dyn. Syst. B 3, 299–311 (2003).
[32] den Driessche, P. V. & Watmough, J. Epidemic solutions and endemic catastrophes. In Ruan, S.,
Wolkowicz, G. & Wu, J. (eds.) Dynamical Systems and Their Applications in Biology, 247–257 (AMS,
Providence, USA, 2003).
[33] Rohani, P., Keeling, M. & Grenfell, B. The interplay between determinism and stochasticity in
childhood diseases. Amer. Nat. 159, 469–481 (2002).
[34] Finkenstädt, B. & Grenfell, B. Time series modelling of childhood diseases: a dynamical systems
approach. J. R. Stat. Soc. C 49, 187–205 (2000).
[35] Bright, C. Life out of Bounds: Bioinvasion in a Borderless World (W. W. Norton, New York City,
USA, 1998).
[36] Phillips, B., Brown, G., Webb, J. & Shine, R. Invasion and the evolution of speed in toads. Nature
439, 803 (2006).
[37] Tao, T. & Vu, V. Random matrices: the circular law. Commun. Contemp. Math. 10, 261–307 (2008).
[38] Gardner, M. & Ashby, W. Connectance of large dynamic (cybernetic) systems: critical values for
stability. Nature 228, 784 (1970).
[39] Wainrib, G. & Touboul, J. Topological and dynamical complexity of random neural networks. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 110, 118101 (2013).
18

[40] Gardiner, C. Stochastic Methods (Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, Germany, 2009), 4th edn.
[41] Liu, W.-M. & Levin, S.A. & Iwasa, Y. Influence of nonlinear incidence rates upon the be- haviour of
SIRS epidemiological models. J. Math. Biol. 23, 187–204 (1986).
[42] Brauer, F., van den Driessche, P. & Wu, J. Mathematical Epidemiology (Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,
Germany, 2008).
[43] Grenfell,
B.
TSIR
analysis
of
measles
in
England
and
http://www.zoo.cam.ac.uk/zoostaff/grenfell/measles.htm; Date of access:24/11/2011.

Wales

[44] Grenfell, B. TSIR analysis of measles in England and Wales (archived version of webpage)
http://www.asc.tuwien.ac.at/∼ckuehn/Data/DATA measles.zip; Date of access:27/10/2014.

19

