The existence and abundance of ghost ancestors in
biparental populations

arXiv:1401.3668v2 [q-bio.PE] 2 Mar 2015

Simon Gravela , Mike Steelb
a Genome Quebec Innovation Centre
Department of Human Genetics, McGill University
740 Dr Penfield
Montreal, Quebec
H3A 0G1, Canada;
simon.gravel@mcgill.ca
b Biomathematics Research Centre, University of Canterbury, New Zealand

Abstract
In a randomly-mating biparental population of size N there are, with high
probability, individuals who are genealogical ancestors of every extant individual within approximately log2 (N ) generations into the past. We use this result
of J. Chang to prove a curious corollary under standard models of recombination: there exist, with high probability, individuals within a constant multiple
of log2 (N ) generations into the past who are simultaneously (i) genealogical
ancestors of each of the individuals at the present, and (ii) genetic ancestors to
none of the individuals at the present. Such ancestral individuals - ancestors of
everyone today that left no genetic trace – represent ‘ghost’ ancestors in a strong
sense. In this short note, we use simple analytical argument and simulations to
estimate how many such individuals exist in finite Wright-Fisher populations.
Keywords: Genealogy, recombination, genetic drift, Wright-Fisher model.

1. Introduction
The reproductive success of an individual is traditionally measured by the
number of offspring it produces. However, even given a fixed number of descendants, there is a fair amount of variation in the amount of genetic material left
by an individual. An ancestor that contributes genetic material to an individual
through multiple lineages is expected to leave more genetic material than an ancestor that contributes along a single lineage, for example [1, 2, 9, 10, 11]. Even
if we fix the genealogy, there remains considerable stochasticity in the amount
of genetic material left by each ancestor during meiosis. The probability of inheriting genetic material along a given ancestral lineage decreases rapidly with
the number of generations. Thus, an individual leaving a single descendant after
more than 10 generations is likely to leave no genealogical material in future generations, even if this descendant is wildly prolific. This limits the information
about past genealogies that can be recovered from present-day genomic data
Preprint submitted to Elsevier

March 3, 2015

[14, 15]. Not only are we limited to individuals that left descendants, but even
the genomes of individuals that left offspring may be completely inaccessible.
A result of Chang [3, 8] states that first-generation (or founding) individuals
of a constant-sized, randomly mating Wright-Fisher diploid population rapidly
reach one of two ancestral states: about 80% become ancestral to the complete
subsequent population, and 20% leave no descendants. We are interested in
the 80% of ‘successful’ individuals, and wonder about the proportion of such
individuals that leave no genetic material to any of their large number of descendants. The question of whether genealogical ancestors leave genetic material
in an infinite population was discussed in detail in [1], where a branching approximation to the infinite-population Wright-Fisher model was used to show
a logarithmic decrease of survival probability with time. Here we consider the
finite population case and obtain analytical and numerical results under the
exact Wright-Fisher model. Because the approximations of [1] are reasonable,
we expect that our results should agree in the large-N and long-time limits, but
our results will provide additional insight for small population and short times.
We first formally show that, amongst those individuals who are genealogically ancestral to the complete population, the proportion that leaves no genetic
material at the present is nonzero in a finite population, and indeed approaches
1 when the number of generations and population size become large. We turn
to simulation to estimate their abundance for finite genomes and finite number
of generations. We find that the proportion of ghost ancestors grows approximately logarithmically with the number of generations in a constant-size population and that convergence to the large-population limits occurs rapidly at
short time-scales.
Our work complements recent efforts to study the relationship between genealogical and genetic ancestries. Wakeley et al. [17] recently proposed an
improved approach to model the recent pedigree structure of samples within
coalescent theory, but found that this improved modeling had a relatively modest effect on the simulated statistics. Wiuf and Hein [18] used mathematical
modelling and simulations to study the distribution of ancestral material of an
extant chromosome, with the aim of addressing two questions: (i) how many
ancestors are there to a present human chromosome? and (ii) how many different sequences in an ancestral population can one sample by sequencing extant
sequences? More recently, Matsen and Evans [11] used simulations and probabilistic analysis to investigate relationships between the number of descendant
alleles of an ancestor allele and the number of genealogical descendants of the
individual who possessed that allele. Here we explore the impact of demography
on the short- and long-term probability that an individual with many genealogical descendants leaves no genetic material. We provide a short formal proof for
the existence of such individuals, in a probabilistic sense, and study their prevalence under different demographic scenarios with Wright-Fisher reproduction.

2

Individuals (N=4)

Generation
1

2

3

4

5

6

Figure 1: In this schematic example, the rightmost individual in generation 1 has genealogical descendants until generation 6, but left no genetic material in generations 5 and 6. By
generation 5 it has become a ghost; by generation 6 it is a ‘super-ghost’, in that it is now
ancestral to the entire population.

2. Ghost and super-ghost ancestors
Given a population at the present, an ancestral individual I is said to be a
ghost ancestor if:
(i) I is the genealogical ancestor of at least one individual at the present, and
(ii) I contributes nothing genetically to any individual at the present.
A super-ghost replaces condition (i) with the stronger condition:
(i)0 I is the genealogical ancestor of all individuals at the present.
A schematic example of a super-ghost is shown in Fig. 1.
2.1. The existence of super-ancestors: Chang’s result
Consider the genealogical ancestry of a randomly-mating biparental population under the neutral Wright-Fisher model. In this model, generations are
discrete, and each individual selects two parents uniformly at random from the
previous generation, and this process is extended back in time independently
from generation to generation. This generates a random genealogy for the population.
Because each individual has on average two offspring per generation, we
would expect individuals to leave a large number of offspring if their descending lineage survives the stochasticity of the first few generations. In fact, the
probability of eventually becoming ancestral to the complete population in a
randomly mating population of size N converges to 1 − ρ ≈ 0.7968 for large N ,
3

where ρ satisfies ρ = e−2+2ρ [3] (see also [4, 5, 6]). Because the expected number
of descendants of successful individuals initially grows close to exponentially, we
would expect that it must take at least log2 (N ) generations to become ancestral to the complete population. In fact, Chang [3] established the following two
tight asymptotic results that are key to this paper:
(a) the number of generations G1 required to find the first super-ancestor
1
approaches log2 (N ), in the sense that logG(N
) converges in probability to
2
1 as N grows; and
(b) the number of generations Ga until all individuals that left descendants
are super-ancestors approaches (1 + ζ) log2 (N ), where ζ ≈ 0.7698, in the
a
sense that (1+ζ)Glog
(N ) converges in probability to 1 as N grows.
2

2.2. The existence of super-ghosts
We consider again the genealogical model from [3], and model the transmission of genetic material. Given a genealogy, each individual receives one copy of
each chromosome from each parent. An individual transmits chromosomes by
recombining the two chromosome copies it has inherited. We model recombination as a Markovian copying process along the chromosome length: starting
from one edge, the transmitted chromosome is generated by copying one of the
two inherited chromosomal copies, with a transition rate between the two of 1
per Morgan.
Proposition 2.1. Under the random biparental genealogical model with discrete
generations of size N , the probability that there is a super-ghost ancestor within
c · log2 (N ) generations from the present converges to 1 as N grows, for any
c > 1.
The formal proof of this proposition is provided in the Appendix, and here we
provide an informal argument for the existence of super-ghosts and logarithmic
dependence on N . The proof has two steps: first, we show that ghosts exist,
i.e., that there are individuals that leave genealogical descendants but no genetic
material. Second, we show that the descendants are likely to become ancestral
to the entire population, ensuring that the ancestral individual is now a superghost. To estimate the timing it is convenient to proceed back in time. In a
Wright-Fisher model, the probability that an individual is the unique descendant
to an individual living G generations is nonzero. It can be easily calculated
through dynamic programming, and is trivially bounded below by P (1)G , where
P (1) is the probability of being an only child. In this particular case of a single
descending lineage, we can also easily show that the probability of leaving no
genetic material becomes nonzero in any reasonable model of recombination:
The descendant haploid genome received genetic contributions along 2G lineages
(some of the lineages may lead to the same ancestors). However, the expected
number of inherited recombination breakpoints that occurred in the intervening
generations is simply GL, where L is the length of the genome, in Morgans.

4

The expected number of independently inherited blocks is therefore GL + C,
where C is the number of chromosomes. If the number of lineages is greater
than the number of blocks (2G > GL + C), there must be some lineages that
have not contributed genetic material. Since the probability of having received
genetic material is independent of the lineage in the Wright-Fisher model, we
must have a finite probability that our ancestor did not leave genetic material
to the single descendant after G generations. Finally, using Chang’s result, this
descendant has a probability of about 1 − ρ ≈ 0.7968 of becoming the ancestor
of the complete population within (1+ζ) log2 (N ) generations. The formal proof
explains how this can be extended to any c > 1.
To estimate the prevalence of super-ghosts after a long time has elapsed,
consider again the diploid Wright-Fisher model with discrete generations of size
N , and a model of random genetic recombination involving genomes of B base
pairs. For a fixed population size N , let
• q(N, T ) be the probability that a randomly selected individual T generations ago contributes nothing genetically to the present generation;
• q 0 (N, T ) be the probability that a randomly selected individual T generations ago is a super-ghost.
Proposition 2.2.
(i) limN →∞ limT →∞ q(N, T ) = 1,
(ii) limN →∞ limT →∞ q 0 (N, T ) = 1 − ρ ≈ 0.7968.
Once again, the formal proof of this proposition is provided in the Appendix,
but the informal argument is straightforward: in a finite, constant-size population, genetic drift at each site will eventually lead to the fixation in the population of the allele inherited from a single ancestor. If the genome is finite, we
only have to wait a finite amount of time until each site has fixed, and at most
B ancestors will prevail. If we increase N while leaving B fixed, the proportion
of individuals who contribute genetic material can be made arbitrarily small.
Note that this proof of Proposition 2.2 requires a genome with a finite number
B of base pairs, contrary to other results in this article, which also hold in the
continuous limit where B goes to infinity as the length of the genome L is held
constant. It may be possible to generalize the proof to a continuous genome,
however we were not able to produce such a proof.
The order of the limits does matter in Proposition (2.2), since taking the
large-N limit first would make it impossible for an individual to become ancestral to the complete population. There are many ways to relax our definition of
‘successful’ to make it realizable in this context (e.g., leaving a finite but large
number of descendants), and we conjecture that in that context, the majority
of genealogically ‘successful’ ancestors leave no genetic material independent of
the limit order. We expect that the convergence to the large-N limit is rapid
for short time-frames: the randomness of individual genealogies is the dominant
stochastic factor, and is relatively unaffected by the finite population size.
5

3. Simulations
We performed diploid Wright-Fisher simulations, keeping track of the list
of ancestors for each individual and the ancestral contributor of each inherited
genetic segment. We simulated 36 chromosomes of length 1 Morgan to mimic
the length of the human genome, while preserving a convenient chromosome
exchangeability. We simulated populations of sizes 20 to 4000 over 800 generations. Each population was run multiple times, such that we had simulated the
descendants of 20,000 ancestors for each population size.
The earliest occurrence of a super-ghost was after 12 generations in a population of size 20, and after 21 generations in a population of 4000 (Fig. 3).
This variation is due to the slightly longer time needed to become ancestral
for the whole population in the larger population, as expected from Chang’s
result. Soon after, all individuals are either genealogical ancestors to the whole
population, or to no one.
The initial rate of super-ghost creation in that stage becomes roughly independent of population size, and the number of super-ghosts, once they first
appear, grows approximately logarithmically with T for N > 100 . As argued
above, this initial independence on population size makes sense; since alleles
inherited from ghost ancestors are ultimately unsuccessful, they are unlikely
to have reached frequencies high enough that the finite population matters.
Eventually, some alleles reach sufficient frequency to be affected by the finite
population size. Some of them will fix in the population, guaranteeing that the
ancestral individual will never become a ghost. In this way, drift reduces the
probability of becoming a ghost.
The number of ancestral individuals who are ghosts should stop increasing
once each site along the genome is fixed for a given ancestral haplotype, since
individuals whose haplotypes fixed in the population are guaranteed to leave
genetic descendants. We can observe this for the smaller populations on Fig. 3.
Fig. 2 shows how the patterns of fixation vary with population size, and how
they correlate along the genome.
For the population of size 20, only 0.4% of ancestors ended up as superghosts, much less than one per simulated population. The proportion reaches
1.2% in the populations larger than 1000 after 800 generations. Simulations
up to 2500 generations in populations of size 2500 showed a continuation of
the logarithmic increase, with 1.8% of super-ghosts at that point. Assuming a
constant population size of 10, 000 and a generation time of 30y, the number
of super-ghosts living between 10,000 and 50,000 years ago would therefore be
a bit above 100, in that model. However, population structure and population
size changes are likely to affect the proportion of ghost ancestors.
Simulations also provide insight into the different factors that influence the
proportion of ghosts. For example, we expect that the probability of being a
ghost decreases with the length of the genome, since a longer genome means
more opportunities to inherit genetic material. The proportion of super-ghosts
in the population as a function of genome length, estimated from simulations,
is shown in Fig. 4. The long tail observed in this graph indicates that the
6

Fraction of the genome that fixed

1.0

N=20

0.8

N=50
N=100

0.6

Theory

0.4

N=200

Simulation

0.2
N=500
0.0
0

200

400

600

800

Number of generations

400

Positions where
individual fixed

Positions where
individual fixed

Number of surviving lineages

1

...

Time (generations)

1
2
3
4
5
20

0

Position along the genome (Morgans)

1

Figure 2: (Top) Proportion of the genome fixed for any ancestral haplotype. Simulated values
are taken from a single simulated population by population size. Theoretical estimates are
derived from Equation 3.27 in [16]. (Bottom) Number of individuals who left descendants at
each position along a chromosome of length 1 Morgan in a population of size 20. The colored
row shows the identity of the surviving individual at each position—there are 8 surviving
lineages in this example.

7

% of super-ghosts

1.2
N
4000
2500
1250
500
200
100
50
20

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

10

20

50

100

200

500

Generation ð
Figure 3: Probability that a founding individual is a super-ghost as a function of the time
elapsed, for different population sizes. Independent replicates were performed for each population size so that 20,000 individuals were simulated for each population size. Shaded areas
represent 1-sigma deviations assuming that the number of ghosts is Poisson distributed.

probability of leaving genetic material along different chromosomes is strongly
correlated. Because of the independent assortment of chromosomes, these correlations can only be mediated by the shared genealogies: individuals that left
no genetic material over the first 25 chromosomes are likely to have genealogies
favorable to becoming ghosts.
Such ghost-friendly genealogies occur if a single descendant survives after
many generations, because the probability of inheriting genetic material along
a single lineage decreases rapidly with the number of generations, and the probability that a lone descendant is an ancestor to the complete future population
is close to 80%. We find that in fact all super-ghosts follow a trajectory with
few offspring over many initial generations and are in the tail of the distribution
with regard to this feature (see Fig. 5), with a tendency for the more extreme
genealogies to lead to earlier ghosts status. Genealogies that maintain a small
number of offspring for many generations are rare because the expected initial
growth rate in the number of offspring is 2 in a constant-size diploid population;
the number of offspring either reaches 0 or increases rapidly.
Based on this intuition, we expect that the number of individuals that will
become ghosts is sensitive to what happens in the first few generations. To
investigate this, we consider a few demographic scenarios: exponential growth
and exponential decline (r = ±0.2%), early short bottlenecks, and early population spikes. Even though the models of population growth and decline lead to
5-fold population size changes over the 800 generations of the simulation, the
impact on the final number of ghosts is at most modest for populations that have
reached fixation. The number of super ghosts in 1000 simulated populations of

8

% of super-ghosts

50
40
30
20
10
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Genome Length HMorgansL
Figure 4: Probability that a founding individual is a super-ghost as a function of genome
length, after 2500 generations in a population of size 2500. Three replicate simulations were
performed with 36 unit-length chromosomes, and results for each genome length are obtained
by downsampling the chromosomes 10 times and averaging the results.

100
Surviving lineages

50
20
10
5
2
1
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of generations
Figure 5: Number of offspring per generation per individual in a diploid Wright-Fisher population of 2500 individuals over 800 generations. Individuals that will become super-ghosts are
colored according to the number of generations that were necessary to achieve ghost status–
blue for generations 1 to 150, red for 151-800.

9

size 20 over 800 generations was 78 in the constant-size population (0.39% of
individuals), 68 in the declining population (0.34% of individuals), and 76 in the
growth model (0.38% of individuals). The difference was more important for
larger populations where fixation had not yet been reached: in the population
of size 500, the number of super ghosts was 229 in the constant-size population,
compared to 375 in the declining population. We can interpret the difference
as a combination of two factors: first, the rate of genetic drift accelerates over
time in a decreasing population, such that the initial rate of ghost creation is
expected to be elevated compared to a population whose size does not decrease.
Second, even with equal drift, fixation can be reached earlier in a smaller population because the available frequencies are more coarsely discretized. If we let
the declining population evolve for 478 generations, to ensure an equal amount
of drift to the constant-size population, the number of super ghosts is reduced
to 274, and the remaining difference with the constant-size population is likely
due to the earlier fixation. These two effects can substantially affect the initial
rate of ghost creation, but do not necessarily lead to an increase in the long-time
ghost probability, as we saw for the smaller populations.
To study the effect of rapid population size changes in the early population
history, we considered a piece-wise population change between generation 5 and
generation 15, with results displayed in Fig. 6. We find that the probability of
becoming a ghost reaches a maximum for decreases in population size. Early
expansions dramatically reduce the creation of super-ghosts, whereas bottlenecks can increase the proportion of ghosts (Figure 6, Top). The intuition for
this behavior is presented in Figure 6, bottom. By generation 5, ancestors have
an expected 25 = 32 descending lineages. In a large population, these lineages
correspond to distinct individuals, so that an abrupt population decline vastly
increases the probability of leaving a small number of descendants. In smaller
populations, the descendants are less likely to be distinct, and the abrupt decline makes it more likely that an ancestor leaves no descendants, and increases
the likelihood that survivors fix in the population. When the population returns to its initial size at generation 15, most individuals left either 0 or a large
number of descendants, so population size fluctuations are unlikely to create
single-descendant lineages.
4. Discussion
We find approximately logarithmic growth of the probability of becoming a
ghost starting between 10 and 20 generations (that is, we see linear behavior on
the log-scale, Fig. 3). This is reminiscent of the prediction [1] that a haploid
y
block of Morgan length y < 1 would leave descendants with probability log(yG)
after G generations for log(yG) >> 1. Thus, both short- and long- time dynamics seem to depend on log(G). This logarithmic slow-down explains why
we may, at the same time, lose all genetic information about relatively recent
ancestors while retaining some information about many very distant ancestors.
According to simulations, approximately 0.5% of individuals are expected to be

10

Proportion of super ghosts

0.010
0.008
0.006
N=50

0.004
0.002
0.000
0

N=20
1

2

3

4

5

Probability of leaving unique lineage

Early expansion/bottleneck ratio
0.008
Generations
8

0.006

9

0.004

10

0.002
0.000

1

2

3

4

5

Early expansion/bottleneck ratio
Figure 6: (Top) Probability of becoming a super ghost for different perturbations of the
population size. Populations of size 20 and 50 were simulated for 800 generations. Between
generations 5 and 15, the population size was scaled by factors ranging between 0.1 and 5
to simulate early bottleneck and expansions. (Bottom) Probability that an individual leaves
exactly one descendant after 8, 9, or 10 generations for an infinite population.

11

super-ghosts in a large, constant-size population after 100 generationsm, and it
reaches 1.4% after 1000 generations. These results are somewhat higher than
those of [1] et al, who found 1.9% survival rate for a haploid genome after 1000
generations, which corresponds to approximately 0.77% in a diploid genome
(see Appendix). The difference is likely due to the limited sample size of 100
early genealogies used in [1] for this particular calculation. A key feature of
individual histories that determines persistence in the population is the number
of surviving lineages in the first few generations after an individual lived. The
number of “favorable” genealogies – falling in the lower right of Fig. 5 – may
be as low as 2 in the analysis of [1], causing a high relative variance.
Demography affects the probability of becoming a ghost and the speed at
which this happens. Convergence to the infinite-population limit appears accurate for N > G, a regime where the effect of drift is relatively weak. For
small populations, the rate of creation of super-ghosts decreases for G > N ,
approaching a plateau: each individual ancestral allele has a finite probability
of fixing in the complete population, ensuring indefinite descendance. Once all
individual genetic contributions have either fixed or disappeared, there can be
no more new ghosts. The probability that an individual contributes genetically
to descendants at infinite time depends on the slow race between drift, which
fixes or eliminates haplotypes in the population, and recombination, which creates new haplotypes at unfixed sites. This race will eventually be interrupted
by the discreteness of the genome, leading to the result from Proposition 2.2
that the probability of leaving genetic material goes to zero as the population
size goes to infinity. The same is true in the continuous genome limit in the
model of [1]. However, the approach to the limit where all individuals become
ghosts may be slow for both time G and population size N .
The probability of leaving genetic material in finite populations is unknown
beyond the cases simulated here, and we lack even approximate expressions.
However, our simulations suggest relatively rapid convergence to the infinitepopulation-size limit, and we may venture a few additional conjectures: A) the
probability of leaving genetic material decreases monotonically with population
size, as suggested in Fig. 3. B) the majority of the eventual fixation events
occur within the first cN generations for some sufficiently large constant c (as
suggested by Fig. 2 ; C) the infinite-population size estimate is accurate for
G < N (as suggested in Fig. 3). If these hold, the long-term probability of
leaving genetic material in a population of size N lies between the infinitepopulation results at times N and cN . Because of the extremely slow rate of
ghost creation, the resulting interval in ghost probability may be quite narrow.
Extrapolating the observed logarithmic growth and assuming c = 1000, the
survival probability at infinite time of an individual in a population of size 7
billion would be between 69% and 72% in the continuous-genome limit.
However, such predictions are difficult to apply to actual populations, because of the potential large effect that early departures from model assumptions
can have on the long-term dynamics of the system. We found that even very
short bottlenecks and population size increases can have a large impact on genetic survival probability. We therefore expect that even slight departures from
12

the Wright-Fisher reproduction can have similar large effects on survival probability. In the long term, population structure and migrations can dramatically
affect the rate at which genetic material fixes and disappears. We found that
short-lived, early population size fluctuations had a large impact on the longterm genetic contributions of individuals, with bottlenecks leading to the highest
probability of becoming a super ghost.
These results emphasize that early genealogies can have a massive impact on
the long-term dynamics of a population when statistical outliers are important.
Modelling of pedigree structure, including effects such as non-Poisson offspring
distribution, correlation in offspring number among successive generations, and
range expansions (c.f. [12]) are therefore key to a better understanding of longterm evolutionary outcomes.
5. Acknowledgements
We thank two anonymous reviewers, and the handling editor for their suggestions on an earlier version of this paper. We also thank Armandine Veber
for two helpful comments concerning the technical aspects of the proofs. MS
thanks the Allan Wilson Centre for funding support. SG thanks CIHR operating grant MOP-134855 and the CIHR Canada Research Chair in Statistical
and Population Genetics.

13

6. References
References
[1] Baird, S.J.E., Barton, N.H. and Etheridge, A.M. 2003. The distribution of
surviving blocks of an ancestral genome. Theor. Pop. Biol. 64, 451–471.
[2] Barton, N.H and Etheridge, A.M. 2011. The relation between reproductive
value and genetic contribution. Genetics, 188(4), 953–73.
[3] Chang, J. 1999. Recent common ancestors of all present-day individuals.
Adv. Appl. Probab. 31, 1002–1026.
[4] Derrida, B., Manrubia, S., Zanette, D., 1999. Statistical properties of genealogical trees. Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1987–1990.
[5] Derrida, B., Manrubia, S., Zanette, D., 2000a. Distribution of repetitions
of ancestors in genealogical trees. Physica A 281, 1–16.
[6] Derrida, B., Manrubia, S., Zanette, D., 2000b. On the genealogy of a population of biparental individuals. J. Theoret. Biol. 203, 303–315.
[7] Donnelly, K. P. 1983. The probability that related individuals share some
section of genome identical by descent. Theor. Pop. Biol. 23, 34–63.
[8] Donnelly, P., Wiuf, C., Hein, J., Slatkin, M., Ewens, W.J., Kingman,
J.F.C., Chang, J.T., (1999). Discussion: Recent common ancestors of all
present-day individuals. Adv. Appl. Probab. 31, 1027–1038.
[9] Lachance, J. 2009. Inbreeding, pedigree size, and the most recent common
ancestor of humanity. J. Theor. Biol. 261, 238—247.
[10] Manrubia, S., Derrida, B., Zanette, D., 2003. Genealogy in the era of genomics. Am. Sci. 91, 158–165.
[11] Matsen, F.A. and Evans, S.N. 2008. To what extent does genealogical ancestry imply genetic ancestry? Theor. Pop. Biol. 74, 182–190.
[12] Moreau, C., Bhérer, C., Vézina, H., Jomphe, M., Labuda, D., and Excoffier,
L. 2011. Deep human genealogies reveal a selective advantage to be on an
expanding wave front. Science 334: 1148–1150.
[13] Rohde, D., S. Olson, and J. Chang. 2004. Modeling the recent common
ancestry of all living humans. Nature 431, 562–566.
[14] Thatte, B. 2013. Reconstructing pedigrees: some identifiability questions
for a recombination-mutation model. J. Math. Biol. 66: 37–74.
[15] Thatte, B. and Steel, M. (2008). Reconstructing pedigrees: A stochastic
perspective. J. Theor. Biol. 251(3): 440–449.

14

[16] Wakeley, J. Coalescent theory, an introduction, Greenwood Village, Colorado: Roberts & Company Publishers, 2009.
[17] Wakeley, J., King, L, Low, B.S. Ramachandran, S. 2012. Gene genealogies within a fixed pedigree, and the robustness of Kingman’s coalescent.
Genetics 190: 1433–1445.
[18] Wiuf, C. and Hein, J. 1997. On the number of ancestors to a DNA sequence.
Genetics 147: 1459–1468.

7. Appendix
Proof of Proposition 2.1
Under a biparental model, for any individual v we will say that an ancestor
w of v from k generations earlier is a k-critical ancestor for v if the following
two properties hold:
(i) w leaves no genetic contribution in v; and
(ii) the only genealogical descendant of w in the same generation as v is v.
If a common ancestor of all individuals at the present has a k-critical ancestor
w, then w is an ancestral super-ghost. We will attempt to produce such an
ancestor, and our first step is to produce a k-critical ancestor.
Let pk (v) be the probability that v has a k-critical ancestor. Under the
random biparental genealogical model, pk (v) is the same for all individuals v in
the same generation, and so we may write it as pk . Moreover, for some value
k > 2, the probability pk is strictly positive. This follows by combining three
observations:
1. The probability that v is the only descendant of an individual living k
generations ago is bounded below by P (1)k , where P (1) is the probability
that any individual x is an only child, i.e., that at least one of its parents
had only one offspring.
2. P (1) ≥ e−2 independently of N . This is because, under the random
biparental genealogical model, P (1) ≥ (1 − N1 )2(N −1) , which decreases
monotonically with N to e−2 as N grows.
3. The probability that no genetic material is inherited along a single lineage
of length k is strictly positive for a value k > 2 and independent of N (see
e.g. [7]). This probability depends on k, on the recombination rate, and on
the length of the genome. To establish the bound from Proposition 2.1,
however, we only use the fact that the probability is nonzero for some
finite k [7].
Thus for some value rk > 0 we have: pk (v) ≥ rk , independent of N and v.
Next, let 1 < c0 < c. Then from [3], the following event AN holds with
probability at least 1 − (N ), with limN →∞ (N ) = 0:
15

AN : at generation G = dc0 log2 (N )e before the present, there is at least one
common ancestor of all individuals at the present.
Consider the following process for generating a super-ghost, when AN holds.
Select one of these common ancestors at generation G, and call it v. If v has a
k-critical ancestor, w, then select w as a super-ghost and stop. Otherwise, select
an ancestor of v at generation G + k before the present. This ancestor (call it
v 0 ) is also a common ancestor of every individual at the present. Whether v 0
has a k-critical ancestor is independent of AN and of whether v has a k-critical
ancestor, since all these depend only on the genealogies among non-overlapping
generations. In this iterative way, we can try to identify a k-critical ancestor
at every k generations back in time from generation G. Let us attempt this M
times, back to generation G + M k. Since we seek to exhibit super-ghosts within
c · log2 (N ) generations, where c > c0 > 1, we can choose M up to
M (N ) = b(c − c0 ) log2 (N )/kc.

(1)

This can be made arbitrarily large by increasing N .
Thus, the probability that the process described fails to locate a super-ghost
within M k + G generations conditional on AN is bounded above by (1 − rk )M ,
and this can be made less than any δ > 0 by ensuring that N is large enough
2 (1/δ)
that M (N ) > − log
log2 (1−rk ) . Consequently, the probability of the existence of a
super-ghost conditional on AN is at least 1 − δ. Since limN →∞ P r(AN ) = 1,
and δ can be chosen arbitrarily small, the probability of a super-ghost can be
made as close to 1 as we like by selecting N sufficiently large. This establishes
the result.
The above argument can be extended to handle extensions of Chang’s model
to allow for population structure, as described in [13]. Note that we do not
expect that our bounds are tight, which is why we have turned to simulations
for estimates that take into account the different correlations among individuals.
Proof of Proposition 2.2: Label the positions along the genome of each individual 1, 2, . . . , B. For a given position x let MT = MT (x) be the number
of individuals in generation T before the present for whom there is a path of
genetic inheritance of position x to at least one individual at the present. Under a Chang-type Markovian model of genealogical ancestry and an associated
Markovian process of recombination, the sequence M0 = N, M1 , M2 . . . is a finite state Markov chain with state space 1, . . . , B, and this chain has a strictly
positive transition probability for the transition i → j precisely when i ≥ j ≥ 1.
Moreover, pii = 1 only for i = 1. Thus i = 1 is the unique absorbing state of
this Markov process, and so:
lim P r(MT (x) = 1) = 1.

T →∞

(2)

Let ET (x) be the event that MT (x) = 1. Notice that the collection of events
{ET (x) : x ∈ {1, . . . , B}} are not independent (through shared genealogical

16

ancestry, and also the resulting shared recombination history) however Eqn. (2)
implies that we nevertheless have:
lim P r(

T →∞

B
\

ET (x)) = 1,

(3)

x=1

TB
PB
since Pr( x=1 ET (x)) ≥ 1 − x=1 (1 − Pr(ET (x)), by Boole’s inequality. Now
TB
EN,T := x=1 ET (x) is the event that each of the B sites in the present population of size N trace back to single ancestors T generations ago. Conditional on
this event, these ancestral individuals need not all be different, but the number
of them is at most B, and the remaining N − B individuals contribute nothing
genetically to the present population. Thus, if we let GN,T denote the event
that a randomly selected ancestor T generations in the past contributes nothing
genetically to the present population of size N , then (for all N, T ):
P r(GN,T |EN,T ) ≥ (N − B)/N = 1 − B/N,
and so:
lim

lim P r(GN,T |EN,T ) = 1.

N →∞ T →∞

(4)

Now,
q(N, T ) = P r(GN,T ) ≥ P r(GN,T |EN,T )P r(EN,T ),
and combining this with Eqn. (4) and limT →∞ P r(EN,T ) = 1 (from Eqn. (3))
we obtain Part (i).
For Part (ii), notice that q 0 (N, T ) is the probability that a randomly selected
individual T generations ago simultaneously satisfies two properties; namely (A)
making no genetic contribution to the present population, and (B) having every
individual at the present as a genealogical descendant. Now, in the limit as
T → ∞, the proportion of randomly selected individuals T generations ago
that satisfy property (A) is at least 1 − B/N , with probability converging to 1
(from Eqn. (3)) while the proportion of individuals that satisfy property (B)
converges in probability to 1−ρ ≈ 0.7968. Consequently, in the limit as T → ∞,
the probability that a randomly selected individual T generations ago satisfies
both properties ((A) and (B)) lies within a term of order N1 from 1 − ρ. Finally,
taking the outer limit, namely N → ∞, we obtain Part (ii). This completes the
proof.
Conversion of haploid to diploid values
We wish to compare our diploid results with those of Baird et al. [1], who
considered survival probability of a single haploid genome (rather than a diploid
genome), let pd be the haploid probability of leaving no genetic descendants
for a single haploid genome, pn the haploid probability of leaving genealogical
descendants but no genetic material (i.e., the probability of being a ghost),
pg the haploid probability of being a ghost conditional on leaving genealogical
descendants, and ρ ' 0.2032 the probability of leaving no pedigree descendants
(haploid or diploid). We have pn = (1 − ρ)pg , and pd = ρ + pn . A diploid
individual leaves a Poisson number of haploid genomes, each of which evolves
17

independently in the infinite-population model of Baird et al. Let pD , pN , and
pG be the corresponding probabilities for a diploid individual. For a constant
population size, the mean of this Poisson distribution is 2, and so
pD =

X e−2 2n
pn = e−2+2pd .
n! d

n≥0

Substituting pd = ρ + (1 − ρ)pg into this last equation, and noting that pN =
pD − ρ we obtain:
pN = e−2(1−ρ)(1−pg ) − ρ.

18

