1

Separability of drag and thrust in undulatory animals and
machines
Rahul Bale,1,+ Anup A. Shirgaonkar,1,+ Izaak D. Neveln,2 Amneet Pal Singh Bhalla,1

arXiv:1402.1544v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 7 Feb 2014

Malcolm A. MacIver,1,2,3,∗ and Neelesh A. Patankar1,∗
1 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Northwestern University,
2 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University,
3 Department of Neurobiology, Northwestern University,
2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
+ Authors made equal contributions
∗ Authors for correspondence (n-patankar@northwestern.edu, maciver@northwestern.edu)

Abstract
For nearly a century, researchers have tried to understand the swimming of aquatic animals in terms of a
balance between the forward thrust from swimming movements and drag on the body. Prior approaches
have failed to provide a separation of these two forces for undulatory swimmers such as lamprey and eels,
where most parts of the body are simultaneously generating drag and thrust. We nonetheless show that
this separation is possible, and delineate its fundamental basis in undulatory swimmers. Our approach
unifies a vast diversity of undulatory aquatic animals (anguilliform, sub-carangiform, gymnotiform, balistiform, rajiform) and provides design principles for highly agile bioinspired underwater vehicles. This
approach has practical utility within biology as well as engineering. It is a predictive tool for use in
understanding the role of the mechanics of movement in the evolutionary emergence of morphological
features relating to locomotion. For example, we demonstrate that the drag-thrust separation framework
helps to predict the observed height of the ribbon fin of electric knifefish, a diverse group of neotropical
fishes which are an important model system in sensory neurobiology. We also show how drag-thrust
separation leads to models that can predict the swimming velocity of an organism or a robotic vehicle.

2

1

Introduction

The hydrodynamics of aquatic locomotion has importance across multiple domains, from basic biology
to the engineering of highly maneuverable underwater vehicles. Within biology, beyond the interest in
aquatic locomotion, there is extensive use of several aquatic model systems within neuroscience such
as lamprey for research into spinal cord function [1], zebrafish for developmental neuroscience [2], and
weakly electric fish for the neurobiology of sensory processing (reviews: [3, 4]). Within engineering, the
maneuverability and efficiency of fish is inspiring new styles of propulsion and maneuvering in underwater
vehicles [5–7]. The implementation of engineered solutions will depend on the resolution of open issues
in hydrodynamics of aquatic locomotion. Finally, an understanding of the hydrodynamics of aquatic
locomotion is critical for insight into the evolution of fish [8] and their land-based descendants.
While the hydrodynamics of swimming organisms have been studied actively for almost a century,
there are key questions that remain unresolved. This work focuses on one such unresolved issue that
pertains to the mechanisms of drag and thrust generation. The decomposition of the total force on a
swimming organism into drag and thrust is desirable because it can fundamentally reveal how an organism
produces forward push to balance the resistance to motion from the surrounding fluid. It can also lead
to simple quantitative models to predict swimming velocity of organisms or artificial underwater vehicles
based on their kinematics.
If we consider a boat with a propeller, the decomposition of thrust and drag is straightforward since all
the thrust is coming from the propeller, and most of the drag is coming from the hull. However, in the case
of anguilliform swimmers such as eels, where the entire body undulates, there are no distinct portions of
the body that alone produce thrust or cause drag. In other groups of fishes there are undulatory elongated
fins along the ventral midline (Fig. 1a, knifefish such as those of the Gymnotiformes and Notopteridae),
dorsal midline (Gymarchus nilotics, the oarfish Regalecus glesne), along ventral and dorsal midlines
(triggerfish of the Balastidae), and along the lateral margins of the body (certain rays and skates of
the Batoidea, cuttlefish). For these animals, undulating fins may be regarded as the primary thrust
generators and the relatively straight body may be regarded as the primary source of drag. However, this
apparent decomposition of drag and thrust regions should not be considered to imply that an undulatory
fin itself has no drag. This is clearly not the case because a hypothetical undulatory ribbon fin that is not
attached to a body will undergo steady swimming. The drag of the ribbon fin and the thrust it generates

3

will be in balance in that case.
Arguably the most widely cited analysis of drag-thrust decomposition is due to Lighthill [10]. He
considered the force generated from undulatory motion by elongated animals such as eels [11], and later,
with Blake, considered forces on ribbon fins of balistiform and gymnotiform swimmers [12]. The analysis
was based on a “reactive” theory of propulsion that was proposed for high Reynolds number swimming.
Lighthill considered a decomposition of the force on the body into resistive and reactive components that
lead to drag and thrust, respectively. He defined the force on a section of the body as resistive if it depends,
linearly or non-linearly, on the instantaneous velocity of that section relative to the surrounding fluid.
Reactive forces were defined as those due to inertia of the surrounding fluid (the “added mass” effect),
proportional to the rate of change of the relative velocity between the fluid and surface of the swimming
body. Lighthill then provided expressions for the reactive thrust force using a simplified potential flow
theory [11, 12]. No model for drag was developed.
To address this long standing issue, we define three fundamental principles for the decomposition
of forces arising from undulatory swimming into drag and thrust. First, (D1) the body movement
(kinematics) creating drag needs to be separated from the body movement creating thrust, such that the
sum of these two movements results in the originally observed swimming motion of the animal. Second,
(D2) these decomposed movements should be such that the surface of the body will move in a continuous
fashion so that the kinematics can be realized in experiments or simulations. Third, (D3) the sum of the
force due to the drag–inducing movement with the force due to the thrust–inducing movement needs to
equal the force estimated from the original (undecomposed) movement of the fish. Requirement (D2) will
enable three independent experiments to estimate forces and develop predictive models for swimming:
i) the force based on the undecomposed motion; ii) the force resulting purely from the drag kinematics,
defined as drag; iii) the force resulting purely from the thrust kinematics, defined as thrust.
In this work we propose a new way to decompose drag and thrust that satisfies conditions D1 to D3.
Using an idealized elongated anal fin (hereafter ribbon fin) of weakly electric fish (Fig. 1a) but with no
body as a model system, we present results from simulations and experiments supporting our approach.
The scope of applicability of the decomposition will be further demonstrated through simulations of the
eel Anguilla rostrata, the larval zebrafish Danio rerio, the black ghost knifefish Apteronotus albifrons, and
the mackerel Scomber scombrus. These examples show where the decomposition is valid, and where it
becomes invalid. For a case where it is valid—swimming with elongated fins such as in the knifefish—we

4

a
b

c

head

X

wave motion
fin base along
body insertion

fin ray
Wave length

θmax

λ

Y
Figure 1. a) A median fin (ribbon fin) undulatory swimmer (gymnotiform swimmer): Apteronotus
albifrons, the black ghost knifefish of South America (photograph courtesy of Per Erik Sviland). b) A
backward traveling wave on the ribbon fin. c) Geometric configuration of the ribbon fin without the
body for computations. Figure adapted from Fig. 1 of [9].

5

go on to show that drag thrust decomposition can be used to predict an important morphological feature:
the height of the fin that maximizes cost of transport. Our predictions agree well with the measured
height of the fin in a sample of 13 species in a representative family of knifefishes, the Apteronotidae.

2

Results

2.1

Kinematic decomposition

To demonstrate drag–thrust decomposition, we consider the same model problem considered by Lighthill
and Blake [12] and analyze the forces on the elongated median fin (hereafter “ribbon fin”) of a gymnotiform swimmer (Fig. 1a). We numerically simulate a translating ribbon fin with a traveling wave (Fig. 1b)
along it. The traveling wave on the ribbon fin was described by the angular position of any point on
the ribbon fin θ(x, t) = θmax sin 2π( λx − f t), where θmax is the maximum angle of excursion, f is the
frequency, and λ is the wavelength of undulations. In the simulations there is no attached body. The
fin morphology is shown in Fig. 1c. The force on the ribbon fin from the fluid is numerically computed
for different values of the translational velocity U of the fin and the traveling wave velocity Uw (given by
f λ). The wave motion is caused by the lateral oscillatory velocity field Vw on the fin surface. Vw , and by
consequence Uw , were varied by changing the frequency f of the traveling wave. The fin had two waves
along its length [9, 13].
To understand our proposed kinematic decomposition, consider a generic waveform of constant amplitude that has a lateral oscillatory velocity Vw and a corresponding traveling wave velocity Uw (Fig. 2-a1
& a2). Let U be the forward velocity of the fin as a whole. This is the undecomposed kinematics which
is decomposed into two parts (Fig. 2-a2 & a3). The first decomposed motion, which we term the drag–
causing perfect slithering motion, occurs when the forward velocity of the fin is equal to the backward
velocity of the traveling wave (Uw ). As a result, the fin appears to move along a stationary wave–shaped
track (Fig. 2-b2). Each point on the fin has a velocity that is tangential to its surface (VD in Fig. 2-a2).
In this case the fluid is dragged forward by the tangential velocity along the fin surface which results in
a backward (drag) force on the fin from the fluid. The second decomposed motion, which we term the
thrust generating frozen fin motion, occurs when the fin is frozen in its undulatory shape, and that frozen
shape drifts backward with a velocity equal to the velocity of the traveling wave minus the translational
velocity of the fin (Uw − U ), when Uw is greater than U . This motion pushes the fluid backward which

6

a1

U
VD

VW

a2

b1

Δd

b2
UW
VW
VD

Δddrag

α

Drag mechanism

a3

b3
UW - U

Thrust mechanism

Δdthrust

Figure 2. a) The proposed kinematic decomposition into drag and thrust producing mechanisms. The
front end is on the left. b) The kinematic decomposition applied to a modeled black ghost knifefish.
Each row, from top to bottom in each of the undecomposed, drag ,and thrust mechanism, is at
increasing instants of time.

7

in turn produces a forward (thrust) force on the fin (Fig. 2-a3 & b3).
In the idealization of the traveling wave as a sinusoid of constant amplitude, superposition of the
kinematics of the perfect slithering and frozen fin motions results in the undecomposed kinematics of
the fin surface. This fulfills both condition D1 (separated body movements add up to give original body
movements) and condition D2 (the separated body movements are without discontinuities and physically
realizable). This kinematic decomposition would be exact in case of an infinitely long fin. However, this
is not the case for the finite fin length that we consider. For example, in the frozen fin case, the wave can
be considered frozen in different phases. Despite this, our computational fluid simulations show that the
thrust force does not depend strongly on the phase as long as there is more than one full wave on the fin,
as is the case here. We next show that the kinematic decomposition also fulfills the requirement that the
force of drag and the force of thrust sum to the undecomposed force from the fin (D3).

2.2

Dynamic decomposition

Dynamic decomposition here implies the decomposition of forces on the swimming body. Without loss
of generality we consider a traveling wave that is moving backward, as in Fig. 1b. If the decomposition
into drag and thrust is valid, then the total force F on the fin should satisfy the following equation

F [ U, Uw ] = sgn[ Uw − U ] T [ Uw − U ] − D[ Uw ],

(1)

where square brackets indicate “function-of”, T is thrust, D is drag, and sgn[·] gives the sign of the
argument. The data for F [U, Uw ] are plotted in Fig. 3a.
We performed a separate set of simulations for the perfect slithering motion (U = Uw ) for different
values of Uw . The force on the ribbon-fin in this case is D[Uw ], which is plotted in Fig. 3b.
Using Eqn. 1 and the results in Fig. 3b we calculate the thrust T [Uw − U ] for each data point in
Fig. 3a. If the decomposition is valid then the resulting data should be a well defined function of Uw − U .
This is found to be so in Fig. 3c. Additionally, the results for T [Uw − U ], obtained above, should also
match results from another set of simulations for the frozen fin case. To check this we performed frozen
fin simulations for different values of the fin translational velocity Uf . There is no traveling wave in this
case. The force on the ribbon fin in this case is T [Uf ] which should be the same function as T [Uw − U ]
with Uf replaced by (Uw − U ). The solid line of Fig. 3c confirms this expectation.

8

1

U = 3 cm/s
U = 0 cm/s
U = 15 cm/s

2

2

a

Drag (mN)

Force (mN)

1

0
0

w

U = 15 cm/s
−25

−15

−5

−1

−2
−25

5

15
25
U −U (cm/s)
w

−5

−2

4

10
20
U (cm/s)

c

30

w

2

−1

−15

b

1

Thrust (mN)

2

0
0
5

15

25

10
20
30
Uw−U, Uf (cm/s)

Figure 3. a) The computed total force on the ribbon fin vs. Uw − U for different parameters. The
legend identifies different simulation sets. For example, the set with Uw = 15 cm/s was the one where
Uw was fixed and the value of U was changed. b) Drag , i.e., the force on a ribbon fin during perfect
slithering motion. c) Thrust T computed as a function of Uw − U for each data point in (a) by
assuming the kinematic decomposition (Fig. 2 and Eqn. 1). These data are shown by solid dots.
Separate frozen fin simulations were conducted as a function of Uf , shown by the dashed line. The dots
cluster along this line giving evidence for the successful decomposition of drag and thrust.

9

Free swimming - Velocity

Free swimming - Pressure

Slithering - Velocity

Slithering - Pressure

Frozen - Velocity

Frozen - Pressure

-1.1 -0.8 -0.5 -0.2 0 .1 0 .3
Velocity (m/s)

-0.18 -0.12 -0.06 0 0 .03
Pressure (kPa)

Figure 4. The axial velocity (left) and pressure (right) fields in a cross-sectional plane at the bottom
edge of the ribbon fin for three cases. Top: Normal case with U = 3 cm/s and Uw = 15 cm/s. Middle:
Perfect slithering motion with U = 15 cm/s and Uw = 15 cm/s. Bottom: Frozen fin motion with a
backward (i.e. to the right) velocity of 12 cm/s. The legend for axial velocity (left) show magnitudes
that are scaled by Uw = 15 cm/s. In the contour plot velocity to the left (i.e. forward direction) is
positive and to the right (backward) is negative. The legend for pressure (right) show magnitudes
scaled by ρUw2 where Uw = 15 cm/s.
Thus, we have two new results: first, an approach to separate the mechanisms of drag and thrust,
and second we obtain a correlation not only for the thrust (Fig. 3c) but also for the drag (Fig. 3b) on an
undulatory propulsor.

2.3

The spatial segregation of drag- and thrust-related flows

Consider a ribbon fin moving with U = 3 cm/s and Uw = 15 cm/s. Through simulation, the total
forward force is found to be 0.46 mN. The drag causing perfect slithering mode has U = 15 cm/s and
Uw = 15 cm/s. The thrust generating frozen mode has no wave velocity but has a backward velocity of
Uw − U = 12 cm/s. Separate simulations were conducted for the drag and thrust causing modes. The
calculated thrust and drag forces were 0.92 mN and 0.52 mN, respectively. The difference is 0.4 mN
which is close to 0.46 mN computed for the un-decomposed case, i.e., Eqn. 1 is approximately satisfied.
We plot the simulated axial velocity and pressure for these three cases in Fig. 4 for the same phase of the
fin. The slithering drag mode has thin boundary layers outside of which the velocity has low magnitude
and does not have strong spatial gradients. On the other hand, the frozen thrust mode has strongly

10

separated regions behind the troughs and crests of the wave along the fin. This velocity field and its
gradients are significant outside the boundary layer region of the slithering mode. Wherever the velocity
due to one mode is high, the velocity due to the other mode is low. The coupling of the drag and thrust
causing modes, through the nonlinear inertia term ((u · ∇)u) in the Navier–Stokes equations (equation
18), is weak. Furthermore, Fig. 4 shows that the dominant pressure regions due to the two modes are
also spatially segregated. The low pressure due to the thrust-causing frozen fin mode is dominant behind
the wave troughs and crests, whereas the low pressure due to the slithering mode is dominant away from
the separation region in the concave part of the wave shape. This spatial segregation of the drag– and
thrust–related flows is the fundamental basis of the success of the drag–thrust decomposition.
Finally, we note the contributions to the force from pressure and viscous terms. Due to separation,
the pressure contribution to the thrust force dominates in the thrust causing frozen fin mode. Of the total
thrust force of 0.92 mN, the pressure contribution is 0.81 mN and the remainder is due to the viscous
contribution. In the drag causing slithering mode the viscous contribution is 0.12 mN out of the total
drag force of 0.52 mN and the remainder is due to the pressure contribution. Thus, the pressure force
dominates thrust while the viscous contribution to drag is relatively large due to thin boundary layers.
It has long been hypothesized that the drag of swimming fish is higher due to the thinning of the
boundary layers caused by undulatory motion [10]. Fig. 4 shows that the boundary layer flow is a key
feature of the drag causing slithering mode. Separated flow plays a role in the thrust mechanism. The
separated flow regions are suction zones where the fluid is sucked backward by the undulating fin. This
leads to the thrust force. This is consistent with our flow visualization data reported earlier [14, 15].

2.4

Generality of the drag–thrust decomposition

The decomposition described above was applied to an idealized ribbon-fin with idealized kinematics at a
Reynolds number around 10,000. This idealization may not be valid for swimming animals, thus we now
examine the applicability of the drag–thrust decomposition to swimming animals with realistic body/fin
geometries and measured kinematics. We also examine the validity of the decomposition at moderately
high Reynolds numbers by applying the decomposition to a robotic knifefish.

11

2.4.1

Application to swimming animals

Our kinematic decomposition of drag and thrust assumed a constant amplitude wave (Fig. 2). This
assumption is not strictly valid for swimming animals. For example, in the black ghost knifefish the
amplitude of oscillation of the ribbon-fin tapers-off toward the two ends [9]. Anguilliform and carangiform
swimmers have an amplitude that increases with body length [16–18]. Additionally, the wave motion may
not be strictly sinusoidal. In the non-constant amplitude case, the kinematic split as proposed in this
work will not be exact. However, if the amplitude changes are not large then the additional error may
not be significant. The approach is expected to work in cases where cross-sections (width of the body in
the lateral direction) of the body are non-uniform, provided that the body width does not change sharply
along the body. The proposed decomposition is not expected to work for indefinitely high Reynolds
numbers, but it does work at moderately high Reynolds numbers which will be demonstrated in the
next subsection. Finally, as the height of the ribbon-fin and its amplitude of oscillation is reduced, the
drag and thrust producing flow fields may not remain as separate as the case shown in Fig. 4. Thus,
as the undulatory propulsor becomes slender the decomposition of drag and thrust may not be as clear.
Given these issues, we examine the applicability of the decomposition with simulations of the eel Anguilla
rostrata, the larval zebrafish Danio rerio, the black ghost knifefish Apteronotus albifrons, and the mackerel
Scomber scombrus. These examples show where the decomposition is valid, and where it becomes invalid.
The drag, thrust, and undecomposed forces on a black ghost knifefish (gymnotiform), an eel (anguilliform), a larval zebrafish (sub–carangiform), and a mackerel (carangiform) are tabulated in Table 1. Table
1 shows that the error in decomposing forces on free swimming knifefish, eel, and zebrafish is small compared to that in decomposing the force on a mackerel. During steady free swimming, the average force in
the swimming direction is zero. For a steady free swimming organism, the drag and thrust components
must be equal. For the black ghost knifefish and the larval zebrafish, it is seen that the drag and thrust
forces are equal to each other within 5%. Note that the knifefish displays a small variation in amplitude
whereas the zebrafish has a subcarangiform amplitude variation. For the eel, which has an anguilliform
amplitude variation, the drag and thrust forces are equal with an error of 17% (Table 1). Thus, we
see that our decomposition works well for gymnotiform (and by similarity for balistiform and rajiform),
anguilliform, and subcarangiform swimmers, none of which display rapid variations in amplitude. But,
the decomposition does not work well for carangiform swimmers because the rate of change of amplitude
in these swimmers is very high (Table 1). A theoretical assessment of why the decomposition works well

12

Knifefish

Amplitude
(cm)

Zebrafish
(larval)

Eel

Mackerel

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

0

0

−0.3
0

4.5
x

9

−0.2
0

0.5
x

1

−0.1
0

0.2
x

0.4

−0.1
0

0.5
x

Amplitude
function A(x)

Experimental [9]

0.15e(x−1) [17]

Experimental

0.02 − 0.08x +
0.16x2 [16, 18]

Thrust force T
(mN)

1.43

6.8×10−4

4.3×10−3

11.6×10−3

Drag force D
(mN)

1.48

8.2×10−4

4.1×10−3

46.8×10−3

Undecomposed
force F (mN)

0

0

0

21.4×10−3

Net force D − T
(mN)

0.05

1.4×10−4

−0.2×10−3

35.2×10−3

1

Table 1. Drag-thrust decomposition of free swimming black ghost knifefish fin, eel, larval zebrafish.
Also shown is the decomposition of a hypothetical fin with mackerel kinematics. The amplitude shown
for the knifefish is at distance of 0.75 cm from base of the fin. The range for x in A(x) is [0, 1].
Undecomposed forces equal to zero indicate free swimming cases.

13

for modest variations in body or fin amplitude along the body length, but not for large variations in
amplitude, is presented in the Discussion Section.

2.4.2

Application to a robotic knifefish

Here we examine how well the decomposition works at moderately high Reynolds numbers. We consider
parameters for a robotic knifefish, approximately three times longer than the adult live knifefish. At
typical kinematic parameters, such as two waves along the fin undulating at 2.5 Hz, the Reynolds number
based on fin length is around 130, 000. Decomposition of drag and thrust forces on ribbon-fins at the
scale of the robot was tested using simulations and experiments with the robot. The fin has the same
dimensions and kinematic parameters in the simulation and the experiment. However, the surface of the
experimental fin departs from the simulated fin in a manner that appears to affect our results, as will be
described later.
Simulations of the decomposition were carried out for a fin the same size as that on the robot, but
without a body. In section B and Fig. 13 we show that the forces on the body and the fin are decoupled,
and the presence of the body has no influence on the fin forces. Hence, the decomposition can be carried
out with or without the body. We choose to carry out the decomposition without the body to reduce the
computational cost. We consider a case where U = 0 cm/s and Uw = 40.75 cm/s. The net force generated
by the fin was found to be 384.7 mN. In the drag causing slithering mode, the fin translated forward at
U = Uw = 40.75 cm/s. In the thrust-causing frozen mode the fin translated backward with a velocity of
Uw − U = 40.75 cm/s (slithering and frozen velocity are same because U = 0 cm/s in the undecomposed
mode). Thrust and drag forces were found to be 427.1 mN and 33.54 mN, respectively. The difference
between thrust and drag force (393.46 mN), matches well with the force of the undecomposed mode
(384.7 mN). Based on simulations, we infer that the drag-thrust decomposition is valid at length scales
of robotic knifefish’s ribbon-fin.
As noted before, the parameters used in the experiments were same as those used in simulations,
above. Forces in the undecomposed, slithering (drag), and frozen (thrust) modes were measured to be
226.8 mN, 229.5 mN, and 283.3 mN respectively. The difference between drag and thrust force is not
equal to the undecomposed force. The undecomposed force and thrust force are of the same order of
magnitude just as it is in simulations. This raises two important questions: i) what is the source of
the larger than expected slithering (drag) mode force? ii) given this disagreement, is there a resolution?

14

U
Forward
motion

Back

L

h

s

Uw

Front


Fin ray

Wave
motion

Figure 5. Geometric parameters and the configuration of the plate-fin assembly.
These questions will be addressed in the Discussion Section.

2.5
2.5.1

Utility of the drag–thrust decomposition
Optimal height of a knifefish ribbon fin

What is the utility of separating drag and thrust in the manner we have proposed? Next we show that this
decomposition provides a powerful predictive tool. To that end, we consider a specific example problem:
given the body of a knifefish, which is held nearly rigid, what should be the height of its ribbon fin? We
also show how drag–thrust decomposition leads to models that can predict the swimming velocity of an
organism.
To find the preferred fin height, we hypothesized that the observed height of the ribbon fin is such that
the mechanical energy spent per unit distance traveled, referred to as the mechanical cost of transport
(COT), is minimized. The COT was computed numerically for different fin heights as discussed below.
We considered steady swimming in which a fish moves with a constant mean velocity. For simplicity,
we considered a plate–fin configuration like that used by Lighthill and Blake [12] to study gymnotiform
and balistiform swimming. A plate of height s = 2 cm and length L = 10 cm was attached to a ribbon
fin of the same length (Fig. 5). These dimensions were selected based on typical fin and body heights

10

2

10

0

-2

10

Curve fit
0

10
h (cm)

c

15

Simulation

10 -1
10

Us (cm/s)

20

a

10

b

1

COT (mJ/mm)

Power (mN-cm/s)

15

10

5

5

Simulation (fin + plate)
Analytic (fin + plate)

0
0 hc

2
h(cm)

4

0

0

hc

1

2
h(cm)

3

4

Figure 6. a) Mechanical power expended in the fluid, obtained from fully resolved simulations of
self–propulsion, as a function of the fin height. b) Swimming velocity as a function of the fin height h
obtained from fully resolved simulation of self–propulsion as well as from a reduced order model (solid
line). c) The mechanical cost of transport as a function of the fin height h obtained from fully resolved
simulation of self–propulsion as well as from a reduced order model. The red shaded region represents
the variation of swimming velocity in (b) and cost of transport in (c) due to a perturbation to the plate
height. The perturbation to the height is equal to ±0.85 cm, which corresponds to the standard
deviation of the measured body heights in an assortment of knifefish at the half way point along the fin
(see Table 3). The dashed blue vertical line in (c) corresponds to the mean fin height measured, and the
blue shaded region represents the standard deviation in fin height. Note: The closed circle and the solid
line in (b) and (c) have the same meaning.
in adult knifefish [9, 13, 19]. The following kinematic parameters were chosen: θmax = 30◦ , f = 3 Hz,
λ = 5 cm. The fin height was varied from 0.5 cm to 2.5 cm. For each fin height we solved the problem
of self-propulsion by using a previously developed efficient algorithm [20]. In these computations the
traveling wave motion of the ribbon fin attached to the plate was specified. For each case we computed
the mean power P spent by the fin against the fluid over one period of the steady swimming cycle. The
time-averaged swimming velocity Us was estimated during steady swimming. The cost of transport was
computed as COT = P/Us .
Fig. 6 shows plots of the swimming velocity Us , the mean power P , and COT as a function of the
ribbon fin height h. The power spent on the fluid follows a power law trend (Fig. 6a). The swimming
velocity Us first increases rapidly with respect to h and then changes slowly at higher values of h (Fig. 6b).

16

This trend is a direct result of different scalings of drag and thrust forces with respect to h (Section B).
The COT is low and nearly constant at smaller h after which it grows rapidly (Fig. 6c). The basis of
this increase in COT is that at larger h, the power increases with increasing h but the corresponding
increase in Us is small. Hence there is a rapid growth of COT at larger h. Fig. 6c shows that the ribbon
fin heights that give lower values of COT, for a plate height of 2 cm, are in the range of 0.5 − 1.1 cm. In
this range the COT does not change significantly but the swimming velocity is highest at h = 1.1 cm. In
short, different scalings of drag and thrust with respect to h lead to a specific trend of Us vs. h, which in
turn determines the trend of COT vs. h. The COT trend eventually provides the prediction for the fin
height h that will minimize the metabolic cost of movement, and as we will see in the next section, this
predicted height agrees well with observed fin heights.
Sensitivity of the optimal fin height to fish body size: The predicted fin height (∼ 1 cm) is
consistent with the mean fin height of 0.97 cm that we measured for 13 species in 8 genera in the family
Apteronotidae of weakly electric South American knifefishes (Table 3, at 50% body length). The standard
deviation of the fin height from the measured mean value (blue vertical bar in Fig. 6c) is within the
range of fin heights (0.5 − 1.1 cm) for which COT is predicted to be low. Although the body height of
the fishes we considered did vary, we found from a sensitivity analysis (see Section C) that the influence
of the plate (or body) height on the COT trend is not significant. We show this result in Fig. 6c, where
the red shaded region shows the variation in COT due to a change in plate height corresponding to the
standard deviation in the body height of the 13 species we measured.

2.5.2

Prediction of swimming velocity

Finally, to show that the proposed drag-thrust decomposition can be used to predict swimming velocities,
a force balance equation similar to Eqn. 1 was written for the steadily swimming fin–plate assembly (Eqn.
13). We used that equation to derive an analytic solution for the fin height as a function of swimming
velocity (Eqn. 15), which can be rearranged to give swimming velocity as a function of fin height.
To test the analytic prediction of swimming velocity we performed numerical simulations to compute
the swimming velocity. Excellent agreement between the analytic and numerical solutions of swimming
velocity is shown in Fig. 6b.

17

3

Discussion

3.1

Are there other ways to obtain drag–thrust decomposition?

There can be many kinematically consistent decompositions which satisfy kinematic conditions D1 (body
movements creating drag summed to body movements creating thrust result in the original undecomposed
movement) and D2 (body movements creating drag and thrust are without discontinuities and physically
realizable). However, the kinematic decomposition depicted in Fig. 2 is the only one we have found
satisfying D1 and D2 as well as providing force decomposition (D3, the sum of the decomposed drag and
thrust forces is equal to force in the originally observed swimming motion of the animal). The primary
reason that force decomposition becomes possible is due to boundary layer flow in the drag mechanism
and separated flow in the thrust mechanism (Fig. 4). A boundary layer flow is observed in the drag
mechanism because in that case the velocity on the fin surface is tangential to the surface itself (Fig. 4).
This type of internal boundary condition arises because the forward translational velocity of the fin in the
slithering mode is equal and opposite to the wave velocity of the undulating fin. Any translational velocity
in the drag mode that is other than Uw will result in a velocity at each point on the fin that is no longer
tangential to the surface. This gives rise to a flow field that is not purely due to the boundary layer and
it couples with the separated flow field due to the thrust mechanism. Thus, even if other decompositions
are kinematically correct, the force decomposition will not work well. The kinematic decomposition that
we have is the one that leads to the least coupling between the drag and thrust modes for the kinematics
considered here.
As an example, consider a different kinematic decomposition where the backward traveling wave is
defined as the thrust producing mechanism whereas the fin translating forward with velocity U is defined
as the drag producing mechanism. We used our data to check if this kinematic decomposition also leads
to force decomposition. If valid then it should be possible to split the total force as

F [U, Uw ] = Ts [Uw ] − Df [U ],

(2)

where Ts [Uw ] is the forward force on a stationary fin with traveling waves moving backward with wave
velocity Uw , and Df [U ] is the force on a fin with a fixed shape, i.e. the frozen fin, that is translating
forward with velocity U . Using the data for F in Fig. 3a and the data for Df [U ], available from our frozen

18

Figure 7. The thrust force Ts computed as a function of Uw for each data point in Fig. 2 by assuming
a decomposition according to equation 2. In this case the data do not cluster along a single curve. The
legend identifies different simulation sets. For example, the set with Uw = 15 cm/s was the one where
Uw was fixed and the value of U was changed.
fin simulations, we computed Ts [Uw ]. These values are plotted in Fig. 7 and compared to the force on
a stationary ribbon-fin from our prior work [14]. If this decomposition is valid, all data should fall on a
single curve in Fig. 7. That is not the case. It can be shown that the reason this decomposition does not
work is because the corresponding flow fields are not decoupled.
Given that drag and thrust appear intermingled in swimming organisms, especially in the undulatory
mode, it has been hypothesized that there must be some spatial or temporal separation between thrust
and drag production that allows the total force to be zero on average over a swimming cycle [17]. A
model to estimate thrust based on temporal oscillations of the swimming velocity has been proposed [21].
Our data suggests that a decomposition of the total force into drag and thrust is possible without relying
on spatio-temporal splitting.

3.2

Comments on different measures of drag reported in literature

Appropriate measures of drag on a swimming organism have been debated in literature for many decades
[22, 23]. Here, we discuss how drag from our decomposition is differs from definitions of drag in the
literature. One measure that has been used is the tow-drag, i.e., the drag on a non-swimming organism if
it is pulled in the fluid at its swimming velocity. The organism is usually not deformed in these experiments

19

or theoretical estimates. This drag measure is not expected to be correct because the shape of the animal
for the tow-drag estimate does not match with shape of the fish during propulsive movement [22]. The
second measure is the drag obtained by pulling a deformed non-undulating body through the fluid at its
swimming velocity, i.e., the drag on the frozen shape configuration. As noted above and in Fig. 7, this
does not result in successful decoupling of thrust from drag. Our results suggest that an appropriate drag
measure for undulatory propulsion is the one corresponding to the perfect slithering motion at the wave
velocity (Fig. 4).
These measures are best illustrated by considering a hypothetical swimming ribbon-fin with no body
attached to it. According to the drag-thrust decomposition and the data in Figures 3b and 3c, a ribbon-fin
with Uw ≈ 22 cm/s will swim with a velocity U ≈ 9.5 cm/s. The first drag measure - the tow-drag - for
this case corresponds to the drag on a flat plate towed at 9.5 cm/s. This is estimated to be 0.12 mN based
on boundary layer theory. The second drag measure corresponding to a frozen fin, moving at 9.5 cm/s,
is 0.6 mN. Finally, the third drag measure proposed by us corresponding to the perfect slithering motion
with Uw ≈ 22 cm/s is 1 mN. Thus, our drag measure is higher than the other two estimates for the scenario
considered here. The result is consistent with reports in literature that the tow-drag is often found to
be lower than that required to achieve a balance of drag and thrust forces during swimming [22, 23]. In
general, however, the relative magnitudes of the three drag measures may not be in the same order as in
the example discussed above. It will depend on various parameters including the geometric configuration.
It has been noted in the past that body undulations lead to a reduction in drag on a swimming
body [24]. That conclusion was based on computing the total force on an infinite two-dimensional wavy
surface for a given imposed velocity U and then noting that as Uw is increased the total force changes
from being backward (drag-like) to being forward (thrust-like). In this sense the presence of undulations
reduces the drag-like behavior. This is consistent with our results.

3.3

Limits of the drag–thrust decomposition

Results of the decomposition of forces on swimming animals showed that the decomposition is valid
for swimming animals with anguilliform, gymnotiform (by similarity balistiform and rajiform), and subcarangiform kinematics. But, the decomposition is not valid for swimming animals with carangiform
kinematics. Here, we present a theoretical assessment of when the proposed decomposition will be correct and when it will fail. For the purpose of analysis, consider kinematics imposed on a rectangular

20

surface (“fin” hereafter) of infinitesimal thickness. At any instant a given point on the fin undergoes
lateral displacement given by
y = A(x) sin[2π(

x
+ f t)],
λ

(3)

where A(x) is the amplitude which is a function of axial direction and it determines the mode of swimming. The amplitude for different modes of swimming is shown in Table 1. The deviation from exact
decomposition is a function of the rate of increase of amplitude with body length. The deviation will be
more if the rate of amplitude change is high and vice-versa. This will be demonstrated below.
The slithering mode is affected by a deviation from exact decomposition. The slithering mode has
the property that velocity at each point on the fin is tangential to surface of the fin. The velocity in
the slithering mode, at a point, is the resultant of the forward translational velocity Uw and the lateral
velocity Vw . The angle, α (Fig. 2), of the velocity at a point is given by

tan α =

2πA(x) cos[2π( λx + f t)]
.
λ

(4)

The direction of the resultant velocity at every point on the fin surface must be equal to slope of the
corresponding point if the velocity has to be tangential to the fin surface. The slope of a point on the fin
undergoing traveling wave motion is given by
2πA(x) cos[2π( λx + f t)] dA(x)
dy
x
=
+
sin[2π( + f t)].
dx
λ
dx
λ

(5)

Note that if A(x) is constant then equation 4 and 5 are identical resulting in a perfect slithering motion
where the resultant velocity of a point is tangential to the fin surface. Substituting equation 4 in 5 we
get the following equation
dy
dA(x)
x
− tan α =
sin[2π( + f t)].
dx
dx
λ

(6)

The above equation is a measure of deviation from exact decomposition. At a given instant of time,
the deviation from tangential velocity is directly proportional to

dA(x)
dx .

The figures in the first row of

Table 1 show that the rate of amplitude change in anguilliform swimmers, subcarangiform swimmers and
knifefish is slower than that in carangiform swimmers. In anguilliform swimmers the amplitude gradually
increases from head to tail, i.e, the rate of change of amplitude is smaller. Thus, the deviation from
perfect slithering motion is small. The same is true for the subcarangiform swimmer as well. In case

21

Figure 8. The surface of the robotic ribbon fin during sinusoidal undulations. The material between
adjacent rays folds and results in kinks on the fin surface.
of the knifefish amplitude, the amplitude first increases, reaches a peak, and then decreases. But the
rate at which amplitude increases or decreases is very small, hence the deviation from perfect slithering
motion is small. Thus, the decomposition of eel, larval zebrafish and knifefish worked well. However, in
carangiform swimmers, the amplitude remains relatively small and constant for at least half the body
length after which it increases rapidly. The rate of change of amplitude is very high towards the caudal
portion of the body thus resulting in a large deviation from perfect slithering motion. Consequently, it
is not surprising that the decomposition did not work for mackerel.

3.4

Why the drag–thrust decomposition failed for the robotic knifefish

Using numerical simulations it was shown that the decomposition was valid for the robotic knifefish. But,
experimental data did not agree with the simulations. The main difference between the experiments and
the simulation was in the force of the slithering mode. The slithering drag force from experiment was
higher than that from simulation; this implies that the drag force is higher than what it should be for
the decomposition to be valid. We hypothesize that the larger than expected slithering drag force in the
experiment is due to the imperfections on the robot’s fin surface. The robotic fin is made up of discrete
rays (32 rays 1 cm apart) that are connected by Lycra fabric; see Fig. 10 in which one of the fin rays is
highlighted in white. It is not possible to produce a smooth sinusoidal wave on the fin unless the fin is

22

a

b

-50

-25
U(cm/s)

c

0

Figure 9. A comparison between the boundary layer due to, a) flow past a flat plate, b) slithering
motion of a robotic ribbon fin, c) and slithering motion of a modeled robotic fin in a simulation. The
boundary layer is shown on a horizontal plane 1 cm above the bottom edge of the fin toward the robot
body. The color bar represents the axial velocity.
made up of very large number of rays. Owing to the limited number of rays, the sinusoidal wave generated
by the robotic fin is not smooth (see Fig. 8). With kinks on its surface the robotic fin cannot maintain a
thin boundary layer in the slithering mode like that in simulations. The kinks will introduce disturbances
into the boundary layer (see Fig. 9). Unlike its real counterpart, the robotic fin modeled in the simulation
is composed of very fine grid points (whose resolution is of the order of fluid grid resolution). Any curved
surface can be imposed (sinusoidal or otherwise) on the modeled fin surface without causing any kinks.
Hence, it leads to a thin undisturbed boundary layer in the slithering mode (see Figure 9). The boundary
layer on the robotic fin is very thick when compared to that from simulation or that from flow past a flat
plate at the same Reynolds number (see Figure 9). The large thickness of the boundary layer may also
indicate separated flow, which could lead to the large drag force measured in the experiment.

3.4.1

An alternate estimate of the drag force on the robotic ribbon fin

Given that the slithering mode force in the experiment does not satisfy the drag–thrust decomposition
due to disturbances caused by surface kinks, we propose that the next best choice may be to use a drag
estimate that is similar to the tow–drag. This is because the surface imperfections on an undeformed (or
straight) robotic ribbon–fin would be much less and consequently the flow would be less perturbed or

23

separated. There is subtle, yet important, difference between our estimate of drag and the conventional
measure of tow-drag. In the conventional measure of tow–drag, the swimmer is towed at its swimming
speed in stationary water. In contrast, we measure the drag by towing a straight fin, in stationary water,
at the velocity of the slithering mode (which is equal to wave velocity, Uw = 40.75 cm/s) instead of
swimming speed. The force was measured to be 81.9 mN. This value is closer to the expected value of
56.6 mN obtained from the drag thrust decomposition estimate.

3.4.2

Why the drag–thrust decomposition works for real knifefishes

Simulations have shown that the decomposition is indeed valid at moderately high Reynolds number.
Experiments on the robotic knifefish, however, suggest possible limitations of the decomposition. The
decomposition is sensitive to any deviation from perfect slithering mode, be it due to high levels of
amplitude change or high roughness on the fin surface. A knifefish’s ribbon-fin is composed of 120–320
rays spanning fin lengths of 10–30 cm, giving typical densities of about one ray per millimeter (Table 4
and Fig. 41 of [25]). Many of these fin rays branch into two rami half the way from their base to their
distal ends, which would effectively double the ray density along the very portion of the fin surface that
could become uneven due to spreading between the rays when they are oscillated [25]. With such fine
ray spacing, a knifefish can produce curved surfaces on its fin without kinks. In contrast, on the robot
the ray density is one ray per 10 mm, resulting in a much less smooth fin surface. We therefore expect
that drag-thrust decomposition would be applicable to a robotic ribbon-fin if it can be designed to have
higher ray density so that the fin surface is smoother.

4
4.1
4.1.1

Methods
Experimental setup
Robotic undulating fin

The robotic model used for the experimental work was the ‘Ghostbot,’ a biomimetic knifefish robot which
undulates an elongated fin to generate thrust (see Fig. 10). The robot consists of a rigid cylindrical body
that houses the motors and electronics to drive the individual rays of the fin. There are 32 rays to actuate
a rectangular Lycra fin measuring 32.6 cm by 5 cm. More details of the robot are found in [26], with the

24

Fin Rays
Figure 10. The robotic knifefish used in the drag-thrust decomposition experiments. The robotic
ribbon-fin is composed of 32 fin rays and a Lycra fabric connecting the rays. One of the fin rays is
coloured white to highlight it.
only difference being the depth of the fin was 3.37 cm in the previous work rather than 5 cm.

4.1.2

Measuring hydrodynamic forces

The robot was suspended horizontally into a variable speed flow tank from an air-bearing platform
allowing near frictionless motion in the longitudinal axis. We fixed the robot in the lateral and vertical
directions. We placed a single axis force transducer (LSB200, Futek, Irvine, CA, USA) in the longitudinal
axis between the air-bearing platform and mechanical ground, allowing us to measure the forces generated
by the robot or acting on the robot along that axis. Voltages from the force transducer were recorded
at 1000 Hz. For each trial, we allowed ample time for the hydrodynamics to reach steady state (30-60
seconds), then averaged the last 10 seconds of data, which was converted to force units based on the
calibration, which had a maximum nonlinear error of 0.034%. The flow speed of the water tunnel was
measured and calibrated using particle image velocimetry (PIV). More details on PIV are provided in
the following section.

4.1.3

Particle image velocimetry (PIV)

We analyzed horizontal PIV planes to measure the boundary layer thickness caused by the fin. The PIV
setup used is the same as the one described in [15]. In short, a 2 W laser beam (Verdi G2, Coherent
Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA) is scanned at 500 Hz to create a planar laser light sheet. A high-speed
camera (FastCam 1024P PCI, Photron, San Diego, CA, USA) imaged reflective particles suspended in

25

the fluid (44 micron silver coated glass spheres, Potter Industries, Valley Forge, PA, USA) at 500 frames
per second, matching the scanning rate of the laser. High-speed video was analyzed using a commercial
software package (DaVis, LaVision GMBH., Göttingen, Germany). Successive frames of the video were
cross-correlated to calculate the velocity vector field of the fluid. Cross-correlation consisted of two passes
with decreasing interrogation windows, first with an interrogation window of 32 by 32 pixels with 50%
overlap and second with a window of 16 by 16 pixels with 50% overlap.

4.2

Numerical problem formulation

For the numerical simulations, the ribbon fin is modeled as a thin membrane as shown in Fig. 1. The
angular position θ(x, t) of any point on the fin (described above in under Results) is modeled as

θ(x, t) = θmax sin 2π(

x
− f t).
λ

(7)

This corresponds to a sinusoidal traveling wave along the fin of length L and height h. Kinematic
parameters are frequency f , θmax , and λ. The speed at which the wave form travels along the fin is called
the wave velocity, Uw = f λ. In the optimal ribbon fin height analysis (presented in Results section), the
knifefish is modeled as a plate-fin assembly where a rigid plate is attached to the ribbon-fin in place of
the fish’s rigid body. In these simulations, the rigid plate is modeled as a rigid surface. The properties
of water are used for the fluid. Two types of simulations are performed in this work. In one type, the
translational velocity U of the fin and/or plate is specified along with the deformation kinematics of the
fin (equation 7). These simulations are carried out in the frame of reference of the fin/plate. Hence
the translational velocity U appears as an imposed free stream velocity. Rotation of the fin/plate is
prohibited.
In the second type of simulation, only the deformation kinematics of the fin are prescribed, which result
in a self-propelling fin-plate assembly. Complete details of the computational method and validation are
given in [14, 20]. In this method, the viscous Navier-Stokes equations along with the incompressibility
constraint are solved in the entire domain. The effect of the immersed fin/plate is resolved by a new
constraint based formulation described in [20]. A finite difference method that is 6th order in space
and 4th order in time is used. The grid size was chosen after performing a grid-sensitivity study. The
Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) number is 0.25 for all simulations. Periodic boundary conditions are

26

Knifefish

Eel

Zebrafish
(larval)

Mackerel

Body/Fin dimensions
length×height (cm2 )

Actual (9×1)

1×0.1

Actual
(0.38×0.04)

1×0.2

Wavelength λ (cm)

3.75

1

0.31

1

Frequency f (Hz)

10.3

5

33.3

15.7

Fluid density (kg/m3 )

1000

1000

1000

1000

Fluid viscosity (Pa s)

0.9×10−3

1.4×10−5

0.9×10−3

0.9×10−3

Wave velocity (cm/s)

38.62

5

10.32

15.7

Translational velocity
(cm/s)

11.9

2.89

1.125

10

Table 2. Simulation parameters.
used in all directions. The computational domain was made large enough to minimize the impact of
periodicity. Mean forces and power of the fin were calculated as the time average over at least one period
of oscillation, after a quasi-steady state is reached.
Parameters chosen to match those of an adult black ghost knifefish [13] are: fin length L = 10 cm, fin
height h = 1 cm, f = 3 Hz, θmax = 30◦ , and λ = 5 cm. The density and viscosity of water are taken as
ρ = 1, 000 kg/m3 and µ = 8.9 × 10−4 kg/m·s unless otherwise specified.

4.2.1

Numerical simulations of swimming animals

Real three dimensional geometries of the bodies or fins were simulated in all cases except the mackerel
where a sheet-like fin was simulated with mackerel-like kinematics. The simulation parameters and the
kinematics are given in Table 2. The fin profile and the kinematic data of the knifefish were experimentally
obtained by us [9]. Only the ribbon-fin of the knifefish was considered for the decomposition. The body of
the knifefish was not considered for the same reason the body was not considered in the robot simulation.
Experimentally extracted kinematic data and body profile of the larval zebrafish were provided by Melina
Hale of The University of Chicago. The body profile of the eel was taken from Kern and Koumoutsakos’

27

Figure 11. The lines along which the fin length, fin height, and body height were measured for
Apteronotus albifrons. Scale bar: 10 mm.
[27] analysis of anguilliform swimming. The kinematics of both the mackerel and eel were described by
equation 3, where the amplitude of kinematic undulations are based on experiments. Eel kinematics were
based on experiments by Tytel and Lauder [17], and mackerel kinematics were based on experiments by
Videler and Hess [16].

4.2.2

Sign convention

As shown in Fig. 5 the forward direction is to the left and the backward direction is to the right.
Translational velocities U and Us are positive if directed to the left (forward) while the wave velocity Uw
is positive if directed to the right (backward). All forces considered in this work are parallel to the length
of the plate and the fin. Thrust force on the fin is positive to the left while drag forces on the fin and
plate are positive to the right. The resultant force on the fin due to thrust and drag is positive to the
left.

4.3

Measurements of fin and body size of South American weakly electric
fishes

A group of 13 species in 8 genera in the family Apteronotidae of South American weakly electric fishes
were considered. The family Apteronotidae is one of five families encompassing 32 genera and 135 species
of South American knifefishes [28]. We restricted our measurements to a subset of one family for practical
reasons, but it is evident from illustrations and images of knifefish in other families that the Apteronotidae
are quite typical in terms of the body height to fin height issue examined here [25, 28, 29].
An image of each specimen was provided by Andrew Williston of the Museum of Comparative Zoology,

Species
devanazii
clarkae
sachsi
leptorhynchus
duccis
bonapartii
schotti
terminalis
gimbeli
albifrons
porcinum b
albifrons
muelleri
tamandua

Sp. ID
59522
78151
92914
48686
46884
78152
59517
98361
164198
78148
164197
169184
59514
98368
0.93
0.38

2.28
0.94

Mean
Standard Deviation

FL
7.20
7.40
10.50
9.40
10.50
12.30
12.90
12.40
14.50
10.20
14.70
13.50
26.90
28.10

25% FL
H
0.60
0.60
0.62
0.60
0.78
0.60
0.87
1.00
1.06*
0.83
1.15
0.93
1.75
1.67*

BLF
10.00
8.30
15.80
12.80
13.00
16.70
17.20
15.60
15.70
12.90
20.50
19.50
39.70
35.60

S
1.10
1.20
1.40
1.82
1.80
2.00
2.04
2.30
2.10
2.40
2.40
3.10
3.88
4.34

BL
8.30
8.30
11.70
10.90
11.20
14.10
14.80
14.80
15.70
12.90
17.50
16.40
33.00
35.60

0.50

2.47

R
1.83
2.00
2.26
3.03
2.31
3.33
2.34
2.30
1.98
2.91
2.09
3.35
2.22
2.60

0.85

1.86

S
0.86
0.92
1.12
1.49
1.50
1.60
1.60
1.80
1.85
1.95
2.00
2.40
2.82
4.18

0.33

0.97

50% FL
H
0.65
0.63
0.68
0.71
0.73
0.65
0.95
1.06
1.05
0.99
1.20
1.10
1.53
1.64

0.35

1.89

R
1.32
1.47
1.65
2.10
2.05
2.46
1.68
1.70
1.76
1.97
1.67
2.18
1.84
2.55

0.59

1.17

S
0.45
0.98
0.66
0.80
0.90
0.90
0.98
1.10
1.25
1.10
1.10
1.40
1.80
2.90

0.26

0.78

75% FL
H
0.50
0.43
0.50
0.71
0.65
0.53
0.73
0.97
0.83
0.95
0.60*
1.10
1.26
1.10

Table 3. Body length (BL), body length with filament (BLF), fin length (FL), body height (S), fin height (H), ratio of body height to
fin height (R) of 13 species across 8 genera of South American weakly electric fishes in the Apteronotidae, in order of body height at
50% along fin length. Specimen identification numbers (Harvard Museum of Comparative Zoology) are represented by Sp. ID. Body
height, fin height, and their ratio (R) were measured at 25, 50, and 75 percent along the fin length, and the same are tabulated. Note:
All lengths are in centimeters, asterisk indicates that the quantity in question was estimated, not measured.

Genus
Adontosternarchus
Adontosternarchus
Adontosternarchus
Apteronotus
Magosternarchus
Apteronotus
Sternarchella
Sternarchella
Porotergus
Apteronotus
Sternarchogiton
Apteronotus
Sternarchorhamphus
Orthosternarchus

0.47

1.50

R
0.90
2.27
1.32
1.13
1.38
1.71
1.34
1.13
1.51
1.16
1.83
1.27
1.43
2.64

28

29

Harvard University. The fin and body height measurements were made at three locations along the fin
length from the rostral tip: 25, 50, and 75 percent. The height of the fin was measured by measuring the
length of the collapsed fin ray. The height of the body was measured along a line that was perpendicular
to the body axis. The lines of measurement are shown in Fig. 11. The measured data are tabulated in
Table 3. For specimens in which fin rays were not present for measurements at a needed position along
the fin, ray length was estimated based on the trend of neighboring fin ray lengths. These data points
are marked by an asterisk in the table.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF grants CBET-0828749 to N.A.P. and M.A.M, CMMI-0941674 to M.A.M.
and N.A.P, and CBET-1066575 to N.A.P. Computational resources were provided by NSF’s TeraGrid
Project grants CTS-070056T and CTS-090006, and by Northwestern University High Performance Computing System – Quest.

Author contributions
NAP, AAS, RB, MAM, and IDN conceived and designed the research and experiments. RB and AAS
performed numerical simulations. IDN and RB performed experiments. NAP, RB, AAS, and MAM
analyzed data. AAS, APSB, and NAP contributed the numerical simulation tool. IDN and MAM
contributed the experimental tool. NAP, RB, AAS, and MAM wrote the paper. All authors edited the
paper.

30

Appendices
A

Difference between this work and Lighthill’s approach

Our approach is different from prior work by Lighthill [10–12] for the following reasons: 1) Our kinematic
decomposition ensures that the realizability condition D2 (the decomposed body movements should be
such that the surface of the body will move in a continuous fashion so that the kinematics can be realized in
experiments or simulations) is satisfied, unlike Lighthill’s decomposition. Thus, our decomposition allows
setting up independent sets of simulations/experiments to determine the drag and thrust components. 2)
We show that the force condition D3 (the sum of the drag and thrust forces from the decomposed body
movements must be equal to the force due the original body movement of the swimmer) is satisfied based
on our approach. Because Lighthill’s approach did not satisfy condition D2, this verification has not been
possible. 3) We are able to estimate both thrust and drag, unlike Lighthill’s work where appropriate drag
estimates are not available. Lighthill’s approach for the decomposition of drag and thrust is summarized
below.
Consider a generic surface with a traveling wave as shown in Fig. 12. It could represent the body of
a swimmer or the surface of a fin. Consider the wave to have a constant amplitude and that the wave is
traveling from left to right (i.e. backward) with velocity Uw which is constant. Due to the wave motion,
any point on the surface oscillates laterally (or oscillates laterally along a figure eight-shaped path if the
body is assumed inextensible [10]) with velocity Vw = −2πf A sin[2π(x/λ − f t)], where A is the amplitude
of the wave, f is the frequency, x is the axial location of the point, and λ is the wavelength. It follows that
Uw = λf . Let U be the forward translational velocity (i.e. to the left; Fig. 12) of the surface as a whole
and let the surrounding fluid be stationary. Positive values of Uw will imply a backward traveling wave
whereas positive values of U imply a forward translating surface. The resultant velocity at any point on
the surface is V as shown in Fig. 12. Lighthill [11] considered the components of V that are tangential
(u) and normal (w) to the surface of the wave with large amplitude oscillations. It can be shown that

u=

w = (Uw − U ) sin[α],

(8)

Uw
− (Uw − U ) cos[α],
cos[α]

(9)

31

Figure 12. Lighthill [10] decomposed the resultant velocity V at a point on the surface into a
component u tangential to it (causing resistive drag) and a component w normal to it (causing reactive
thrust).
where α is the angle as shown in Fig. 12. Lighthill [11] then stated that the added mass due to the normal
component w will be large and therefore it will primarily contribute to the so-called “reactive” force. The
axial component of this reactive force was termed thrust. He stated that the tangential component u
will have only small contribution to the added mass and thus it will contribute predominantly to the
viscous resistance. The axial component of the viscous force was termed drag. In this way, Lighthill
formulated the decomposition of the force on the fin into drag– and thrust–causing mechanisms in spite
of nonlinearities at high Reynolds numbers. Note that the decomposition of the fin velocity into u and
w does not satisfy the realizability condition D2. Lighthill developed expressions to obtain the reactive
thrust due to w for elongated bodies or fins [11, 12]. Since thrust T was assumed to be caused by w,
according to equation 8, it is a function of Uw − U [12]. The thrust is directed in the forward direction,
as desired, when Uw − U > 0, whereas it is directed backward when Uw − U < 0. According to Lighthill,
drag must be a function of Uw and (Uw − U ) since it is caused by u (equation 9). However, no expressions
for drag were developed.
As shown in Fig. 2 and Table 4, below, the decomposition proposed in this work is different from
Lighthill
Uw
−
cos[α]
(Uw − U ) cos[α]

Current Study

u=

Drag

Thrust

w = (Uw − U ) sin[α]

us =

Uw
cos[α]

wf = (Uw − U ) sin[α]
uf = −(Uw − U ) cos[α]

Table 4. Comparison of Lighthill’s kinematic decomposition and the one proposed here.

32

Lighthill’s. The velocities us and uf that are tangential to the wave surface in our slithering and frozen
fin modes, respectively, are given by
us = Uw / cos[α],

(10)

uf = −(Uw − U ) cos[α].

(11)

The tangential velocity in the slithering mode according to equation 10 corresponds only to the first
part of the tangential velocity u according to Lighthill’s decomposition in equation 9. The tangential
velocity in our frozen fin mode (equation 11) corresponds to the second part of the tangential velocity u
in equation 9. The normal velocity in the slithering mode is zero whereas that in the frozen fin mode wf
is given by
wf = (Uw − U ) sin[α],

(12)

This normal velocity is the same as w in equation 8. Thus, our results suggest that part of the tangential
velocity u in the decomposition of Lighthill [11] that depends on (Uw − U ) is in fact coupled with the
normal component to account for the thrust force according to the frozen fin mode.
In our decomposition the drag force is a function of Uw unlike the consequence of Lighthill’s decomposition where the drag force is expected to be a function of Uw and (Uw − U ). The thrust force in our
case is a function of (Uw − U ) like Lighthill but it has an additional contribution from the tangential
velocity along the fin surface.

B

Optimal height of the ribbon fin: Analysis

B.1

Swimming velocity

In Fig. 6b we presented the swimming velocity obtained from self-propulsion simulations. In this section
we will show that it can also be obtained based on a reduced order model. Doing so will provide insights
into the mechanisms underlying the simulation data.
The steady swimming velocity of a self-propelling organism is the one at which the resultant force on
the body, averaged over a swimming cycle, is zero. In case of the fin-plate assembly, forces on the plate
and the fin are decoupled as seen in Fig. 13. Therefore, at steady swimming Ff [Uw , U, h] − Fp [U ] = 0,
where square brackets indicate “function-of” and U is the translational velocity of the plate-fin assembly.

33

Figure 13. Force Fp on the plate (—•—), force Ffp on the fin-plate assembly (——), and Ff − Fp (–
–N– –) as a function of s/h. Agreement between Ffp and Ff − Fp shows that there is no momentum
enhancement.
The value of U that satisfies the force equation is the swimming velocity Us . Only Uw , U and h are the
parameters of interest in this analysis. Remaining parameters are assumed to be constant.
According to the drag-thrust decomposition discussed in the Manuscript, Ff = Tf − Df , where Tf and
Df are the thrust and drag forces on the ribbon fin, respectively. It was found that Df depends on the
wave velocity Uw whereas Tf depends on (Uw − U ). Using the drag-thrust decomposition of the force Ff
on the fin, the force balance equation for the plate-fin assembly during steady swimming can be written
as
Tf [Uw − U, h] − Df [Uw , h] − Fp [U ] = 0.

(13)

The functions for Tf , Df , and Fp are obtained as follows. Fig. 3c shows that Tf depends on (Uw − U ).
A combination of linear and quadratic variations fit the graph well. Since the mechanism of thrust
generation is shown to be the low pressure caused by flow separation, thrust is proportional to the
effective frontal area of the flapping ribbon fin which scales as h2 . The drag force Df is shown to be
due to a boundary layer type flow caused by the slithering motion (Fig. 4). It depends on Uw (Fig. 3b),
which is a constant in our simulations. The drag force is proportional to the wetted surface area of the
ribbon fin which scales as h. Finally, Fp is caused primarily by the boundary layer on the plate. Hence,
it is proportional to U 3/2 (all other parameters are constant). Thus, equation 13 can be written in the

34

following form
{A1 (Uw − U )2 + A2 (Uw − U )}h2 − Bh − CU 3/2 = 0,

(14)

where A1 , A2 , B, and C are constants. The term involving h2 is the thrust force Tf , Df = Bh, and
Fp = CU 3/2 . Note that Uw = 15 cm/s for all cases considered here. Based on the data in Figures 3b
and 3c, we find that A1 = 0.0059 mN-s2 /cm4 , A2 = 0.0068 mN-s/cm3 , and B = 0.51 mN/cm. We
did simulations for flow over a plate and found that C = 0.017 mN/(cm/s)3/2 . The only unknowns in
equation 14 are U and h. Thus, it can be used to obtain the swimming velocity Us as a function of h.
Analytic solution for Us : Now we solve the analytic equation 14 and compare it to the swimming
velocity computed from self-propulsion simulations of the fin-plate assembly (Fig. 6b). It is possible to
obtain an approximate closed form solution for h as a function of Us by solving equation 14. To do so
we note that equation 14 is a quadratic equation for h. Using the quadratic formula for h, keeping the
physically relevant solution, and using binomial expansion of a square-root term up to first order, we get
the following solution
3/2

h=

B
CUs
+
A1 (Uw − Us )2 + A2 (Uw − Us )
B

.

(15)

The first part on the right hand side corresponds to the swimming of an isolated fin and the second part
is the correction due to the drag on the plate. The above equation is solved for Us and is compared to the
values computed from self-propulsion simulations in Fig. 6b. Also plotted in Fig. 6b is the analytic solution
for a hypothetical freely swimming ribbon fin without a plate attached. That solution is obtained from
equation 15 by substituting C = 0. Below a critical height hc the analytic swimming velocity becomes
negative. Analytic solution in this regime is not plotted since the drag-thrust split model is not valid
in this regime. There is no self-propulsion simulation data in this regime since the swimming velocity is
very small and the numerical accuracy is not sufficient. The trends in Fig. 6b will be discussed below in
two parts: 1) trends for swimming velocity above the critical fin height, and 2) swimming at fin heights
below the critical value.
1) Fig. 6b shows that, for fin heights above a critical value, the swimming velocity from self-propulsion
simulations is in good agreement with the analytic curve for a plate-fin assembly at smaller h and agrees
better with the analytic curve for the fin-only case at larger h. This is expected because at h comparable
to or larger than the plate height of s = 2 cm, the plate drag is dominated by the drag of the ribbon
fin. Hence, the plate-fin assembly swims at a velocity that is close to the self-propulsion velocity of the

35

ribbon fin itself. The disagreement between simulated and analytic swimming velocities of the plate-fin
assembly, at larger h, arises because the higher-order terms in the binomial expansion were neglected in
equation 15.
The key trend of Us is the rapid rise with respect to h at smaller h and a slow change at larger h. This
variation is the primary factor that determines the cost of transport (COT) trends obtained in Fig. 6c.
It is clear from Figure 6b that the trend in Us is inherent to the self-propulsion velocity of the isolated
ribbon fin itself. The presence of the plate drag merely plays a role in shifting the swimming velocity to
a lower value. Equations 14 and 15 imply that the root cause of the trend in Us is the fact that the fin
thrust Tf scales as h2 while the fin drag Df scales as h, and the fact that the swimming velocity affects
only Tf . Due to this, at smaller h, any increase in fin height increases the drag more than the thrust.
To achieve a balance between drag and thrust, the swimming velocity must increase significantly so that
the thrust is large enough to equal the drag. For larger h the effect is opposite. Any increase in h causes
larger increase in thrust compared to drag. Hence, to achieve drag-thrust balance the swimming velocity
needs to change only slightly.
2) The analytic solution leads to a critical height hc at which the swimming velocity is zero (Figure
6b). The analytic solution is not valid for this and smaller heights because the drag-thrust split model for
the fin force is not accurate. The swimming velocities at fin heights below the critical value, computed
from self-propulsion simulations, are very small indicating inefficient swimming, i.e., large COT. Thus,
optimal swimming conditions do not fall within this regime. We do not present these data because the
numerical accuracy was not sufficient to report them quantitatively. It was computationally expensive
for us to explore this regime because very refined meshes are required in this case to resolve the flow due
to a tiny ribbon fin attached to a large plate.

B.2

Cost of transport (COT)

To undersand the COT trends we first consider the trend of average power plotted in Fig. 6a. It is seen
that the data fit a single curve that scales as h3 over the entire range. It is found from our computations
that the power is dominated by the work done to flap the ribbon fin laterally. The velocity Vw of
lateral motion is maximum at the bottom edge of the ribbon fin and scales as hθmax f . Thus, the power
is expected to scale as ρVw3 A, where A is some scale for area. The power spent is not substantially
influenced by the swimming velocity for the scenarios considered here. Our computations also show that

36

the dominant contribution to power spent from lateral flapping comes from the bottom edge of the fin.
Thus, the appropriate scale for A is not expected to depend strongly on h. Therefore, it follows that
power P ∼ h3 , consistent with Figure 6a.
To compute the COT analytically we use the curve fit for power in Fig. 6a and divide it by the
analytically obtained swimming velocity (equation 15). This is plotted in Fig. 6c and compared with the
COT computed from self-propulsion simulations. The agreement is found to be good.
The analytic solution helps to better understand the trend in COT = P/Us above the critical fin
height. Since the swimming velocity changes faster with respect to h at lower values of h, it compensates
for the h3 rise of power. This gives the low and nearly constant trend of COT with respect to h in the
simulation data. At larger h the swimming velocity increases with respect to h at a rate that is less than
h3 . Hence, COT = P/Us increases with respect to h, thus, making swimming with a larger fin less and
less effective. As noted before, the variation in the swimming velocity can be understood in terms of
different scalings, with respect to h, of the drag and thrust of the ribbon fin. Therefore, the key factors
that explain the trends in COT with respect to the fin height are the different mechanisms of drag and
thrust on the ribbon fin.

B.3

Effect of a realistic fish body drag

In case of the idealized plate-fin swimmer, the plate drag is dominated by boundary layer flow and scales
as U 3/2 . In case of an actual fish, this may not be an accurate drag estimate due to the presence of
form drag on the body. To ensure that the key features obtained in the idealized plate-fin model are
not affected by this factor, we consider an analytic solution with a different body drag. To that end, we
replace the plate drag term CU 3/2 in equation 14 with EU 2 , which represents the typical pressure drag
scaling at high Reynolds numbers. Our prior simulations for the drag force on a realistic CAD model of
the body of a black ghost knifefish [30], give E = 0.055 mN-s2 /cm2 . Using this drag model for the body
we find the analytic solution for the swimming velocity. Then we estimate the COT for the body-fin
assembly by assuming that the primary contribution to power comes from the fin – which was verified in
the plate-fin case. To obtain COT, we use the same power curve as that in Fig. 6a and divide it by the
analytically calculated swimming velocity based on the body drag model. Fig. 6c shows a comparison
between the COT for the plate-fin and body-fin assemblies. The key features pertaining to the minimum
in COT are the same. Thus, all the trends discussed above about optimal fin height are applicable even

37

with a realistic body drag.

C

Sensitivity of COT to perturbations in plate height

We measured the body and the fin height of 13 species from 8 genera of South American weakly electric
fishes in the family Apteronotidae (see Section 4.3 and Table 3). We found that the mean body height, at
mid-fin length, was 1.86 cm with a standard deviation of 0.85 cm. The mean fin height, at mid-fin length,
was measured to be 0.97 cm. This is within the range our prediction for optimal fin height. Although
the standard deviation of the fin height is as high as 0.84 cm, the measured fin height does not vary
significantly. The standard deviation of fin height is 0.33 cm.
In this section we investigate how sensitive the COT trend is to variations in plate height. Note that
the COT trend is the one that leads to the prediction of the fin height. For this, holding the fin height
constant, we first find the rate of change of swimming speed with plate height using equation 15. The
rate of change of velocity is then used to find the change in cost of transport due to perturbations in
plate height. The change in cost of transport will provide insights into how optimal fin height will change
with plate height.
The rate of change of swimming velocity with plate height, after differentiating equation 15 at constant
fin height, is given by

√ 

∂Us
C 0 U 3/2
B(2A1 (Uw − Us ) + A2 )
3C Us
=−
+
,
∂s
B
(A1 (Uw − Us )2 + A2 (Uw − Us ))2
2B

(16)

where C 0 = ∂C/∂s. The drag on the plate has a linear dependence on the plate height. Consequently, C
will also have a linear dependence on plate height. We find C 0 = ∂C/∂s = 0.0085 mN-s3/2 /cm3/2 .
The rate of change of cost of transport is found by taking the derivative of P/Us with respect to s at
constant fin height. It is given by
COT ∂Us
∂COT
=−
.
∂s
Us ∂s

(17)

The change in cost of transport, ∆COT , due to a perturbation in plate height, ∆s, is computed using
the above equation. This is used to estimate the change in the computed value of the cost of transport
corresponding to the standard deviation of the measured body height of fishes. These estimated changes

38

are plotted in Figure 6. It is seen that although the plate height does vary, the corresponding variation
in COT is very small at small fin height h, while at larger values of h the change is moderate. In short,
the basic trend of the COT with fin height is unaltered by changes to the plate height.

D

Navier-Stokes equation

The Navier-Stokes equation for incompressible flow
∂u
1
+ (u · ∇)u = − ∇p + ν∇2 u,
∂t
ρ

(18)

where u is the fluid velocity, p is the pressure, ν is the kinematic viscosity of the fluid, and ρ is the fluid
density. The second term on the left-hand-side is the nonlinear inertia term referred to in the Manuscript.

39

References
1. Grillner, S., 2003 The motor infrastructure: from ion channels to neuronal networks. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience 4, 573–586.
2. McLean, D. L., Masino, M. A., Koh, I. Y., Lindquist, W. B. & Fetcho, J. R., 2008 Continuous shifts
in the active set of spinal interneurons during changes in locomotor speed. Nature neuroscience
11, 1419–1429.
3. Turner, R. W., Maler, L. & Burrows, M., 1999 Special issue on electroreception and electrocommunication. J. Exp. Biol. 202, 1167–1458.
4. Krahe, R. & Fortune, E., 2013 Electric fishes: neural systems, behavior and evolution. J. Exp.
Biol. .
5. MacIver, M. A., Fontaine, E. & Burdick, J. W., 2004 Designing future underwater vehicles: principles and mechanisms of the weakly electric fish. IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 29, 651–659.
6. Neveln, I. D., Bai, Y., Snyder, J. B., Solberg, J. R., Curet, O. M., Lynch, K. M. & MacIver, M. A.,
2013 Biomimetic and bio-inspired robotics in electric fish research. Journal of Experimental Biology
216, in press.
7. Colgate, J. E. & Lynch, K. M., 2004 Mechanics and control of swimming: A review. IEEE Journal
of Oceanic Engineering 29, 660–673.
8. Webb, P. W., 1984 Form and function in fish swimming. Sci. Am. 251, 58–68.
9. Ruiz-Torres, R., Curet, O. M., Lauder, G. V. & MacIver, M. A., 2013 Kinematics of the ribbon
fin in hovering and swimming of the electric ghost knifefish. The Journal of Experimental Biology
216, 823–834.
10. Lighthill, J., 1975 Mathematical biofluiddynamics. Philadelphia, PA: SIAM.
11. Lighthill, J., 1971 Large-amplitude elongated-body theory of fish locomotion. Proc. Roy. Soc. B.
179, 125–138.
12. Lighthill, J. & Blake, R., 1990 Biofluiddynamics of balistiform and gymnotiform locomotion 1.
Biological background, and analysis by elongated-body theory. J. Fluid Mech. 212, 183–207.

40

13. Blake, R. W., 1983 Swimming in the electric eels and knifefishes. Can. J. Zool. 61, 1432–1441.
14. Shirgaonkar, A. A., Curet, O. M., Patankar, N. A. & MacIver, M. A., 2008 The hydrodynamics of
ribbon-fin propulsion during impulsive motion. J. Exp. Biol. 211, 3490–3503.
15. Neveln, I. D., Bale, R., Bhalla, A. P. S., Curet, O. M., Patankar, N. A. & MacIver, M. A., 2013
Undulating fins produce off-axis thrust and flow structures. Journal of Experimental Biology) p.
in press.
16. Videler, J. J. & Hess, F., 1984 Fast continuous swimming of two pelagic predators, saithe (pollachius
virens) and mackerel (scomber scombrus): A kinematic analysis. J. Exp. Biol. 109, 209–228.
17. Tytell, E. D. & Lauder, G. V., 2004 The hydrodynamics of eel swimming: I. Wake structure. J.
Exp. Biol. 207, 1825–1841.
18. Borazjani, I. & Sotiropoulos, F., 2008 Numerical investigation of the hydrodynamics of carangiform
swimming in the transitional and inertial flow regimes. Journal of Experimental Biology 211, 1541–
1558.
19. MacIver, M. A., Sharabash, N. M. & Nelson, M. E., 2001 Prey-capture behavior in gymnotid
electric fish: Motion analysis and effects of water conductivity. J. Exp. Biol. 204, 543–557.
20. Shirgaonkar, A. A., MacIver, M. A. & Patankar, N. A., 2009 A new mathematical formulation and
fast algorithm for fully resolved simulation of self-propulsion. J. Comput. Phys. 228, 2366–2390.
21. Peng, J. & Dabiri, J., 2008 The ‘upstream wake’ of swimming and flying animals and its correlation
with propulsive efficiency. The Journal of Experimental Biology 211, 2669–2677.
22. Fish, F. E. & Lauder, G. V., 2006 Passive and active flow control by swimming fishes and mammals.
Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 38, 193–224.
23. Schultz, W. W. & Webb, P. W., 2002 Power requirements of swimming: Do new methods resolve
old questions? Integr. Comp. Biol. 42, 1018–1025.
24. Shen, L., Zhang, X., Yue, D. K. P. & Triantafyllou, M. S., 2003 Turbulent flow over a flexible wall
undergoing a streamwise travelling wave motion. J. Fluid Mech. 484, 197–221.

41

25. Albert, J. S., 2001 Species diversity and phylogenetic systematics of american knifefishes (gymnotiformes, teleostei). Misc. Publ. Mus. Zool. Univ. Mich. 190, 1–127.
26. Curet, O. M., Patankar, N. A., Lauder, G. V. & MacIver, M. A., 2011 Mechanical properties of a
bio-inspired robotic knifefish with an undulatory propulsor. Bioinspir. Biomim. 6.
27. Kern, S. & Koumoutsakos, P., 2006 Simulations of optimized anguilliform swimming. J. Exp. Biol.
209, 4841–4857.
28. Albert, J. S. & Crampton, W. G. R., 2005 Diversity and phylogeny of neotropical electric fishes
(Gymnotiformes). In Electroreception, pp. 360–409. New York: Springer.
29. Crampton, W. G. R. & Albert, J. S., 2006 Evolution of electric signal diversity in gymnotiform
fishes. In Communication in Fishes (eds. F. Ladich, S. Collin, P. Moller & B. Kapoor), pp. 641–725.
Science Publishers Inc., Enfield, NH.
30. MacIver, M. A., Shirgaonkar, A. A. & Patankar, N. A., 2010 Energy-information trade-offs between
movement and sensing. PLoS Comput. Biol. 6, e1000769.

