Flocking and turning: a new model for self-organized collective motion
Andrea Cavagnaa,b,c , Lorenzo Del Castelloa,b , Irene Giardinaa,b,c , Tomas Grigerad,e , Asja Jelica,b , Stefania Melilloa,b ,
Thierry Moraf , Leonardo Parisia,b , Edmondo Silvestria,b,g , Massimiliano Vialea,b , and Aleksandra M. Walczakh
a
Istituto Sistemi Complessi (ISC–CNR), Via dei Taurini 19, 00185 Roma, Italy
Dipartimento di Fisica, “Sapienza” Universitá di Roma, P.le Aldo Moro 2, 00185 Roma, Italy
c
Initiative for the Theoretical Sciences, The Graduate Center, 365 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10016 USA
d
Instituto de Investigaciones Fisicoquı́micas Teóricas y Aplicadas (INIFTA) and Departamento de Fı́sica,
Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, c.c. 16, suc. 4, 1900 La Plata, Argentina
e
CONICET La Plata, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientı́ficas y Técnicas, Argentina
f
Laboratoire de Physique Statistique de l’École Normale Supérieure,
CNRS and Universites Paris VI and Paris VII,
24 rue Lhomond, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
g
Dipartimento di Matematica e Fisica - Universitá Roma Tre,
Via della Vasca Navale, 84, 00146 Roma, Italy, and
h
Laboratoire de Physique Théorique de l’École Normale Supérieure,
CNRS and University Paris VI, 24 rue Lhomond, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
(Dated: January 22, 2015)

arXiv:1403.1202v2 [cond-mat.stat-mech] 21 Jan 2015

b

Birds in a flock move in a correlated way, resulting in large polarization of velocities. A good
understanding of this collective behavior exists for linear motion of the flock. Yet observing actual
birds, the center of mass of the group often turns giving rise to more complicated dynamics, still
keeping strong polarization of the flock. Here we propose novel dynamical equations for the collective motion of polarized animal groups that account for correlated turning including solely social
forces. We exploit rotational symmetries and conservation laws of the problem to formulate a theory in terms of generalized coordinates of motion for the velocity directions akin to a Hamiltonian
formulation for rotations. We explicitly derive the correspondence between this formulation and
the dynamics of the individual velocities, thus obtaining a new model of collective motion. In the
appropriate overdamped limit we recover the well-known Vicsek model, which dissipates rotational
information and does not allow for polarized turns. Although the new model has its most vivid
success in describing turning groups, its dynamics is intrinsically different from previous ones in a
wide dynamical regime, while reducing to the hydrodynamic description of Toner and Tu at very
large length-scales. The derived framework is therefore general and it may describe the collective
motion of any strongly polarized active matter system.

Flocks of birds represent paradigmatic cases of emergent collective behavior, where short range interactions
between individuals lead to nontrivial movement patterns
on the large scale[1–5]. Several models have been developed by biologists [6–10], physicists [11–17] and control
theorists [23, 24] to describe flocking behavior. Some
of these models greatly improved our understanding of
collective motion, offering a powerful description of the
large scale properties of active systems [18–21]. However, recent experiments on real flocks [25] revealed new
surprising features in the way collective turns are performed that are still unaccounted for, urging for a novel
theoretical explanation.
The most conspicuous feature of flocking is the presence of collective order: flocks are strongly polarized
groups, where individuals all move in approximately the
same direction. This kind of orientational order can be
naturally explained in terms of alignment interactions
between the birds velocities and basically all models of
flocking include a ‘social’ force term, describing the tendency of individuals to adjust their flight direction to
those of neighbors. Recently, using inference techniques
on real data of flocking birds [26], it was in fact shown
that simple models based on pairwise alignment topological interactions are able to explain the long-range corre-

lations between flight directions and the large degree of
coherence exhibited by natural flocks [27].
The role of alignment is emphasized in the simplest
model of flocking, the Vicsek model [11]. In the Vicsek
model flocking individuals are described as self-propelled
particles of constant speed, where the velocity (i.e. the
flight direction) of each particle is updated from one time
step to the next by computing the average direction of
motion of neighbors. Several variants of the model have
been analyzed in the literature, where additional cohesive
terms are added [9, 13, 14, 18], and interactions are chosen topologically rather than metrically (as in the original version) [17, 28]. In all these cases the structure of
the dynamical equations always remains the same, where
alignment forces due to neighbors directly act on the individual velocity. In other terms, the velocity evolves
according to a first order Langevin equation, its time
increments being determined by the social force and random noise. This kind of dynamics generates long-range
order at low noise and scale-free correlations in the polarized phase, both experimentally observed features of natural flocking. Additionally, at very large scales all these
models are well described by the hydrodynamic theory
of flocking, whose intriguing predictions of giant density
fluctuations, propagating sound modes and anomalous

2
diffusion have been observed in a variety of active inanimate and animate fluids [18, 20–22].
However, the Vicsek model does not correctly describe
the way collective turns occur in natural flocks. Recent
experiments on starling flocks [25] show that collective
turns involve linear propagation of purely directional information (the direction of motion of the birds) and curvature (of the individual trajectories), without any local
change in density. Turns start locally in space (one single individual starts the turn) and occur very quickly,
the turning front propagating with a speed that does
not depend on the density of the flock. These ‘turning
modes’ travel extremely fast and undamped through the
group, with a linear dispersion law analogous to superfluid transport [25]. This is different from what happens
in the Vicsek model: the hydrodynamic theory of flocking, that describes the long-wavelength behavior of the
Vicsek model, predicts propagating sound modes that
couple orientational and density disturbances [18, 22].
These are not, however, the kind of modes observed in
experiments, where density does not play any role and
curvature propagates together with direction. In fact,
turns typically occur in finite groups and on short scales,
outside the hydrodynamic regime described by [18, 22].
On such scales the Vicsek model does not account for
directional propagation: if a directional disturbance is
created in the system, such as a few individuals willing
to turn and change direction of motion, the turning information is transmitted diffusively and attenuated, i.e.
‘turning’ modes are non-propagating overdamped modes
(see Fig. 1 and sec. V).
In Ref. [25] some of us showed that there are two
crucial and connected ingredients missing in the microscopic dynamics of the Vicsek model, that must be taken
into account to theoretically reproduce the dispersion law
observed in turning flocks: 1) the presence of a conservation law associated to the rotational symmetry of the
system; 2) the existence of a behavioral inertia mediating
the effect of the social force. In this paper we introduce
a new microscopic model for flocking where these two
ingredients are appropriately incorporated. This model
provides a unified general set of equations to describe systems of interacting self-propelled individuals, where all
the salient traits of real flocking - not only order and correlations, but also turns and information propagation are correctly reproduced. Interestingly, the Vicsek model
can be retrieved as the overdamped limit of this more
general model. Additionally, in the long wavelength limit
the model is well described by the hydrodynamic theory
of flocking of Toner and Tu [18] and is therefore consistent with its predictions on the large scale behavior.
Because the derivation of our new model will be somewhat lengthy, we start by stating the final equations. As
we shall see, the crucial ingredient of the new dynamics
is the conservation of the internal angular momentum,
namely of the spin and the introduction of a spin inertia.
For this reason we will refer to these new equations as

start
of turn

real flock

start
of turn

Vicsek model

FIG. 1. Schematic representation of turn propagation in real
and Vicsek flocks. a. In real flocks when a bird starts a turn
the turning information is propagated unattenuated through
the whole group and the flock as a whole performs a collective turn. b. In the Vicsek model the turning information is
damped and does not propagate. The representation concerns
scales (group sizes and time) where collective turns occur. In
the hydrodynamic regime the Vicsek model exhibits propagating sound modes - see Sec.IV A.

the inertial spin model:
1
d~vi
= ~si × ~vi
dt
χ


X
~
ξ
J
η
d~
v
d~si
i
i
= ~vi (t) ×  2
+ 
nij ~vj − 2
dt
v0 j
v0 dt
v0

(1)

d~ri
= ~vi (t)
dt
with noise correlator
hξ~i (t) · ξ~j (t0 )i = (2d) η T δij δ(t − t0 ) .

(2)

In these equations ~ri represents the position of particle
i, ~vi its velocity (with fixed speed |~vi | = v0 ), and ~si is a
new variable associated to each particle, representing a
generalized momentum (the spin), connected to the instantaneous curvature of the particle’s trajectory. The
parameter χ is a generalized moment of inertia, η a friction coefficient, and J the strength of the alignment force
to neighbors. The connectivity matrix nij describes who
is the neighbour of whom. Finally T is a generalized
temperature.
These equations might look unfamiliar and difficult to
interpret, but we will show that they are quite natural.
Most of the paper is devoted to explaining how the equations can be derived from general symmetry considerations, what is their meaning, what are the interesting
limiting cases (the Vicsek model and the deterministic
limit), and what are the predictions of the model for information propagation in the ordered phase. We hope the
reader will go through this whole exercise, but for those
less interested in the details, the last section of the paper
presents in a self-contained way numerical simulations of
model (1) and illustrates its behavior.

3
I.

SETTING UP THE STAGE

Our aim in this work is to introduce a model of flocking
able to describe collective turning and information propagation in flocks. Since these phenomena occur on finite
scales of space and time, we need to go beyond hydrodynamics. As a consequence, the universality of the long
length scale behavior is lost, and a degree of arbitrariness
arises in the way we chose the terms of the microscopic
dynamical equations. One way to address this issue is
to propose a model and check a posteriori its validity.
The reader can look at Eqs. (1) as our guess, and then
directly skip to the last section, where we show with numerical simulations that model (1) correctly describes the
experimental results of [25].
In the following sections we will follow a longer route,
and show that it is possible to construct a microscopic
model of collective motion starting from effective variables, symmetries, conservation laws and Hamiltonian
dynamics. This may seem a bit formal when we think
about systems as complex and highly dissipative as real
flocks. However, our point will be that all the nontrivial
dissipative nature of animals’ active motion can be captured by an effective constraint on their velocity. Once
we find the right set of canonical variables enforcing this
constraint, we are able to give a Hamiltonian description
of flocks. In a second part of the paper, we then generalize this description to include non-Hamiltonian contributions and noise.
In Sec. I A we want to make this formal description
easier to understand by going back to a very simple (in
fact, quite trivial) example, showing that the use of effective variables and symmetries in presence of a constraint
is quite standard in physics.
For the sake of simplicity we will assume in this section
that bird velocities lie on a plane. Although this is true
in most experimental cases [25], it is not an essential
mathematical condition, and in the next sections we will
analyze the fully three-dimensional case. We will also
disregard the reciprocal movement of birds (which is very
low during real turns [25]) when deriving analytically an
expression for the dispersion law. Later in Sec. V we
then perform numerical simulations of model (1) where
the complete dynamics of positions, velocities and spins
is implemented, and network rearrangements are fully
taken into account.
A.

Circular motion in the external space of
position

Consider a point on a plane, with coordinate ~r and
linear momentum p~, subject to the constraint,
|~r | = r0 .

(3)

The constraint indicates that the point is confined on a
circle of radius r0 . How is the circular constraint implemented in practice? We do not know, but probably in

a complicated way. We know there must be forces acting on the particle that are hard to describe explicitly.
We also know that the standard canonical variables (~r, p~)
are not very convenient to describe the system. The standard thing to do is to introduce a new coordinate that
automatically enforces constraint (3). This coordinate is
the polar angle θ, whose relation to the coordinate of the
particle is simply
~r = r0 exp (iθ) .

(4)

The variable θ parametrizes the rotation in the (external)
space of coordinates. The momentum conjugated to θ is
the generator of this rotation [29, 30], namely the orbital
angular momentum, l. Hence, (θ, l) are a pair of canonical conjugated variables and, in absence of forces other
than the ones enforcing the constraint, the Hamiltonian
is given by
H=

l2
,
2I

(5)

where I is the moment of inertia – the resistance of the
point to change its angular momentum. The Hamilton
equations of motion are
dθ
∂H
= {θ, H} =
= l/I ,
dt
∂l
dl
∂H
= {l, H} = −
=0,
dt
∂θ

(6)
(7)

where the Poisson bracket is defined as
{A, B} =

∂A ∂B
∂A ∂B
−
.
∂θ ∂l
∂l ∂θ

(8)

The fact that the angular momentum l is the generator
of the rotation parametrized by θ is expressed by the
relation,
dA
= {A, l} .
dθ

(9)

The rotational symmetry of the problem ensures
(through Noether’s theorem) that the generator of the
rotation, l, is conserved, so that the particle performs
rotational uniform motion with constant angular velocity, θ̇. However, if a dissipative term proportional to θ̇
were present in (7) the particle would eventually stop rotating, unless there is some external injection of angular
momentum.
The message of this repetition of classical mechanics is
that, regardless of the complexity by which the constraint
is enforced in practice (3), once we introduce the right
canonical variables we can completely forget about these
complications. Additionally, the symmetry of the Hamiltonian with respect to the transformation parametrized
by the effective coordinate ensures the conservation of the
generator of the transformation itself, that is the momentum.

4
B.

Circular motion in the internal space of velocity

Flocks are out-of-equilibrium systems, where energy
is continuously injected and dissipated at the individual level. For this reason, linear momentum is not conserved and it is not possible to use a Hamiltonian description in the standard canonical variables (positions
and velocities). However, the only crucial consequence
of this very complicated aerodynamics and energetics of
bird motion (including the interaction with the surrounding medium) is that individuals move at approximately
constant speed. Experimental findings show that fluctuations in the speed are indeed very small, both during
straight flight [27] and during turns [25]. The simplest
way to describe the active nature of the system is therefore to model individuals as self-propelled particles moving at constant speed, as in the original Vicsek model,
|~v | = v0 .

(10)

This constraint on the velocity of a single bird is analogous to the constraint on the position of standard circular
motion which we have seen above, equation (3). Hence,
as in that case, we must find a generalized coordinate
which automatically enforces this constraint. This coordinate is the phase, ϕ, namely the orientation of the
velocity on the plane,
~v = v0 exp (iϕ) .

(11)

Note that the phase ϕ is the parameter of the rotation
in the internal space of velocity, while θ was the parameter of the rotation in the external space of positions.
This difference is crucial: the generator of the rotation
parametrized by ϕ is not the orbital angular momentum
l, but rather the internal angular momentum, or spin, s.
The variables (ϕ, s) are the canonically conjugated pair
enforcing constraint (10), exactly as (θ, l) are those enforcing constraint (3). For this reason, the single-particle
Hamiltonian in absence of forces other than those enforcing the constraint is given by
s2
,
H=
2χ

(12)

where χ is a generalized moment of inertia quantifying
the resistance of a bird to a change of its spin. The
equations of motions are
dϕ
∂H
= {ϕ, H} =
= s/χ ,
dt
∂s
ds
∂H
= {s, H} = −
=0.
dt
∂ϕ

(13)

The symmetry of the Hamiltonian under rotations in the
internal space ensures that the spin is conserved. Hence,
this motion is simply one where the velocity rotates at
constant angular velocity, ϕ̇ = s/χ. Here we are considering the idealized case where noise and dissipation are
absent in the system, so that the spin is fully conserved.

Later on we will introduce dissipation, which causes eventually the spin, and thus the angular velocity, to decay
to zero in absence of external injection of spin.

C.

From one to many birds

To describe flocks we must generalize Hamiltonian (13)
to the case of many interacting particles, each one with
its phase and spin, (ϕi , si ). The obvious generalization
is the following [25]:
H = V ({ϕi }) +

X s2
i
.
2χ
i

(14)

In this expression, V ({ϕi }) is a potential describing the
interaction between particles. The Hamilton equations
of motions are
dϕi
∂H
si
=
=
dt
∂si
χ
dsi
∂H
∂V
=−
=−
.
dt
∂ϕi
∂ϕi

(15)

The only thing we need to know about the interaction potential V is that it is rotationally symmetric: because all
directions of motion are a priori equally likely at the individual and collective level, it is reasonable to expect that
interactions between individuals will respect this symmetry. This means that V (and therefore the Hamiltonian)
is invariant under a global rotation of all the velocity vectors ~vi , that is under the transformation ϕi → ϕi + δϕ.
Thanks to Noether’s theorem, this global symmetry implies a global conservation law. Although the individual
spin si is now notPconstant, due to the force ∂V /∂ϕi , the
total spin, S = i si , is conserved. This is clear from
Hamilton’s second equation,
X ∂V
dS
=−
=0,
dt
∂ϕi
i

(16)

where the r.h.s. vanishes as a consequence of the symmetry, V ({ϕi }) = V ({ϕi +δϕ}). We will see later on that in
the continuum space limit, equation (16) becomes a continuity equation for the spin field. We will also see that
this conservation law is the crucial mathematical ingredient that allows for the propagation of undamped turns
in natural flocks [25].
It is very important to understand that in the case of
many particles, a uniform rotation of the polar angle θ
and a uniform rotation of the phase ϕ give two completely
different results. The θ-rotation, generated by the orbital
angular momentum l, acts on the positions of the points
and therefore it gives rise to parallel paths trajectories:
these all have the same origin as a centre of rotation, but
different radii of curvature. On the other hand, the ϕrotation, generated by the spin s, acts on the velocities of
the points, giving rise to equal radius trajectories: these
have different centres of rotation, but the same radius

5
of curvature. Turning flocks of birds are known to move
along equal radius trajectories [25, 31], as this is the only
way to keep cohesion at constant speed. This experimental observation confirms that phase and spin are indeed
the correct canonical variables.
Let us summarize this introductory Section. We describe birds’ motion through a set of effective conjugated
variables, the phase ϕi and the spin si , that automatically enforce the constraint of constant speed, |~vi | = v0 .
This allows us to disregard the highly complex and dissipative mechanism enforcing this constraint and to switch
to a Hamiltonian description. Once the speed is constant,
the only transformation that the velocity can undergo is
a rotation, which is parametrized by the phase. The generator of this rotation is the spin (internal angular momentum), so that in presence of rotationally symmetric
forces the total spin of the system is conserved. The way
real birds turn is of course complicated, involving the details of flight aerodynamics. However, as long as birds
are able to control their motion keeping their speed fixed
and performing equal radius turning - as they do - they
can be described in a simple way within this framework.
II.

DETERMINISTIC EQUATIONS FOR THE
VELOCITY AND THE SPIN

We have written the dynamical equations for the phase
and the spin, which are the canonical variables, but not
for the velocity. However, in order to actually run a simulation of a system of self-propelled particles, we need
to know how the velocities evolve in time. Because the
velocity is not a canonical variable, the update equations
for ~vi will be nontrivial. Moreover, we need to study the
fully three-dimensional case, in order to have a model as
general as possible. In this Section we will write the dynamical equations for the velocity, in absence of noise and
dissipation, which amounts to describing a deterministic
flock. Noise and dissipation will be introduced later on.
A.

From the phase to the velocity

In the context of Hamiltonian dynamics, there is a
standard method to retrieve the dynamical evolution of
any observable once the Hamiltonian is given in terms of
canonical variables (here phase and spin). This method
is to calculate the Poisson brackets with the Hamiltonian, which is the time-evolution operator. In the simple
planar case discussed in the previous section, we have
vi = exp(iϕi ), hence
dvi
∂vi ∂H
∂vi ∂H
si
= {vi , H} =
−
= i vi .
dt
∂ϕi ∂si
∂si ∂ϕi
χ

(17)

In the planar case the velocity is a two dimensional vector
on the (x, y) plane, whereas the spin (the generator of the
rotations of v in the plane) can be seen as a vector along
the z direction orthogonal to the plane. In this vectorial

description, the term i vi si at the r.h.s of (17) is a vector
orthogonal to both vi and si , hence it is simply the cross
(vector) product between vi and si . We therefore can
write (with a slight abuse of notation)
d~vi
1
= ~si × ~vi .
dt
χ

(18)

The derivation of equation (18) can be generalized to the
case of a fully three-dimensional velocity. In this case
we must introduce three phases, {ϕai } (a = x, y, z), each
one parametrizing the rotation around a different cartesian axis. Accordingly, the generator of the symmetry,
i.e. the spin, becomes a full three-dimensional vector,
~si = {sai }. With this notation, for example, ϕz is the angle parametrizing rotations around the z axis (i.e. acting
in the xy plane) and sz is the corresponding spin (oriented along z). Rotations around the z axis leave the z
component of ~v unaltered while effectively rotating the
projection of ~v in the plane orthogonal to z. Thus ϕz
plays the role of a polar coordinate in the xy plane, and
it is equivalent to ϕ in the planar case discussed in the
previous section. We have,
q
vy = v02 − vz2 sin(ϕz )
(19)
q
vx = v02 − vz2 cos(ϕz ) .
(20)
Analogous relations hold connecting ϕx and ϕy to the
components of ~v . We can now explicitly compute the
equations for the velocities by using Poisson’s brackets,
c
X ∂v a ∂H
dvia
∂via ∂H
i
b si
= {via , H} =
−
=

v
abc
i
dt
∂ϕci ∂sci
∂sci ∂ϕci
χ
c
a
a
a
X
dsi
∂si ∂H
∂si ∂H
c ∂H
= {sai , H} =
c ∂sc − ∂sc ∂ϕc = abc vi
dt
∂ϕ
∂vib
i
i
i
i
c

(21)
where abc is the fully antisymmetric Levi-Civita symbol, and we exploited the fact that ∂via /∂ϕbi = −abc vic .
We can rewrite Eqs. (21) in a more compact form using
vectorial notation, and finally get the set of dynamical
equations of the inertial spin model (deterministic case),
d~vi
= −~vi ×
dt
d~si
= −~vi ×
dt
d~ri
= ~vi ,
dt

δH
1
= ~si × ~vi
δ~si
χ
δH
= ~vi × F~i
δ~vi

(22)
(23)
(24)

where we have also added the kinematic relationship between the velocity v~i of a particle and its position in space
~ri . We note that these equations are formally analogous
to what one would get for rotations and circular motion
in real space, with the external variables ~r and ~l playing
the role of ~v and ~s. In this last case, though, equation
(24) would of course not be present.

6

si
vi

sj

to the resistance of the bird to change its banking angle
(see [25]).

vj

B.

FIG. 2. Schematic representation of velocity, spin, and trajectory for two particles.

In (22-24) H is the same Hamiltonian as in (14) (but
written in terms of velocities rather than phases) and
F~i = −δH/δ~vi is therefore the force acting on particle i
due to interactions with other particles. For alignment
interactions we have
H(~v , ~s) = −

1 X 2
J X
nij ~vi · ~vj +
s ,
2
2v0 ij
2χ i i

(25)

where nij is the connectivity matrix (being 1 if j is a
particle interacting with i and 0 otherwise), and J is
P
the alignment strength. Therefore F~i = (J/v02 ) j nij ~vj .
Note that, contrary to Eqs. (15), Eqs.(22-24) do not
have a Hamiltonian form, precisely because (~vi , s~i ) are
not canonical variables (~si is the conjugated moment to
the phase ϕ
~ i , not to the velocity vector ~vi ). Still, they
retain a pseudo-Hamiltonian structure where the derivatives of the Hamiltonian are combined with a vectorial
product. Thanks to this structure, the speed of the individual particles is automatically conserved by the dynamics. Besides, the equations also conserve ~si · ~vi , which we
fix equal to zero (the only solution in absence of forces).
Finally, the Hamiltonian H itself is conserved by these
equations.
We can now explore how Eqs.(22-24) determine the
motion of particles in space (see Fig. 2). When the spin
~si is equal to zero, the direction of motion of particle i
always remains the same and the particle therefore follows a straight path in real space. When ~si is different
from zero but constant, the flight direction obeys uniform
circular motion and the particle performs a turn in real
space with a constant radius of curvature R ∼ v0 χ/|~si |.
Hence, the spin ~si has a clear kinematic meaning being
related to the instantaneous curvature κ = 1/R of the
trajectory. When there are forces acting on the particle the local spin/curvature ~si changes in time, inducing
a variation in the rate of direction changes. The paths
followed by the particles in real space depend on the instantaneous realization of the forces. However, the important point is that - whatever these forces are - in our
new model they act on the spin ~si and not directly on the
velocity, ~vi . In other terms, forces cannot change the direction of motion abruptly, but there is an inertial effect
mediated by ~si . In this respect, we see that the generalized inertia χ measures the resistance of the particle to
change the instantaneous radius of curvature of its trajectory. In the case of birds, χ can be explicitly related

Spin conservation and information propagation

Another crucial consequence of the presence of a global
continuous symmetry is that the generator of the symmetry is a constant of motion of the dynamics. In our case,
~ = P ~si is conserved.
this implies that the global spin S
i
Interestingly, for a polarized flock this conservation law
also has local implications (i.e. at the level of individual particles): if a strong misalignment occurs between
a particle i and its neighbors, this causes an excess of
curvature and an excitation of the local spin ~si ; since the
global spin is a conserved quantity, the local excitation
cannot be re-absorbed or dissipated, but must be carried
away. For this reason we expect propagating modes in
this system.
To better understand how this occurs, let us consider
a polarized flock of particles all moving approximately in
the same direction. We stick to the simpler planar case
for convenience, but the argument is general. For an
ordered flock, the rotational symmetry is spontaneously
broken since a specific global direction of motion is selected by the system. Still, a residual symmetry remains
in the space orthogonal to this direction: we can choose
the phase ϕi of each particle as the angle with respect to
the global flock velocity, and use Eqs.(15) to describe the
evolution of such phases.
Since the flock is ordered, phases are
P small and the
potential can be written as V = J/4 ij nij [ϕi − ϕj ]2 .
If phase variations are smooth and we look at distances
larger than the typical distance a between interacting
neighbors, we can consider the continuum limit in space
ϕi (t) → ϕ(~r, t), si (t) → s(~r, t). ThePphase variation
2
between a particle and its neighbors
j nij [ϕi − ϕj ]
2
2
can be conveniently
P P approximated by Jnc a [∇ϕ] , where
nc = (1/N ) i j nij is the average number of interacting neighbors. Then, Eqs.(15) become
∂ϕ
s
=
(26)
∂t
χ
∂s
= nc a2 J∇2 ϕ .
(27)
∂t
Interestingly, the second of these equations can be written as a continuity equation for the field s(~r, t),
∂s
− ∇ · ~j = 0 ,
∂t

(28)

~
with current ~j = nc a2 J ∇ϕ.
This conservation law describing spin flow is precisely the local counterpart of
global spin conservation that we mentioned above. If we
now take a second derivative of ϕ with respect to time,
we immediately get d’Alembert’s equation,
χ

∂2ϕ
= Jnc a2 ∇2 ϕ .
∂t2

(29)

7
This equation can be easily solved in Fourier space to get
the dispersion relation, namely the law describing how
directional information travels through the system. We
find
ω = cs k ,
(30)
p
with cs = Jnc a2 /χ. A real value for the frequency
ω corresponds to propagating modes: what we find is
therefore that a deterministic flock exhibits undamped
propagating modes of the phase. Besides, the dispersion
law is linear, meaning that propagating modes travel at a
well defined speed cs , which is a function of the alignment
strength and the generalized inertia. Linear propagation
is reminiscent of sound propagation in a medium. Here,
however, the modes that we are looking at are not related
to density fluctuations, but to phase fluctuations. In fact
the same equations for the phase we are looking at, and
the same dispersion law, would also hold for a fixed network of particles, e.g. a regular lattice. Phase propagating modes mean that if in a flock a particle starts turning, this change will affect through the alignment term
the spin/curvature of nearby particles, which will start
turning themselves. The information will travel with a
speed cs which is larger the more ordered the flock, and
the whole system will perform a collective turn. As we
shall discuss, this is similar to what happens in natural
flocks of birds, indicating that far from being an idealized
abstract description of collective motion, the deterministic model introduced so far has some crucial ingredients
occurring in real systems.
The field equations we have written for ϕ(~r, t) and
s(~r, t) in this Section make one important approximation, namely that the interaction matrix nij is fixed in
time. Without this approximation we cannot use the
continuous Laplacian, nor obtain d’Alembert’s equation.
This condition is, in general, violated, and this is what
marks the difference between a lattice model and an offlattice model of moving particles, where nij = nij (t) depends on time. However, if the time scale of propagation
in d’Alembert’s equation (29) is shorter than the typical time scale of reshuffling of the network nij , then the
equations are justified. This is indeed the case in natural
flocks of starlings [25], where phenomena like collective
turns happen on a time scale indeed significantly shorter
than the time needed for an individual to change its interacting neighbours. Nevertheless, at the end of this work
we will run numerical simulations of the full model with
varying nij (t) and show that when cs is large enough, the
propagation phenomena are quantitatively in agreement
with the field equations we have written above.
C.

Dynamical universality class

The relationship between symmetries of the system,
equations of motions and conservation laws is a well
known feature of Hamiltonian dynamics and a particular manifestation of Noether’s theorem. The presence

of a continuous symmetry implies the existence of a conserved quantity, and the concomitant linear propagation
of local disturbances. What is novel in our analysis is
that we have studied these properties in the context of
the dynamics of flight directions of flocking particles.
Interestingly, the same structure of equations and
dispersion law that we have introduced for flocks also
hold in other kinds of systems, where a non-conserved
order parameter (the flight direction in the case of
flocks) co-evolve with a conserved quantity (e.g. the
spin/curvature). In fact, Eqs. (27)(28) are formally
identical and belong to the same dynamical universality class as the planar ferromagnet [36] and superfluid
Helium [34, 37] (model F in the Halperin-Hohenberg classification [33]). In liquid Helium, for example, the quantum phase plays the role of the flight direction, the (conserved) superfluid component plays the role of the spin,
~j is the superfluid current, and the propagating wave is
the so-called ‘second sound’ [34, 35, 37]. In the same way,
the full three-dimensional model Eqs (22-24) is equivalent to the isotropic antiferromagnet (model G dynamical
universality class), with exactly the same equations, the
staggered magnetization playing the role of the flight direction, and the (conserved) total magnetization playing
the role of the spin.
In both these cases (model F and model G of [33]),
propagating modes and a linear dispersion law are the
consequence of the rotational symmetry and of the conservation of the spin deriving from it. This is not a
generic feature of spin models. For example, in the case
of the isotropic ferromagnet, the conserved field is the order parameter itself and this conservation does not derive
from any symmetry of the Hamiltonian. In this case the
linear propagation of the phase is lost, and a dissipative,
diffusive dispersion law holds [33]. Therefore, the essential ingredient of linear spin propagation is not simply the
presence of a conserved quantity, but rather the fact that
this conserved quantity must be the generator of a spontaneously broken continuous symmetry. This condition
is the true hallmark of superfluid transport, namely of
the undamped and linear propagation of the spin. In the
case of Helium, the spin is mapped onto the superfluid
component, which propagates through second sound [33],
whereas in the isotropic antiferromagnet one has actual
spin superfluid propagation [33]. In flocks, spin carries
the turning information.

III.

A NEW MODEL OF COLLECTIVE
MOTION

The deterministic inertial spin model we have introduced in the previous Section conserves spin (through
the continuity equation), but it does so a bit too effectively, as in absence of forces the angular velocity remains
forever constant. Here we want to cure this anomaly. An
example may help: although linear momentum conservation and inertia is essential to propagate standard sound

8
in a crystal, we certainly do not expect sound to propagate forever and for infinite distance, as some dissipation
will eventually dampen the signal. The same must be
true for second sound, which is carried by spin conservation. Therefore, we must introduce a dissipative term
coupled to ~s. Moreover, the dissipative term will be associated to a noise term, making the model stochastic.
It is important to understand that the dissipation we
need to introduce is not the standard linear one, proportional to ~x˙ . Standard linear dissipation would drive the
modulus of the velocity to zero, while this cannot happen
here: the constraint |~vi | = v0 must be automatically enforced by our equations. Instead, spin dissipation must
account for the natural and rather intuitive fact that in
absence of spin injection and of interaction with neighbours, a bird is unlikely to turn forever with constant
angular velocity. As we shall see, regulating the strength
of this dissipative term will make the difference between
propagating and nonpropagating information.

A.

The Inertial Spin Model

As we would do for a physical system, we start from
the deterministic structure of the equations (22-24) and
add noise and dissipation to the ‘conservative’ forces F~i =
−δH/δ~vi . In this way we obtain the final equations of the
inertial spin model of collective motion,
d~vi
1
= ~si × ~vi
dt
χ


X
~
J
ξi
d~si
η d~vi
= ~vi (t) ×  2
+ 
nij ~vj − 2
dt
v0 j
v0 dt
v0
d~ri
= ~vi (t) ,
dt

(31)

d~vi
1
= ~si × ~vi
dt
χ
d~si
η
= − ~si .
dt
χ

(35)
(36)

The spin exponentially decays to zero, so that the velocity vector stops rotating. A bird that was originally
turning (~si 6= 0) reduces its spin/curvature until reaching a state of straight motion (~si = 0). Thus η acts as
a damping on the spin and plays the role of a rotational
dissipation.
B.

A closed equation for the velocity

By taking a further time derivative of Eq. (31) and
exploiting Eq. (32), one can get a closed second order
equation in the velocities,
2

d2~vi
~vi d~vi
d~vi
χ 2 +χ 2
+η
=
dt
v0 dt
dt


X
J
nij ~vj  × ~vi + v0 ξ~i⊥ , (37)
= 2 ~vi ×
v0
j
with
~vi ~vi
ξ~i⊥ = ξ~i − (ξ~i · )
,
v0 v0

(32)

(38)

and
(33)

with ~vi ·~si = 0. Here η is a generalized viscous coefficient
and ξ~i is an i.i.d vectorial noise with variance
hξ~i (t) · ξ~j (t0 )i = (2d) η T δij δ(t − t0 ) ,

on the birds and the noise is zero (i.e. Fi = 0, T =
0). We remind that under these conditions, if η = 0 a
bird conserves its local spin, i.e. it keeps turning with
uniform angular velocity. When η 6= 0, on the other
hand, Eqs. (31-32) give,

(34)

where we have introduced the generalized temperature T ,
in analogy to physical systems. Note that, consistently
with our entire description, the constraint |~vi | = v0 is
satisfied by these equations.
The inertial spin model (31-33) represents a full description of the system’s dynamics in terms of the variables (~vi , ~si ). Being a first order system it is relatively
easy to implement numerically, and we shall discuss results of simulations later in the paper. For the time being,
we note that there are four important parameters entering Eqs.(31-33): the alignment strength J, the moment
of inertia χ of the spin, the viscous coefficient η, and the
temperature T . The spin inertia, χ, is the new ingredient
in the dynamics.
To better understand the effect of dissipation, let us
consider the case where there are no social forces acting

hξ~i⊥ (t) · ξ~j⊥ (t0 )i = 2(d − 1) η T δij δ(t − t0 ) .

(39)

Equation (37) is a generalized Langevin equation with respect to the velocity vectors. The first term in the l.h.s is
an inertial second order term, where χ is not the conventional inertia (i.e. the mass of the particle) but measures
the resistance of a particle to change the curvature of
its trajectory. The second term at the l.h.s. is a contribution arising from the constraint on the speed, the
analogue of what would be the centripetal acceleration
for circular motion in ~r space. Its presence is a signature
of the underlying Hamiltonian structure of the equations
and is therefore essential to recover the appropriate deterministic limit when η → 0. The last term in the l.h.s.
is the dissipative term. In the r.h.s. we find the effect of
the social force and the noise.
As compared to other second order equations that have
been considered in the literature [38–42], in Eq.(37) the
connection between inertial terms and symmetries is automatically implemented. We stress that this is in fact a
crucial point, since - as we showed in the previous sections
- the way information propagates is strongly influenced
by this connection.

9
C.

Overdamped limit: the Vicsek model

Interestingly, the original Vicsek model happens to be
the overdamped limit of the inertial spin model, that
is the limit in which the spin inertia becomes negligible
compared to the spin dissipation. Equation (37) is the
full Langevin equation for the velocity, including both
inertial terms (proportional to χ) and a dissipative term
(proportional to η). As usual in the Langevin equation
[43, 44], the overdamped limit is obtained by taking the
limit χ/η 2 → 0, which in our case gives


X
J 
d~vi
nij ~vj  × ~vi + v0 ξ~i⊥ .
(40)
= 2 ~vi ×
η
dt
v0
j
Note that a rescaling of time, t → t0 = t/η, would allow
us to get rid of η both in the equation for ~v and in the
noise correlator (this is the reason why the overdamped
limit is χ/η 2 → 0, rather than χ/η → 0). This time
rescaling is usually taken for granted in the overdamped
limit and for this reason η is normally set equal to 1 in
this limit.
Equation (40) is identical to the Vicsek model (in the
continuous time limit version). The double cross product
in the P
r.h.s. has a clear interpretation. Calling F~i =
2
(J/v0 ) j nij ~vj the social force acting on particle i, we
can exploit the properties of the cross product and write
(~
vi × F~i ) × ~vi = v02 [F~i − (F~i · ~vi )~vi /v02 ]
X
= v02 Fi⊥ = J(
nij ~vj )⊥ .

(41)

j

Only the perpendicular component of the social force
contributes to changing the velocity vector, as it should
be since the speed is constant due to the constraint.
Thus, the double cross product is a formal and clean
way to ensure that the norm of ~vi is conserved during
the dynamics.

D.

Steady state distribution of velocity and spin

We have seen that the dynamical equations of the inertial spin model have their deep roots in the existence of
a symmetry, and its associated conservation law. In fact,
the rotational symmetry and its spontaneous breaking
also have implications when looking at the steady state
distribution of velocity and spin. In general, one might
wonder whether a steady state distribution exists at all
in flocks, since the system is completely out of equilibrium. In fact many of the most intriguing features of
active systems precisely come from their off-equilibrium
nature [21]. Still, if we look at a flock on timescales
smaller than the typical swapping time between an individual an its neighbors, then we can consider the velocities and spins as dynamical variables evolving on a fixed
interaction network. In this case we can show that the

joint distribution probability for velocities and generalized momenta obeys a Fokker-Planck equation [43, 44].
The steady state solution of such an equation reads


1
P (~v , ~s) ∼ exp − H(~v , ~s) =
(42)
T



X
X s2
J
1
i 
nij ~vi · ~vj +
.
exp − − 2
T
2v0 ij
2χ
i
As usual in statistical physics, this probability distribution factorizes between coordinates and momenta, that
is velocities and spins. This result tells us that velocities
are in fact amenable to a statistical description (on scales
where network rearrangements can be disregarded): a
measure exists, which can be used to compute expectation values. This distribution is a Boltzmann distribution, where the ratio between noise and dissipation - what
we called temperature - in fact acts as a real temperature in the statistical sense. Additionally, inertia does
not enter in the velocity distribution. For this reason,
all the static properties of our model (including the velocity correlation functions and the steady-state ordering
properties), are the same as the Vicsek model, which is
described by the very same configurational part.
If we now look at the explicit form of the Hamiltonian in (42), we see that the velocities are described by a
Heisenberg model on a random euclidean lattice (the one
realized by the particles positions). In the ordered phase,
where the rotational symmetry is spontaneously broken,
this distribution generates soft Goldstone modes and long
range correlations corresponding to fluctuations of the individual velocities perpendicular to the global velocity of
the flock [45]. Long-range correlations in velocity fluctuations have been experimentally observed in natural flocks
of birds [27]. Besides, in [26] using inference techniques
on empirical data, we showed that the equal time properties of the velocity fluctuations can be fully described
by a Boltzmann distribution with local pairwise alignment interactions. The model we have discussed so far is
therefore fully consistent with all experimentally known
dynamic and static features of real flocks of birds.

IV.

INFORMATION PROPAGATION IN THE
ORDERED PHASE

Equations (31-33) give rise at low noise to polarized
flocks, much as in the Vicsek model. In Section II we have
seen that for a deterministic flock the rotational symmetry and the concomitant conservation law have strong
implications on the properties of the ordered phase. Now
we would like to understand whether this scenario holds
in presence of noise and dissipation.
Let us consider the system in the strongly polarized
phase. In this case, the individual velocities are very
aligned to each other and the flock as a whole has a non~ . To fix ideas, let us
zero collective direction of motion V

10
assume that the group velocity is along the x direction,
~ = V ~nx , with ~nz = (1, 0, 0). The individual velocities
V
can be conveniently written in terms of a longitudinal
component along the direction of motion, ~nx , and a perpendicular component, i.e. a two dimensional vector ~π
in the two-dimensional (y, z) plane,
~vi =

viL~nx

+ ~πi .

Using the phases defined in the previous sections, we can
write
(45)
(46)

However confusing these relations may seem, they are
correct: a nonzero y component of ~π is obtained by rotating ~v around the z axis, a rotation parametrized by
ϕz . Similarly, a nonzero πz is generated by a rotation
parametrized by ϕy . The crucial point is that, once we
have spontaneous symmetry breaking, only two relevant
phases are left. By using (44-46) into equation (37) and
expanding at the first order (spin wave expansion), we
obtain for each one of the two phases, ϕz and ϕy , the
same equation,
χ

X
d2 ϕi
dϕi
=J
Λij ϕj − η
+ ξi⊥ ,
2
dt
dt
j

χ

(43)

Because of the large polarization all individual velocities
~ , so that π 2  1 and
will be very close to V
i
q
(44)
viL = v02 − πi2 ∼ v0 [1 − πi2 /(2v02 )] .

πy = v0 sin(ϕz ) ∼ v0 ϕz ,
πz = v0 sin(ϕy ) ∼ v0 ϕy .

the discrete
Laplacian with its continuous counterpart,
P
i.e. J j Λij → Jnc a2 ∇2 (where, as before, a is the
typical distance of the interacting neighbors and nc their
number). In this case we can write

(47)

P
where Λij = −nij + δij k nik is the discrete Laplacian.
In general, solving equation (47) is not an easy task,
because the dynamics of the ϕ
~ ’s is coupled in a non-trivial
way with the movement of the particles in space, i.e.
the network nij changes with time. Hydrodynamic theories of flocking address this problem by coarse-graining
the microscopic dynamics and looking at the large-scale
long-time behavior. Here, however, we are interested
in addressing the dynamics of the system on shorter
timescales. We can therefore assume that nij does not
change significantly, as indeed happens in flocks during
collective turns [25]. Later in Sec. V we perform numerical simulations of model (1) where network rearrangements on the scale of turns are fully taken into account.
For a fixed interaction network, the equation for ϕ can
be solved analytically to obtain the dispersion relation.
To do this, we must choose a diagonal representation
both in space and time, i.e. we must diagonalize the
Laplacian Λ, write the equations in terms of its eigenmodes, and Fourier transform with respect to time. This
can be done exactly numerically. Yet a simple analytical
approximation gives us some intuition about the nature
of the dispersion relation. To do this we can proceed as
in the previous section: if we look at spatial scales larger
than the nearest-neighbor distances, we can approximate

∂2ϕ
∂ϕ
= Jnc a2 ∇2 ϕ − η
+ ξ⊥ .
∂t2
∂t

(48)

The propagator (Green function) of this differential equation can be easily computed in Fourier space giving the
following dispersion law
χω 2 − iηω − Jnc a2 k 2 = 0 .

(49)

This dispersion law tells us how local disturbances in the
flight direction of a particle affect the rest of the flock.
If a bird/particle changes its flight direction, will this
perturbation propagate through the entire group or be
damped? The answer to this question depends on the
values of the parameters entering the equations, and in
particular on the balance between dissipation and inertia.
In the deterministic limit η → 0 we get the linear dispersion law ω = cs k discussed in the previous sections
with
s
Jnc a2
.
(50)
cs =
χ
This is the perfectly undamped case of propagating orientational modes. At the opposite end of the spectrum
there is the over-damped limit, χ/η 2 → 0, which, as we
have seen, corresponds to the Vicsek model. In this case
ω is purely imaginary with a quadratic diffusive dispersion law, ω = i(Jnc a2 /η)k 2 . We conclude that in the
Vicsek case there is no propagation, but pure exponential damping. We will see through numerical simulations
that this is indeed what happens: in the Vicsek model it
is not possible to locally initiate a turn that propagates
to the entire flock.
In the general case, where both dissipation and inertia
are different from zero, we obtain
q
ω = i/τ ± ω0 1 − k02 /k 2 ,
(51)
with
ω0 ≡ cs k

,

η
k0 ≡ p
2 Jnc a2 χ

,

τ ≡ 2χ/η .

(52)

Here ω0 is the zero dissipation frequency, while k0 and τ
are the two relevant scales, respectively in wave number
and time, related to the effect of dissipation. With zero
dissipation, we get k0 = 0, τ = ∞ and ω = ω0 : the time
scale needed for dissipation to have an effect is infinite
and linear propagation occurs on all spatial scales. For
η 6= 0, on the other hand, we have two regimes, according to the value of the friction coefficient and of the wave
number k. For k ≥ k0 we have attenuated propagating
waves, as the frequency has both a real and an imaginary

11
part. For k < k0 we have evanescent waves with exponential decay and we recover the overdamped Vicsek-like
behavior.
Consistently with the above analysis we see that the
large scale k → 0 behavior of a system of self-propelled
particles is well accounted for by the Vicsek overdamped
case and is therefore well described by the hydrodynamic
theories of flocking. There is however a crucial ingredient to be considered when dealing with natural or even
artificial groups: flocks are finite. The smallest value of
k in the system is kmin ∼ 1/L, where L is the linear size
of the flock. Hence, even if dissipation is present, if it is
sufficiently small it does not affect the scales relevant for
information to travel through the group. More precisely,
if,
√
Jnc χa
η<
: underdamped limit ,
(53)
L
then there is linear propagation of the information
throughout the whole flock. Indeed, for these values
of η the time scale of the exponential decay is τ >
p
χ/(Jnc a2 ) L = L/cs . Therefore, small dissipation implies that the damping time constant is larger than the
time the information takes to travel across the flock. In
other words, the signal is effectively very weakly damped
across the length scale of interest. We conclude that even
when a small dissipation is present, propagation of information is qualitatively the same as that described by the
zero dissipation theory.
Natural flocks of birds appear to be precisely in this
underdamped, quasi-deterministic regime [25]. Experiments on large flocks of starlings performing collective
turns show that, once the turn (i.e. a direction change) is
initiated by some individuals at the edge of the flock, the
turning front propagates through the group with a linear
dispersion law with very limited attenuation. The relationship (50) between the experimentally measured speed
of information propagation cs and the alignment strength
J, predicted by the model in the deterministic limit, is
also remarkably verified [25]. Thus, far from being an idealized construction, the deterministic model introduced
previously truly captures some important mechanisms
occurring in real biological groups.
A.

what happens as these large length (and time) scales are
approached. On the one hand, as we noted in the previous section, when k → 0 the frequency Eq. (51) becomes
purely imaginary indicating that there are not any more
purely directional propagating modes. The physical reason is that for times scales t  τ = 2χ/η the global spin
relaxes due to dissipation and does not act as a quasiconserved variable, thus the conservation law that determined the propagating nature of the modes is lost. In
other terms, the second order terms of the microscopic
dynamics become irrelevant, as well as the coupling between direction and curvature. On the other hand, on
such large time scales the movement of individuals becomes relevant, and crucial: orientational fluctuations
(which would be evanescent on a fixed network) couple
with fluctuations in density. As a consequence, there are
propagating hybridized longitudinal sound modes transporting both directional and density disturbances. The
speed of propagation of such modes usually depends on
the average density (as in standard sound), contrary to
the purely directional propagating modes of the underdamped regime, where the propagation speed cs does
not depend of the flock density and is determined by
the global alignment strength J (i.e. the degree of polar order). Finally, if the interaction between the moving
particles and the surrounding medium becomes important the hydrodynamic theory also predicts shear-bend
modes [18, 46] that propagate directional changes. These
modes are transverse (i.e. they do not exist in d = 2) and
have limited speed in a co-moving reference frame, and
are therefore well distinct from the turning modes observed in flocks, which are longitudinal and have very
fast propagation speeds [25].
Summarizing, in the quasi-deterministic regime k >
k0 , where the spin is a quasi-conserved variable, there
are propagating modes thanks to the coupling between
velocity and spin and the consequent conservation law;
these turning modes transport changes of direction and
curvature and describe collective turns in flocks. In the
hydrodynamic regime, due to the movement of the network, changes in direction couple with changes in local
density generating propagating sound modes; this regime
is universal, i.e. independent of the details of the microscopic dynamics, and does not describe transport of
curvature.

Transition to the hydrodynamic regime

The natural flocks investigated in [25] live in the quasideterministic regime k > k0 . Other systems, however, (or
even very large flocks) might well explore larger lengthscales. This is certainly the case for a variety of fluids or
large assemblies of active individuals. As mentioned in
the previous section, hydrodynamic theories of flocking
offer a sophisticated and detailed description of the k → 0
regime, which has been investigated in numerical simulations and experiments on granular active matter. While
we do not want to give a complete account of this description (we refer the reader to [18]) we briefly comment on

V.

NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS

In the previous sections we have used analytical arguments to derive the predictions of the inertial spin model
on how orientational information propagates in the ordered phase. We did that, however, working under two
assumptions: we disregarded effects due to the reshuffling of the interaction network, and we considered the
continuous space limit. While these assumptions are reasonable in certain cases, we want to test the behavior of
the model in full generality. We performed numerical

12
simulations for a wide range of the relevant parameters
χ, η, and J and explored how the values of these parameters determine the collective dynamics of the system.
We implemented a time discretized version of the inertial spin model,
1
~vi (t + dt) = ~vi (t) + ~si (t) × ~vi (t) dt
(54)
χ
J X
nij ~vj (t) dt (55)
~si (t + dt) = ~vi (t) + ~vi (t) × 2
v0 j
η
ξ~i (t) √
− si (t) dt + ~vi (t) ×
dt
χ
v0
~ri (t + dt) = ~ri (t) + ~vi (t) dt

(56)

where we exploited the equation for ~vi in order to replace
d~vi /dt with ~si , and where we recall ~vi · ~si = 0. The noise
variance is
hξ~i (t) · ξ~j (t0 )i = (2d) η T δij δt,t0 .
(57)
Our objective is twofold: on the one hand we want to
check the model’s behavior in the ordered phase in the
various possible regimes; on the other hand we want to
compare it to results obtained in natural flocks of birds
[25]. To this end, we chose the connectivity network between particles according to a topological rule, as in real
flocks [26, 27]: each particle interacts with the first nc
neighbors so that nij = 1 if j is among the first nc neighbors of i, and zero otherwise. We focus on finite groups
of particles with open boundary conditions, but qualitatively similar results also hold for periodic boundary
conditions.
We are interested in understanding how, for different
values of η, χ and J, directional information propagates
in the system, and whether the simulated flock is able
to sustain coherent collective turns as natural flocks do.
In real flocks collective turns start locally: an individual bird, the initiator, starts to turn and then the information about turning propagates through the system
with a linear dispersion law [25]. To mimic this situation, we consider the system at low enough values of
noise as to generate an ordered flock with large polarization (Φ > 0.95 as in natural flocks), and we initialize
all the ~si = 0 so that the flock as a whole performs a
straight motion. Then, we chose at random a particle
inside the flock and make it artificially turn changing its
flight direction with a ramp-like time dependence (red
line in Fig. 3d,e,f). The change in direction of the initiator affects - through Eqs. (56) - the dynamics of the
spins of nearby particles, which might or might not cause
a collective movement. We then look at the behavior of
the whole flock in time to assess whether the signal has
propagated, and what kind of dispersion law is obeyed.
According to the analytical arguments given in the previous section, we expect two different regimes, according
to the values of η and χ:
1) Overdamped regime: η 2 /χ > nc J(a/L)2 . In
this regime, given a system of size L, some attenuated propagation occurs up to certain spatial scales

√
(k ≥ k0 , with k0 = 1/(2a nc Jχ) > 1/L). On
larger scales (k < k0 ) however, dissipation takes
over leading to an exponential decay of the signal.
The extreme case occurs for η 2 /χ → ∞ (or χ/η 2 →
0), corresponding to the Vicsek model, when propagation of orientational perturbations does not occur
(unless we reach hydrodynamic lenght-scales where
density and orientational modes couple, see [18, 22]
and Sec. IV A).
2) Underdamped regime: η 2 /χ  nc J(a/L)2 . In
this regime there is linear propagation of the signal
throughout the whole system with negligible attenuation. The speed of information propagation is
determined solely
by the ratio of alignment to inp
ertia, cs = a nc J/χ.
We performed simulations for values of the parameters
corresponding to these two different regimes. As can be
seen from Fig. 3, what we observe is fully consistent with
what is described above. The top panels in this figure
display the trajectories of the individual particles in the
flock for three decreasing values of η 2 /χ, the trajectory
of the initiator being represented by the thick black line.
The intermediate panels show, for the same events, the
cosine of the velocity of each particle with the original
flight direction of the flock. Here the initiator is represented as a red line, and one can see the ramp-like dependence of the perturbation. The lower panels reproduce
the individual acceleration profiles, and are particularly
useful to determine if and how particles turn, and how
the turning signal is attenuated during time.
The first two cases in Fig. 3 (panels a,b) belong to the
overdamped regime. For values of η 2 /χ much larger than
nc J(a/L)2 (which is of order 1 for our simulations) the
turn of the initiator does not trigger any collective turn,
since the signal does not propagate and is quickly damped
(panel a). We can see from the cosine curves (panel d)
that some of the neighbors feel the disturbance caused
by the initiator, but this effect is very small: no particle follows the initiator, no collective turn is triggered
and the flock ultimately keeps its original flight direction
(see also attached Video 1). For smaller values of η 2 /χ
(panel b) there is some propagation, but it is progressively attenuated as the signal travels through the group
and eventually decays (panels e,h). Some particles are
reached by the directional perturbation before the signal
is damped (corresponding to scales k > k0 ), and follow
the initiator changing their flight direction and performing a turn. Most of the particles, however, are not significantly affected by the perturbation, consistently with
a strong damping of the signal on large enough scales.
This effect is clearly seen by looking at the acceleration
profiles of the particles (Fig. 3h). Some particles display
a profile similar to the one of the initiator with a clear
peak marking the occurrence of a turn. The height of
the peak, however, decreases as the turning information
is transmitted (i.e. particles start turning one after the
other) and at some point it abruptly drops to zero (see

13

FIG. 3. Information propagation in different regimes. a. Strongly overdamped regime, η 2 /χ = 28.8 × 102 . The signal is quickly
dissipated and there is no collective turn. All the particles keep following the initial direction of motion without following the
initiator. The trajectory of the initiator is displayed as a thick black line. η = 60, χ = 1.25, J = 0.8. b. Overdamped regime,
η 2 /χ = 1.8 × 102 . Some propagation occurs, but the signal is strongly attenuated before reaching throughout the whole group.
As a consequence, the flock looses cohesion and coherence while turning. η = 15, χ = 1.25, J = 0.8. c. Underdamped regime,
η 2 /χ = 7.2 × 10−2 . The signal is propagated unattenuated through the whole flock, which performs a neat turn retaining shape
and cohesion. η = 0.3, χ = 1.25, J = 0.8. d, e, f Cosine of the individual velocities with the original flight direction of the flock
for the three cases displayed in panels a,b,c. The cosine curve of the initiator is displayed as a red curve: at time t = t0 the
flight direction of the initiator is tuned from its original direction (coherent with the flock motion) to a final direction following
a ramp-like pattern. The inset in panel f shows the threshold used to compute the ranking of the particles (see text). g, h, i
Individual acceleration profiles for the three cases displayed in panels a,b,c. The acceleration curves have been smoothed with
a low-pass filter to cure noise and high frequency oscillations. The insets display the intensity of the peak as a function of time.
Particles are ranked according to the order of reaction to the initiator (see text). The p
other parameters of the simulations are
N = 512, T = 8 × 10−5 , nc = 6, v0 = 0.1. The integration time is chosen as dt = 0.1 J/χ to ensure proper simulation time
for all values of J and χ.

inset). In this case, the flock breaks into two subgroups:
the largest component keeps the original flight direction,
while a smaller fragment is dragged by the initiator (see
attached Video 2). In this respect we note that, due to
active nature of the particles, the effect of overdamping
is even stronger than discussed in sec. IV: not only the
turning information fails to percolate through the group,
but the flock breaks up and looses cohesion.
In the underdamped regime (panel c), on the contrary, there is robust propagation of the signal through
the whole group: all the particles follow the initiator
changing their flight direction with negligible attenuation. Both the cosine curves and the acceleration profiles
show that the particles turn in a highly coordinated way:
the curves are very similar one to the other with a shift in

time corresponding to the propagation of the turn from
the initiator to the last particle (Fig. 3f,i). The flock performs a neat collective turn retaining shape and cohesion
during motion (Fig. 3c, and Video 3).
In this regime, we can quantify the dispersion law using
the method introduced in [25]. We rank all the particles
according to their order of turning: the initiator has rank
r = 0, then the particle that first starts turning after the
initiator has rank r = 1 and so on. To determine the
rank of a particle we follow two different procedures. We
look at the cosine curve of the particle and determine its
absolute turning delay from the initiator (and therefore
its rank) as the time when the cosine reaches a threshold
value (we choose 0.9 - see inset in Fig. 3f). Alternatively,
we proceed as in [25]: from the acceleration curves we

14

FIG. 4. Propagation curve and dispersion law. a. Propagation curve. Distance x traveled by the turning front vs time, for three
different values of the parameters η, χ, J in the small dissipation regime. The distance x traveled in a time t is proportional
to the radius of the sphere containing the first r(t) birds in the rank, namely x(t) = [r(t)/ρ]1/3 . t = 0 corresponds to the time
when the initiator starts the turn. The three curves correspond respectively to η = 0.3, χ = 0.83, J = 1.2 (red circles); η = 0.3,
χ = 1.25, J = 0.8 (green squares); η = 0.3, χ = 2.50, J = 0.4 (blue diamonds). The rank is computed using the cosine curves
(see text). The speed of propagation, cs , is the slope of the propagation curve in linear regime. The colored straight lines show
the linear fits for the three different
curves. b. Speed of propagation cs , normalized by the typical distance a of the interacting
p
neighbors, as a function of J/χ. For each value of J/χ we run several simulations and estimate cs from the slope of the
propagation curve, the point corresponds to the average value and bars to standard error. The speed of propagation depends
on the ratio J/χ as predicted by the analytic arguments in the previous section: more ordered flocks transmit the turning
information quicker. Inset: same curve as in main panel, but using accelerations
curves to compute ranks and propagation
p
curves. b. Speed of propagation cs , normalized by a, as a function of 1/ χ(1 − Φ). Inset: same curve as in main panel, but
using accelerations curves to compute ranks and propagation curves.

compute the relative time delays between pairs of particles as the shift necessary to superimpose their curves.
Once the relative delays are found for all particles we use
a standard algorithm to rank them all. This method is
more robust when it is not known a priori who is the initiator (as in experiments [25]). The two procedures give
equivalent results.
If we now look at the rank as a function of delay time
we get the ranking curve, describing how the turn is executed through the group. Since the turn starts locally
and the flock moves in three dimensions, r1/3 (t) is a measure of the distance x travelled by the turning wave in
time t. As can be seen from Fig. 4a, the distance vs. time
curve displays a clear linear dependence corresponding
to a linear dispersion law, as predicted by the analytic
argument in previous section. We can also check quantitatively the prediction for the propagation speed
s
nc J
cs = a
(58)
χ
To do so, we run numerical simulations for several values
of the parameters in the underdamped regime. We fix
η = 0.3 and vary J and χ so as to obtain propagation
curves with different slopes, but keep Jχ constant in order to have the same value of k0 < 1/L. Then, for each
simulation, we compute the distance vs. time curve as in
Fig. 4a and we estimate cs from a fit of the linear part of
the curve. As can be seen from Fig. 4b, the dependence
of cs on J/χ is very well reproduced by numerical data.
An alternative way to check the speed dependance which is particularly useful when comparing to real data
- is to plot it as a function of the polarization. We know
from Section III D that the statistical properties of the
velocities are described through the Boltzmann measure

Eq. (42). If we use this distribution, we can compute the
expected value of the polarization in the ordered phase.
This gives Φ = 1 − T J −1 TrΛ−1 (see [26] for the details
of the computation). We can therefore eliminate J in
favour of Φ, and obtain,

s
cs = a

nc T (TrΛ−1 )
.
(1 − Φ)χ

(59)

The parameters T and nc are kept constant in our simulations; moreover, the trace of the inverse discrete Laplacian Λij fluctuates little from sample to sample. Therefore, to check equation (59) we
p plot the speed propagation cs /a as a function of 1/ (1 − Φ)χ (see Fig. 4c).
Also in this case the numerical data agree very well with
the analytical prediction.
The behavior displayed in Fig. 4 is analogous to what
is observed in natural flocks of birds. The propagation
curves look indeed very similar to the ones computed for
real flocks and shown in [25]. Even more importantly,
Fig. 4c is remarkably similar to what found in real data,
and the model correctly reproduces the experimentally
found relationship between propagation speed and degree of order in the system. We can therefore conclude
that Eqs. (1) in the underdamped limit fully describe
the correlated collective turning exhibited by real flocks.
We remind that in this limit inertia and deterministic
effects dominate over dissipation: it is the Hamiltonian
structure of the dynamical equations, and the connected
conservation law, that cause the linear dispersion law and
the highly non-trivial relationship between speed of propagation and degree of order in the system.

15
VI.

CONCLUSIONS

The main point of our work is that momentum matters. More precisely, the powerful mathematical entanglement between symmetry, momentum and conservation, is the crucial ingredient giving rise to a dispersion
relation, namely to a propagation law, identical to the
one observed in real flocks of birds during global changes
of direction. If momentum is disregarded, the dispersion
relation changes dramatically and linear propagation collapses: the practical result is that no collective change of
direction can be achieved by the group.
But what momentum is that? We hope we have convinced the reader that the momentum essential to our
new model is not linear momentum, nor orbital angular
momentum. Accordingly, the generalized inertia in our
equation is not the mass, nor the moment of inertia. Linear momentum conservation is clearly violated in active
matter systems: this is because the particles are, indeed,
active. Momentum (and energy) is injected and dissipated continuously at the individual level. For this reason describing active matter systems in terms of Hamiltonian dynamics in the (x, p) variables is impossible. But
once we wrap all the complicated active mechanism into
an effective constraint for the velocity, we can define an
effective angular variable, the phase, which parametrizes
the rotation of the velocity and satisfies the constraint.
The relevant momentum then is the generator of this internal rotation, that is the spin. The resistance of the
particle to changes in its spin is the turning inertia. This
set of variables, (ϕ, s, χ), has nothing to do with the more
familiar set, (θ, l, I), of polar angle, orbital angular momentum and moment of inertia.
This unusual definition of momentum is the precise
reason why the propagation phenomenon described by
the inertial spin model is so akin to superfluidity. One
could object that linear propagation of information is
in fact the most mundane thing of all, sound waves being its most obvious example. The point is that sound
waves transport density fluctuations, the symmetry involved is translation, and the relevant momentum is p.
On the other hand, second sound waves, those associated
to superfluidity, transport phase fluctuations, the symmetry is internal rotation, and momentum is s, the spin.
This transport of phase and spin is typical of superfluid
systems that transport quantum phase. However weird
this connection between flocks and quantum systems may
seem, it is mathematically exact.
What is surprising is that the new phenomenology of
linear propagation is obtained at the rather low price of
introducing just one more parameter to the standard Vicsek model, that is the spin inertia χ. Moreover, because
of the standard Hamiltonian decoupling between coordinates and momenta, the static (short time) properties of
the inertial spin model are exactly the same as the Vicsek
model, so that we do not have to worry about how to recover the rich physical description of static correlations
previously achieved. In the overdamped limit momen-

tum and inertia become irrelevant and ones recovers the
original Vicsek dynamics. Finally, the large length-scale
behavior is described by the standard hydrodynamics of
flocking [18]. Hence, the inertial spin model introduced
here achieves quite a lot in terms of new and experimentally accurate phenomenoogy, at a very little cost in
terms of modeling complexity.
At the more concrete numerical level, we have clearly
shown that the inertial spin model describes turns accurately. A change of direction can successfully be initiated
by just one bird and the turn propagates very efficiently
to the rest of the flock. The speed of propagation is related to the strength of the alignment interaction and
to the turning inertia exactly in the way predicted by
our mathematical equations and observed in real experiments [25]. On the contrary, if spin conservation is neglected (overdamped or Vicsek case) no collective turn is
achieved. Interestingly, due to the active nature of flocking, the effect of overdamping is even more dramatic than
predicted in the fixed-lattice case: instead of a diffusive
and damped propagation of the signal, one observes no
propagation at all, as the failure to transport the turning information ultimately produces the break up of the
flock.
An interesting question is what happens when considering very large systems and time scales. This is the
realm addressed by the hydrodynamic theories of flocking [12, 18, 20]. On these scales the motion of the network
cannot be disregarded and a non-trivial hybridization occurs between density modes (caused by the relative movement of the particles) and orientational modes (due to
alignment between velocities). As we already discussed
in the paper, if some rotational dissipation is present in
the system (i.e. η 6= 0), the asymptotic long wavelength
behavior of our model is the same as the overdamped
Vicsek limit, and we therefore expect the predictions of
current hydrodynamic theories to describe it appropriately. One can however wonder whether a hydrodynamic
description exists that also accounts for the underdamped
behavior occurring at smaller scales, where many relevant
phenomena like collective turns in flocks take place. To
do so, one would need to modify the hydrodynamic equations to include a weakly damped spin field. This opens
new interesting perspectives at the theoretical level.
What we have done here and in Reference [25] is to
push one step further the ambitious program to tame
the vast richness of biological phenomena using the powerful conceptual framework of theoretical physics. This
program is of course not new. Kinetic approaches [49, 50]
and hydrodynamic theories of active matter [18, 20, 21]
used tools as kinetic theory, Navier-Stokes equations
and dynamical renormalization group to determine the
long distance and large time scaling properties of flocks
and to explain why the Mermin-Wagner theorem is violated. At the static level, the maximum entropy approach [26, 51, 52] endeavors to define a thermodynamic
description of biological collective systems based exclusively on the experimental data. In this approach, theo-

16
retical physics tools, as the Goldstone theorem and scaling relations, have powerful consequences [27].
Here, however, we do something different. We bring
into the arena the abstract power of symmetries and conservation laws in linking static properties to dynamical
predictions at the level of the microscopic description of
the system. Symmetry is not necessarily a dynamical
concept: it is a very general and profound condition that
a system may or may not enjoy. However, the conservation laws predicted by symmetry through Noether’s theorem and Hamilton’s description have deep dynamical
implications, which, as we have seen, can be experimen-

[1] Camazine, S., Deneubourg, J.-L., Franks, N. R., Sneyd,
J., Theraulaz, G., and Bonabeau, E. Self-Organization in
Biological Systems (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2001)
[2] Self-organization and collective behavior in vertebrates
Couzin, I. D. Krause, J. Adv Study Behavi 32: 1–75
(2003.)
[3] Giardina I. Collective behavior in animal groups: theoretical models and empirical studies HFSP Journal 2:
205–219 (2008)
[4] Sumpter DJT. Collective Animal Behavior (Princeton
University Press, Princeton 2010)
[5] Cavagna A, Giardina I, Bird Flocks as Condensed Matter, Ann. Rev. Cond. Matt. Phys. DOI: 10.1146/annurevconmatphys-031113-133834 (2014).
[6] Aoki I., A simulation study on the schooling mechanism
in fish. Bull. Jpn. Soc. Sci. Fish. 48: 1081-1088 (1982)
[7] Reynolds CW. 1987. Computer Graphics 21: 25-33.
[8] Huth, A., & Wissel, C. The Simulation of the Movement
of Fish Schools. J. Theor. Biol. 156, 365–385 (1992).
[9] Couzin, I. D., Krause, J., James, R., Ruxton, G. D., and
Franks, N. R. Collective memory and spatial sorting in
animal groups J. Theor. Biol. 218, 1–11 (2002)
[10] Hildenbrandt, H., Carere, C., and Hemelrijk, C. Selforganized aerial displays of thousands of starlings: a
model Behav. Ecol. 21: 1349–1359. (2010)
[11] Vicsek, T., Czirók, A., Ben-Jacob, E., Cohen, I., and
Shochet, O. Novel type of phase transition in a system
of self-driven particles Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1226–1229
(1995).
[12] Toner, J. and Tu, Y. Long-range order in a twodimensional dynamical XY model: how birds fly together
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75: 4326–4329 (1995)
[13] G Grégoire, H Chaté & Y Tu, Moving and staying together without a leader Physica D 181: 157-170 (2003)
[14] Grégoire, G. and Chaté, H. Onset of collective and cohesive motion Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 025702 (2004)
[15] DOrsogna MR, Chuang YL, Bertozzi AL, and Chayes
LS. Self-propelled particles with soft-core interactions:
patterns, stability, and collapsePhys Rev Lett96, 104302.
(2006)
[16] Aldana A, Dossetti V., Huepe C, Kenkre VM, Larralde
H. . Phase transitions in systems of self-propelled agents
and related network models Phys. Rev. Lett. 98: 095702
(2007)

tally verified in natural system and in numerical simulations alike. To do this the right set of effective variables
must be found - a recurrent and quite natural theme in
physics. We believe that this kind of approach may have
some generality in biological systems other than flocks.
Acknowledgments. We thank William Bialek, Serena Bradde, Paul Chaikin and Dov Levine for discussions. Work in Rome was supported by grants IIT–
Seed Artswarm, ERC–StG n.257126 and US-AFOSR FA95501010250 (through the University of Maryland).
Work in Paris was supported by grant ERC–StG n.
306312.

[17] Ginelli, F. & Chaté, H. Relevance of metric-free interactions in flocking phenomena. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105:
168103 (2010)
[18] Toner, J. and Tu, Y. Flocks, herds, and schools: A quantitative theory of flocking Phys. Rev. E 58, 4828–4858
(1998)
[19] Vicsek T, Zafeiris A. Collective motion Physics Reports
517: 71140 (2012)
[20] Ramaswamy S. The Mechanics and Statistics of Active
Matter Ann. Rev. Cond. Matt. Phys. 1, 301 (2010).
[21] Marchetti MC, Joanny JF, Ramaswamy S, Liverpool TP,
Prost J et al. Hydrodynamics of soft active matter Rev.
Mod. Phys. 85 1143 (2013).
[22] Tu Y., Toner J., Ulm M. Sound waves and the absence
of galilean invariance in flocks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 4819
(1998).
Toner, J. and Tu, Y. Long-range order in a twodimensional dynamical XY model: how birds fly together
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75: 4326–4329 (1995)
[23] Justh, E.W., & Krishnaprasad, P.S. Equilibria and steering laws for planar formations, Systems & Controls Letters 52, 25–38 (2004)
[24] Tanner, H.G.; Jadbabaie, A.; Pappas, G.J., Flocking in
Fixed and Switching Networks, Automatic Control, IEEE
Transactions 52, 863–868 (2007)
[25] Attanasi A, Cavagna A, Del Castello L, Giardina I, Jelic
A, Melillo S, Parisi L, Shen E, Viale M. Information
transfer and behavioural inertia in starling flocks Nat.
Phys. 10, 691–696 (2014)
[26] Bialek, W., Cavagna, A., Giardina, I., Mora, T., Silvestri,
E., Viale, M., and Walczak, A. M. Statistical mechanics
for natural flocks of birds Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
109, 4786–4791 (2012)
[27] Cavagna, A., Cimarelli, A., Giardina, I., Parisi, G., Santagati, R., Stefanini, F., and Viale, M. Scale-free correlations in starling flocks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
107:11865–11870 (2010)
[28] Ballerini, M., Cabibbo, N., Candelier, R., Cavagna, A.,
Cisbani, E., Giardina, I., Lecomte, V., Orlandi, A.,
Parisi, G., Procaccini, A., et al. Interaction ruling animal collective behavior depends on topological rather
than metric distance: Evidence from a field study Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 1232–1237 (2008).
[29] Goldstein H., Classical Mechanics (Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, MA, 1980)

17
[30] Fetter AL, Walecka, JD. Theoretical Mechanics of Particles and Continua ( Courier Dover Publications, 2012)
[31] Pomeroy, H, Heppner F. Structure of turning in airborne
rock dove (Columba livia) flocks Auk 109: 256267 (1992)
[32] Cavagna A., Duarte Queirs SM, Giardina I, Stefanini
F and Viale M. Diffusion of individual birds in starling
flocks Proc. R. Soc. B 280, 20122484 (2013)
[33] Hohenberg, P. C. and Halperin, B. I., Theory of dynamic
critical phenomena, Rev. Mod. Phys. 49, 435–479 (1977)
[34] Halperin, B.I. & Hohenberg, P.C. Hydrodynamic Theory
of Spin Waves, Phys. Rev. 188, 898–918 (1969)
[35] Sonin, E.B. Spin currents and spin superfluidity, Advances in Physics 59, 181–255 (2010)
[36] Matsubara, T. & Matsuda, H., A lattice model of Liquid
Helium, I, Prog. Theor. Phys. 16, 569–582 (1956)
[37] Lane, C.T., Fairbank, H.A. & Fairbank, W.M. Second
Sound in Liquid Helium II, Phys. Rev. 71, 600–605 (1947)
[38] Justh, E.W. & Krishnaprasad, P.S. Equilibria and steering laws for planar formations, Systems & Controls Letters 52, 25–38 (2004).
[39] Szabo, P., Nagy, M., & Vicsek, T. Transitions in a selfpropelled-particles model with coupling of accelerations
Phys. Rev. E 79, 021908 (2009)
[40] Hemelrijk C.K. & Hildenbrandt H. Some causes of the
variable shape of flocks of birds PLoS ONE 6, e22479
(2011)
[41] Gautrais, J., Ginelli, F., Fournier, R., Blanco, S., Soria,
M., Chateé, H. & Theraulaz, G. Deciphering interactions
in moving animal groups, Plos Comp. Biol. 8 e1002678
(2012)
[42] Sumino Y., Nagai K.H., Shitaka Y., Tanaka D.,
Yoshikawa K., Chaté H., Oiwa K. Large-scale vortex lat-

[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]

[47]

[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]

[52]

tice emerging from collectively moving microtubules. Nature 483, 448–452 (2012)
Zwanzig, R. Nonequilibrium statistical mechanics (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2001).
Gardiner, C. W. Handbook of stochastic methods. Vol.
3.(Springer, Berlin, 1985).
Goldstone, J. Field theories with Superconductor solutions. Il Nuovo Cimento 19, 154–164 (1961)
Ramaswamy S., Simha R.A., Hydrodynamics Fluctuations and Instabilities in Ordered Suspensions of SelfPropelled Particles, Phys. Rev. Lett.89, 058101 (2002)
Camperi M, Cavagna A, Giardina I, Parisi G, Silvestri
E, Spatially balanced topological interaction grants optimal cohesion in flocking models Interface Focus2, 715–
725 (2012)
FJ Dyson, General theory of spin–wave interactions.
Phys Rev 102, 1217–1230 (1956).
Bertin E, Droz M, and Gregoire G. Phys. Rev. E 74,
022101 (2006)
Ihle T, Kinetic theory of flocking: Derivation of hydrodynamic equations. Phys. Rev. E83 030901 (2011)
Bialek, W., Cavagna, A., Giardina, I., Mora, T., Pohl
O., Silvestri, E., Viale, M., and Walczak, A. M. Social
interactions dominate speed control in poising natural
flocks near criticality. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111,
7212-7217 (2014)
Cavagna, A., Giardina, I., Ginelli I, Mora, T., Piovani D.,
Tavarone R. and Walczak, A. M. Dynamical maximum
entropy approach to flocking. Phys. Rev. E 89 042707
(2014)

