arXiv:1404.4548v2 [q-bio.PE] 23 Jan 2015

A mathematical approach to territorial
pattern formation
1,a
1,2,b

Jonathan R. Potts , Mark A. Lewis
1 Centre for Mathematical Biology, Department of Mathematical and
Statistical Sciences, University of Alberta, Canada
2 Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Canada
a E-mail: jrpotts@ualberta.ca. Centre for Mathematical Biology,
Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, 632 CAB, University
of Alberta, Canada, T6G 2G1. Tel: +1-780-492-1636.
b E-mail: mark.lewis@ualberta.ca.

Abstract
Territorial behaviour is widespread in the animal kingdom, with creatures
seeking to gain parts of space for their exclusive use. It arises through a
complicated interplay of many different behavioural features. Extracting
and quantifying the processes that give rise to territorial patterns requires
both mathematical models of movement and interaction mechanisms, together with statistical techniques for rigorously extracting parameters from
data. Here, we give a brisk, pedagogical overview of the techniques so far
developed to tackle the problem of territory formation. We give some examples of what has already been achieved using these techniques, together
with pointers as to where we believe the future lies in this area of study.
This progress is a single example of a major aim for 21st century science: to
construct quantitatively predictive theory for ecological systems.

Introduction.
The natural world is full of complex systems, where constituent parts interact to cause patterns that can be very rich in diversity and unexpected
in form. These range from the detailed termite hills structures that emerge
from the collective actions of individually very simple animals, to oscillatory
and chaotic patterns in predator-prey systems; from spatially heterogeneous
territorial segregations to climactic effects of changing ecosystems [1, 2, 3, 4].
To understand how one, more ‘macroscopic’, level of description emerges
from finer-grained, ‘microscopic’ processes presents a formidable challenge

1

that can only be tackled with sophisticated mathematical and computational
tools, many of which may need to be created for each new problem.
Statistical physics has seen remarkable success at describing emergent
phenomena from underlying mechanisms. Properties that were originally
only phenomenologically understood, such as the relationships between heat,
pressure and volume of a gas, have been accurately and analytically derived
from the movements of tiny, jiggling particles [5]. During the 20th century,
these ideas have been extended into many areas of physics, including optics,
fluid dynamics and soft matter studies, to name but a few [6]. However, in
the field of physics, the constituent agents are relatively simple particles of
inorganic matter.
By contrast, the organisms constituting an ecosystem are living plants
and animals, with evolutionarily driven goals and complex behavioral traits.
Despite this complexity, the last few decades have seen many scientists and
mathematicians embarking on a journey to develop an analogue of statistical
mechanics for ecosystems [7]. This has been spurred on by an increasing
awareness of the need to develop a predictive ecology, so that we can accurately foretell the effects of anthropogenic changes on ecosystems [8].
Here, we review a small part of that journey, the quest to understand how
animal populations self-organize into territorial structures from the movements and interactions of individual animals. Along the way, we will describe a number of mathematical and statistical techniques that have been
used to help tackle this problem. We follow the philosophy that biological questions should drive the decisions to use one particular mathematical
technique over another, rather than starting with a field of mathematics and
trying to see what it can add to biological understanding. Consequently, our
review is broad rather than deep, intended to entice the reader into reading
more about the techniques covered than explain them exhaustively. We hope
that this article will help readers quickly understand the problem of territory
formation and introduce them to tools that are helpful in solving problems
regarding animal movement, interactions and space use.

Ecological issues.
As well as theoretical curiosity, there are various ecological considerations
that make it important to build a mathematical theory of territory formation.
In conservation biology, understanding territory size is vital for designing
2

nature reserves to fit a given population [9]. In epidemiology, if a disease
is spreading through a population of territorial animals then it is crucial to
understand how the movements and contact rates of the animals relate to the
size and shape of the territories [10]. Territorial interactions can also cause
spatial structures to arise that can affect predator-prey dynamics [11].
Traditionally, territorial structures have been understood by statistical
analysis of positional data. This can often be as simple as drawing the
minimum convex polygon around a set of points [12] or assuming that the
animal’s territory is roughly given by the mean of narrow Gaussian distributions around each observed location [13]. Recently, more involved techniques
that take into account the animal’s probable movement between successive
locations have been proposed as a more accurate way of determining spatial
patterns [14]. It makes sense, therefore, to build on these ideas by also including the interactions between animals into our understanding of territorial
formation. The techniques described in this review explain the mathematical
details behind this theory. Information about the practical lessons provided
by such theory is given in our more biologically-oriented companion review
[15].

Building a model from the ground up: the random walk approach.
Though animal movement decisions are complex and multi-faceted, we believe the best approach to model building is to start with as simple a model
as possible, then build up the complexity one facet at a time, rigorously testing whether each additional term significantly improves how the model fits
the available data. This requires a certain amount of imagination, as a very
simple model is unlikely to model well a real animal in an actual environment. So we start by asking ourselves: what would an animal do if it were
placed alone in a barren, featureless landscape?
We might imagine that it moves for a certain time in one direction, to
explore. Then turns at random and moves in another direction for a short
while, and so on. These so-called random walk patterns have been successfully
used as the basis for animal movement models for some time [16, 17]. So we
start with this idea as the basis for our animal movement models.
Mathematically, a random walk can be described by the probability den-

3

sity pτ (x|y) of moving to position x at time τ in the future, given that
the animal is currently at position y, which can be in one-, two- or threedimensional space. Animals may move a variety of different distances in this
time period, but are more likely to move a short distance, and extremely
unlikely to move a large distance. Therefore a suitable distribution of the
so-called step lengths, i.e. lengths of straight-line movement between random
turns, might be the exponential distribution:
pτ (x|y) ∝ exp(−δ|x − y|),

(1)

where δ is a free parameter and the constant of proportionality is calculated
by ensuring that the integral of pτ (x|y) with respect to x across the domain
of study is 1. This is often called the step length distribution of an animal. Placing such steps together in succession gives a hypothesised possible
movement path, as in figure 1.
Our ultimate goal is to move from this ‘microscopic’ description of animal
movement, to a description of the expected space use of the animal, in a
non-speculative, mathematical fashion. While this is difficult for complex
movement models, the random walk equation (1) is simple enough that we
can derive an analytic formula for the space use patterns. We show this here
in the one-dimensional (1D) case.
Let u(x, t) be the probability that the animal is in position x at time t.
(We no longer use bold font since the positions are 1D.) Then we can write
down the so-called master equation for this system as
Z ∞
u(x, t + τ ) =
pτ (x|y)u(y, t)dy.
(2)
−∞

Given some initial distribution u(x, 0) = u0 (x), this can be solved numerically
over time. Moreover, by taking the limit as τ → 0, it is possible to derive a
diffusion equation, which is a type of partial differential equation (PDE).
To do this, we first define z = y − x to give the following master equation
Z
δ ∞
exp(−δ|z|)u(x + z, t)dz.
(3)
u(x, t + τ ) =
2 −∞
A Taylor expansion of u(x + z, t) gives

Z
δ ∞
∂u
u(x, t + τ ) =
exp(−δ|z|) u(x, t) + z (x, t)+
2 −∞
∂z

z2 ∂ 2u
3
(x, t) + O(z ) dz.
2 ∂z 2
4

(4)

Rearranging this, and calculating the integrals of z exp(−δ|z|) and z 2 exp(−δ|z|)
gives
Z
1 ∂ 2u
δ ∞
u(x, t + τ ) − u(x, t) = 2 2 (x, t) +
exp(−δ|z|)O(z 3 )dz. (5)
2δ ∂x
2 −∞
Now we need to take the limit as τ → 0. When doing this, we need to notice
that δ will not remain constant, because the animal’s step length distribution
will narrow as the time intervals become smaller.
The only way to obtain a sensible limit for equation (5), i.e. where ∂u/∂t
is not zero or infinity, is to insist that τ goes to 0 in such a way that D =
1/2δ 2 τ is kept constant. Then
√
∂ 2u
u(x, t + τ ) − u(x, t)
= D 2 (x, t) + O( τ ),
τ
∂x

(6)

√
where the O( τ ) arises from the fact that the n-th order moment of the
exponential distribution is propotional to δ −n , which scales as τ −n/2 in the
limit. Taking the limit as τ → 0 gives
∂ 2u
∂u
= D 2 (x, t),
∂t
∂x

(7)

which is the classical diffusion equation.
Since the animal starts in a given position x0 , the initial condition is
the Dirac delta function u0 (x) = δ(x0 ). The exact solution of equation (7),
with this initial condition, is just a normal distribution with variance that
increases linearly in time
u(x, t) =

exp[−(x − x0 )2 /2Dt]
√
.
2 πDt

(8)

This result, in fact, generalises to higher dimensions. In the case of animal
territoriality, we are interested in the 2D result
u(x, t) =

exp[−(x − x0 )2 /2Dt]
,
4πDt

(9)

where the power of two denotes the scalar product of a vector with itself.
This gives our first example of the sort of space use patterns that can be
shown to arise from descriptions of animal movement. If the animal moves in
5

a random fashion, its space use distribution at any point in time is described
by equation (9). Of course, animal movement is typically far from random.
We explain how to add realism in the next section.
When estimating space use patterns in reality, field biologists have to
measure positions over a period of time. As such, they cannot derive the
probability distribution at any particular point in time, but instead construct a utilisation distribution, sometimes called a home range [18], over a
given time window such as a day, month or season. To compare this simple
random walk model with the positional data, it is necessary to make use of
the utilisation distribution derived from equation (9) over the time T during
which the data were collected (figure 1)
RT
0
R hR T
Ω

0

u(x, t)dt
i .
u(x, t)dt dx

(10)

Getting the model right: statistical techniques.
Real animals, of course, do not exist alone in featureless environments. The
natural drive to survive and reproduce means that interactions with the environment and other animals greatly affect movement decisions. For example,
the needs to gather food, avoid predation, maintain territories, or find mates
may all be contributing factors in an animal’s movement choices [19, 20, 21].
The challenge is both to disentangle which of these factors make significant contributions to movement, and to quantify their effects. By doing this,
we can construct realistic models of animal movement, from which accurate
predictions of spatial patterns should emerge.
There are two main approaches to constructing such models in a rigorous, data-driven fashion. One is the hypothesis testing approach, whereby
parameters are added to the model one at a time. Each time a parameter is
added, we test whether it significantly improves the model. If so, we keep it;
if not, it is discarded. The second is the model selection approach, whereby a
number of plausible models are constructed and fitted to the data. We then
use the best one to construct our model of space use.
In the context of animal movement, the so-called likelihood ratio test
provides a useful means for hypothesis testing. Suppose we have a simple
model of animal movement, for example the random walk model of equation

6

(1). Denote our data on the positions of the animal at times 0, τ, 2τ, . . . , N τ
by x0 , x1 , . . . , xN .
Since we have spent many weeks observing the animals, or have spent
many hours listening carefully to someone who has, we have sufficient intuition to construct hypotheses about the animals’ movements. For example,
we might hypothesise that they have a tendency to move towards areas of
high resource biomass. If b(x) is the resource biomass at position x then we
could construct the following model to take this into account
p1τ (x|y, α) ∝ exp[−δ|x − y| + αb(x)],

(11)

which is the probability of moving from y to x in a time-interval τ , analogous
to equation (1). This model assumes implicitly that the distribution of step
lengths, disregarding the effect of resources, is exponential. It also assumes
that the effect of resources on movement is proportional to the exponential of
the biomass. Neither of these are necessarily true for a given data set, so it is
important in practice to try several functional forms for equation (1) and use
a model selection method (e.g. the Akaike Information Criterion detailed
in the next section) to find the best one. We are just using the model in
equation (1) for ease of explanation and mathematical exposition.
The null hypothesis H0 is that α = 0, hypothesising that the best model
is equation (1), whereas the alternative hypothesis H1 is that α 6= 0. Testing
this requires constructing the so-called likelihood function, which is the probability of the data given the model and parameters. If we assume that the
movement steps are independent from one another (which may not always be
true, but is a surpisingly fruitful assumption [10, 19, 20, 21]), the likelihood
takes the following form
L(x0 , . . . , xN |α) =

N
−1
Y

p1τ (xn+1 |xn , α).

(12)

n=0

The method of maximum likelihood chooses the parameters so as to make the
likelihood as large as possible. Let αmax be the value of α that maximises expression (12). Then the likelihood ratio test tells us that 2 log[L(x0 , . . . , xN |αmax )]−
2 log[L(x0 , . . . , xN |0)] is approximately χ-squared distributed with 1 degree
of freedom [22].
We can therefore use the χ-squared test to test whether there is sufficient
evidence to reject H0 . If we reject H0 then we can consider p1τ (x|y, αmax )
7

as an improved model of animal movement, compared to the simple random
walk model of equation (1). We may therefore use it to compute predicted
space use patterns, via constructing the master equation as per equation
(2), and if possible taking a PDE limit (see [23, 24] for an example). The
predictions can then be compared with those of the diffusion equation (9) to
see if they are more accurate. Proceeding in this way, we can add parameters
one at a time to improve the fit of our model to the data until we are satisfied
with the space use predictions (figure 2).
As an alternative to the reductionist approach of hypothesis testing, we
may wish to use the approach of multiple working hypotheses. Here we would
formulate an array of plausible models, each defined by a different group of
nonzero parameters, and see which of these models is best supported by the
data. This can be more computationally intensive, but it takes into account
the idea that a blend of different factors may affect movement, and that the
effects might only be observed when all the covariates are included at the
same time.
As a simple example, suppose that both resource biomass and the distance
|x−xc | from a predator’s home range centre, xc , are hypothesised to influence
movement decisions. Then we can construct four different movement models
p0τ (x|y, α) ∝ exp[−δ|x − y|],
p1τ (x|y, α) ∝ exp[−δ|x − y| + αb(x)],
p2τ (x|y, α) ∝ exp[−δ|x − y| + β|x − xc |],
p3τ (x|y, α) ∝ exp[−δ|x − y| + αb(x) + β|x − xc |].

(13)

The Akaike information criterion (AIC) gives a technique for choosing between these models. The AIC of a model is 2k − 2 log(Lmax ) where Lmax is
the maximum of the likelihood function and k the number of model parameters. Intuitively, it measures the relative closeness of models to the data,
with some penalisation for models with a larger number of parameters, although the exact form of the AIC expression can be derived more deeply
using information theory [22]. The various models can be used to build a
mechanistic model of animal movement, by constructing the master equation
as in equation (2). The model with the lowest AIC is likely to describe the
space use patterns most accurately.
Once we have our best model, though, it is important to ask how much
better it is than the rest. In other words, what is the chance that we are
wrong and one of the other models is in fact the best? The theory of AIC
8

gives a nice answer for this. Let AICmin denote the AIC of the best model
and AICi that of model i. Then each model i is exp[(AICmin −AICi )/2] times
as likely as the model with the minimum AIC to be the ‘best’ model, insofar
as it minimises information loss (see [22]).
We have given something of a whistle-stop tour of model selection and
hypothesis testing, emphasising the relations to building animal movement
models. There are a number of textbooks that give detailed descriptions of
AIC, likelihood and related topics, e.g. [22], to which we refer the interested
reader for more information. For an example of model selection and hypothesis testing in the context of movement models, see [25]. Sometimes authors
use AICc, Bayesian Informaion Criteriion (BIC) or other related techniques,
which have various pros and cons, which are discussed in detail elsewhere
(e.g. [22]).

Adding territorial interactions.
Now we have the tools to build up a model of individual animal movement,
we come to the main aspect of this paper: accounting for territorial interactions. There are two approaches to this in the modelling literature. The
first, typified in the book by [26], is to derive space use patterns from a
plausible model of interaction mechanisms, then fit these patterns to location data. One can then test various candidate models against the data, for
example using the AIC techniques described in the previous section, to infer
information about the drivers of territorial structures.
The second is to continue along a similar path as in the previous section, fitting the individual movement and interaction model to data, then
see whether the spatial patterns that emerge are similar to the territories described by animal locations. This more conservative approach is newer and
less well-developed, but as such raises a number of interesting challenges for
future developers of territorial models.
Perhaps the first use of partial differential equations to capture territories
emerging from animal movements and interactions was that of [11], in the
context of modelling wolf pack territoriality. The simplest model in that
paper was of two packs with densities U (x, t) and V (x, t) and can be derived
on a 1D lattice with zero-flux boundary conditions [28, section 3.2]. It posited
that as wolves move, they deposit scent which decays at a rate µ. The density
of scent for packs U and V at position x and time t are denoted P (x, t) and
9

Q(x, t) respectively. The rate of scent deposition of pack U is l + νQ(x, t),
and is l + νP (x, t) for pack V , modelling the fact that there is a baseline rate
of scent deposition, but that it also increases in the presence of the other
pack’s scent.
The wolves have a constant speed but switch direction at a rate dependent
on the presence of conspecific scent. We assume that the den site of pack U
is at the left-hand boundary of the lattice, while pack V has den site to the
right. Therefore the probability of a member of pack U switching from right
to left (resp. left to right) is λ + σQ(x, t) (resp. λ − σQ(x, t)), whereas the
probability of a member of pack V switching from left to right (resp. right
to left) is λ + σP (x, t) (resp. λ − σP (x, t)). Letting the positions of leftand right-moving members of pack U be denoted by U − (x, t) and U + (x, t)
respectively, and similarly for V , we arrive at the following master equation
in discrete space and time [28, section 3.2]
U − (x, t + τ ) =[1 − τ {λ − σQ(x, t)}]U − (x + a, t)+
τ [λ + σQ(x, t)]U + (x − a, t),
U + (x, t + τ ) =[1 − τ {λ + σQ(x, t)}]U + (x − a, t)+
τ [λ − σQ(x, t)]U − (x + a, t),
V − (x, t + τ ) =[1 − τ {λ − σP (x, t)}]V − (x + a, t)+
τ [λ + σP (x, t)]V + (x − a, t),
V + (x, t + τ ) =[1 − τ {λ + σP (x, t)}]V + (x − a, t)+
τ [λ − σP (x, t)]V − (x + a, t),
P (x, t + τ ) =(1 − µτ )P (x, t) + U (x, t)[l + νQ(x, t)]τ,
Q(x, t + τ ) =(1 − µτ )Q(x, t) + V (x, t)[l + νP (x, t)]τ,

(14)

where a is the lattice spacing and τ the time it takes to move distance a.
To derive partial differential equations from this stochastic model, a mean
field approximation is needed that assumes the distributions of scent marks
and individuals are uncorrelated. This could be unreasonable on short time
scales, but is reasonable on the longer times scales that are relevant to the
formation of territorial patterns since the movement of the individuals is
rapid compared to the change in scent mark density. Again, we need to take
a delicate limiting process. Based on our experience with the earlier diffusion
limit taken on equation (5), and observing that the space step a takes the
place of the mean space step δ −1 in equation (3), we would expect that the
space and time steps, a and τ would approach zero with a scaling so that
10

a2 /τ is constant. However, we now have additional parameters, λ and σ.
How should they scale? A natural choice is to have λ increase so that λτ
approaches a constant as τ approaches zero, and to have σ increase so that
σa approaches a constant as a approaches zero. That way, the switching
and scent mark bias terms are incorporated into model as significant factors
during the limiting process. Denoting by lower case letters the densities that
correspond to upper case letters for probabilities in equation (14), we arrive
at the following PDEs describing the emergent space use patterns (see [28,
section 3.2] for a derivation)
∂
∂ 2 u(x, t)
∂u(x, t)
−c [q(x, t)u(x, t)] = d
,
∂t
∂x
∂x2
∂
∂ 2 v(x, t)
∂v(x, t)
+c [p(x, t)v(x, t)] = d
,
∂t
∂x
∂x2
∂p(x, t)
=[l + νq(x, t)]u(x, t) − µp(x, t),
∂t
∂q(x, t)
=[l + νp(x, t)]v(x, t) − µq(x, t),
∂t

(15)

where (σa)/(τ λ) → c and (a2 )/(2τ 2 λ) → d as a and τ tend to zero.
It is interesting to consider other possible limiting processes. For example,
we could argue, quite reasonably, that the speed of movement a/τ should
remain constant during the limiting process rather than becoming arbitrarily
large. This limit is mathematically possible, and leads to related hyperbolic
models for animal movement (see [37] for the general theory). However, as
argued in [28], the hyperbolic and parabolic limiting equations have similar
behaviour when evaluating territorial pattern formation over long time scales.
Thus we have a system of PDEs describing territorial patterns that is
rigorously derived from the underlying movement and interaction processes.
These equations generate steady-state solutions that exhibit spatial patterns
that correspond qualitatively to found in territories [27] (figure 3). Here
there is spatial segregation between the the two packs, u and v, and the
scent marks, p and q are highest along the boundary between the two packs.
To understand this qualitatively we see that segregation arises from advection
terms in equation (15) that drive individuals back towards their den site when
the encounter foreign scent marks, and heightened scent mark densities at
boundaries arise from a positive feedback loop where scent marking from
one pack gives rise to heightened scent marking rates from the other pack.
Indeed, it actually possible to choose a feedback loop that is so strong that
11

scent marks exhibit mathematical “blow up” at territorial boundaries [27].
This is intriguing, although biologically nonsensical, if only due to the finite
bladder capacity of animals involved.
Although interesting to analyse, these equations are only described in 1D
and contain no behavioural features other that scent marking and conspecific
avoidance. To add further realism, it is necessary first to extend the results
into 2D, then add further plausible drivers of spatial patterns to the PDE,
to create a suite of possible models that describe predicted territorial distributions. These distributions can be fitted to data on animal locations to
deduce which model is the best at explaining the complex patterns observed
in nature.
We demonstrate this with an example from [3], where the authors use
a mechanistic model of territory formation to determine the movement tendencies that underlie coyote territories. They start with a 2D version of
the model in equations (15) that applies to n packs with position densities
u1 (x, t), . . . , un (x, t) and scent densities p1 (x, t), . . . , pn (x, t)
"
#
X
∂ui (x, t)
=d∇2 ui (x, t) − c∇ · xi ui (x, t)
qj (x, t) ,
∂t
j6=i
"
#
X
∂pi (x, t)
= l+
νpj (x, t) uj (x, t) − µpi (x, t),
(16)
∂t
j6=i
where xi is the unit vector in the direction from x to the den site for pack
i. This equation can be derived from a biased random walk process with
scent-marking in two spatial dimensions (see [26] for details). By nondimensionalising appropriately [26] and assuming that the system is contained within a finite domain with zero flux boundary conditions, the system
steady state is given by
"
#
X
0 =∇2 ui (x) − β∇ · xi ui (x)
qj (x) ,
j6=i

"
0= 1+

#
X

mpj (x) uj (x, t) − pi (x).

(17)

j6=i

To this system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs), the authors add
two different terms. The first corresponds to a tendency for coyotes to move
12

away from steep terrain, where it’s difficult for them to roam, giving the
following model
"
#
X
0 =∇2 ui (x) − β∇ · xi ui (x)
qj (x) − ∇[αz ui (x)∇z(x)],
(18)
j6=i

where z(x) is the elevation of the landscape and αz the strength of the tendency to move away from high ground. The second models the tendency to
move towards areas with higher prey availability, giving the following model
"
#
X
0 =∇ · [e−αr h(x) ∇ui (x)] − β∇ · e−αr h(x) xi ui (x)
qj (x) −
j6=i

∇ · [e−αr h(x) ui (x)∇h(x)],

(19)

where h(x) is the amount of prey available and αr a measure of the strength
of the tendency to move towards areas of higher prey availability. The three
models in equations (17), (18) and (19) are then fitted to data on coyote
locations to determine which gave the best fit and therefore which gives the
most likely explanation as to the causes of territorial patterns.
The procedure for fitting to data uses an AIC test, by taking locations
sufficiently far apart (in both space and time) so that they can be considered
independent random variables drawn from the steady state distribution. For
each pack i, let x0 , . . . , xNi be the positions of these independent relocations.
Then the likelihood of the data given the model is
L=

Ni
n Y
Y

ui (xki ),

(20)

i=1 ki =0

where ui is the solution of one of the three differential equations (17), (18)
or (19). Using the AIC model selection techniques outlined in the previous
selection, equation (19) turns out to fit the data significantly better than
the other two models, suggesting that movements towards available prey,
together with conspecific avoidance (CA), explain the territorial patterns
better than either avoidance of steep terrain plus CA or just CA on its own
[3] (figure 4). Notice that AIC penalises the number of model parameters.
Therefore it is important that we use the non-dimensional forms of the models, which have the minimum number of parameters needed to specify the
model.
13

While such reaction-diffusion approaches have been successful in both
describing territorial patterns and inferring behavioural features, the above
methods do not give sufficient evidence to conclude that the best fit parameters values of β, m, αz accurately reflect the underlying mechanisms. First,
reaction diffusion approximations can sometimes fail to describe the patterns
that arise from underlying individual-level descriptions, especially when interactions are rare, as is the case with territorial behaviour. Second, though
the models are built from one level of description, the movement and interaction mechanisms, they are fitted to data on another level, the space use
patterns. From a logical perspective, it is not necessarily true that a good
fit to space use implies an accurate description of the underlying movement
and interaction mechanisms.
The first issue was addressed recently by building a model of territoriality
by directly simulating individual-level movement and interaction processes
[29]. Territorial patterns emerged that well-fitted long-term data on fox
movements and could be used to infer information about the longevity of
scent cues that accurately replicated field observations [10] (figure 5). One
striking difference between this approach and that of [26] is that no anchoring
den site is necessary to see territorial patterns emerge. This causes the
territories to continually move, never settling to a non-trivial steady state,
which means the approach of analysing steady-state ODEs as in equations
(17), (18) and (19) is no longer usable.
Instead, the authors developed semi-analytic techniques for describing the
animal’s movements based on trends observed in the movement of simulated
territories [30, 31, 32]. They noticed that the territories move in a subdiffusive fashion, as predicted by the theory of exclusion processes, and that the
generalised diffusion constant of the territory decays exponentially with the
dimensionless product DρT , where D is the intrinsic diffusion constant of the
animal, ρ is the population density and T is the scent-mark longevity. This
enabled them to build an analytic model of animal movement within territory borders (figure 6) which could be fitted to movement data. However, as
yet this technique is unable to infer the territorial interaction processes without using simulation analysis, though see [33] for some first steps towards
rectifying this.
The second issue can be addressed by extending the program of building
movement models described in the previous section ‘Getting the model right’
to include territorial, as well as environmental, interactions. Rather than
constructing one function for all animals, as in equations (13), this approach
14

requires constructing different functions for different animals or packs, then
coupling them together via the territorial interactions (figure 2). The generic
form of such a model is
t
pt,τ
i (x|y) ∝ φi (x|y)Wi (x, y, E)Ci (x, y, Pi ),

(21)

where φi (x|y) denotes the intrinsic movement of a single animal i on its own,
e.g. equation (1), Wi (x, y, E) represents interactions with the environment
E, as in equations (13), and Ci (x, y, Pit ) is a coupling term representing the
interactions between the various animals, such as territorial avoidance. The
term Pit contains the information about the population required to describe
these interactions [34].
By using methods identical to those in the previous section, one can
test candidate models of territorial interaction processes and parameterise
an individual-level movement and interaction model. In the same way as
we moved from equation (1) to (2), we can use equation (21) to construct
a master equation to derive predicted spatial patterns. This can either be
solved numerically, or a continuous-time PDE limit may be found, which
might give some analytic insight.
Before we draw general conclusions, it is interesting to note that models
of the sort we describe here also have been applied to human populations.
In ground-breaking work, Andrea Bertozzi and colleagues have started to
understand the mathematics of crime [35]. Their approach to mapping Los
Angeles gang territories was to fit a modified version of equation terrain-taxis
model 18, that includes structures impeding gang movement, such as freeways
and rivers, instead of terrain elevation. This was fitted to an extensive Los
Angeles database on gang reports, and the analysis provided new insights
regarding gang interactions [36].

Conclusion and future directions.
The focus of this paper has been to demonstrate how to derive movement and
interaction mechanisms from animal location data, and use these to construct
models of territorial patterns. We have given a brief, pedagogical overview of
the various techniques used so far to attack this problem, which we hope will
leave the reader in a position to begin using them, together with information
about what to read to obtain a deeper and more thorough understanding.

15

While most current approaches build models of territory formation from
plausible movement and interaction mechanisms, then validate the model
by fitting it to data, the recent attempts to derive spatial patterns from
ready-parametrised movement-and-interaction models give a more conservative approach, which is likely to be more accurate at uncovering the actual
mechanisms used by animals. This is vitally important in predicting the
effect of future environmental changes on animal populations in a quantitatively as well as qualitatively accurate way.
Currently this approach is in its infancy. The challenge for the future is to
build mathematical theory that details the best ways to use equations such
as (21) to derive spatial patterns. The simplest way is numerical derivation.
However, it is more mathematically pleasing, and may save computational
effort, to derive a theory of PDEs for the so-called coupled step selection
functions of equation (21) [34].
There are various approaches to deriving PDEs from individual-level descriptions, reviewed in [37] in a biological context. Different limits of the
master equation may uncover different biological aspects of the patterns. It
would be an important future advancement to see which limits give rise to
accurate territorial structures.
Another approach, used more in the physics literature, are van Kampen
approximations of Markovian processes. Recent work by Alan McKane and
others has shown that, when biological models exhibit behaviours quite different from those of mean field models, van Kampen approximations often
do a better job [38, 39, 40]. Since these approximations result in the mean
field description in certain limits, they can often be used to tease out the
reasons why and how mean field approaches may fail.
It is natural to ask whether territorial animals might try to modify their
behaviour so as to gain an advantage over their neighbours. Here neighbouring packs could effectively play a spatial game where each tries to maximize
its fitness via increased resource consumption arising from territorial expansion while, at the same time, attempting to minimize losses incurred through
territorial altercations. To play the game, the packs should thus be able to
modulate their spatial movement behaviours, described in the partial differential equation models, in pursuit of enhanced fitness. Preliminary work
applying the theory of differential games to one-dimensional territorial pattern formation has shown how certain movement behaviours are stable from
an evolutionary perspective while others are not [41]. One fascinating aspect
of this analysis has been it’s ability to explain the spontaneous emergence of
16

buffer zones, where neither pack is found, between wolf territories as the outcome of an evolutionarily stable strategy. Such buffer zones have observed in
nature, and have been studied in detail for wolf populations in northeastern
Minnesota [42].
In conclusion, while we have gone a significant way to understanding the
mathematics behind territory formation, much work needs to be done. In
this era of rapid ecological change, predictive ecology is becoming an increasingly important subject. With ever-changing ecosystems, understanding the
mechanisms behind observed spatial patterns is vital for such predictions to
be possible. We are on the first steps of a journey towards making ecology
quantitatively predictive. But it is one that cannot be tackled by a small
number of scientists. We hope that this paper has helped you understand
this area and its importance, and perhaps encouraged you to join us in this
endeavour.

Acknowledgment.
This study was partly funded by NSERC Discovery and Acceleration grants
(MAL, JRP). MAL also gratefully acknowledges a Canada Research Chair
and a Killam Research Fellowship. We are grateful to members of the Lewis
Research Group for helpful discussions.

References
[1] Pascual M, Diffusion-Induced Chaos in a Spatial Predator-Prey System.
J. Roy. Soc. Interface 251 (1993) 1-7
[2] Bonabeau E, Theraulaz G, Deneubourg J, Franks NR, Rafelsberger O,
Joly J, Blanco S, A model for the emergence of pillars, walls and royal
chambers in termite nests Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 353 (1998)
1561-1576.
[3] Moorcroft PR, Lewis MA, Crabtree RL, Mechanistic home range models
capture spatial patterns and dynamics of coyote territories in Yellowstone. Proc Roy Soc B 273 (2006) 1651-1659.
[4] Breed GA, Stichter S, Crone EE, Climate-driven changes in northeastern
US butterfly communities. Nature Climate Change 3 (2013) 142-145.
17

[5] Perrot P, A to Z of Thermodynamics. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1998.
[6] Sturge MD, Statistical and Thermal Physics: Fundamentals and Applications, CRC Press, 2003.
[7] Levin SA, Towards the marriage of theory and data. Interface Focus 2
(2012) 141-143.
[8] Evans MR et al., Predictive systems ecology. Proc. Roy. Soc. B 280
(2013) 1471-2954.
[9] Corsi F, Duprè E, Boitani L, A Large-Scale Model of Wolf Distribution
in Italy for Conservation Planning. Cons Biol 13 (1999) 150-159. doi:
10.1046/j.1523-1739.1999.97269.x
[10] Potts JR, Harris S, Giuggioli L, Quantifying behavioral changes in territorial animals caused by sudden population declines. Am Nat 182 (2013)
E73-E82
[11] Lewis MA, Murray JD, Modelling territoriality and wolf-deer interactions. Nature 366 (1993) 738-740.
[12] Harris S, Cresswell WJ, Forde PG, Trewhella WJ, Woollard T, Wray
S, Home-range analysis using radio-tracking data - a review of problems and techniques particularly as applied to the study of mammals.
Mammal Rev 20 (1990) 97-123.
[13] Worton BJ, Kernel methods for estimating the utilization distribution
in home-range studies. Ecology, 70 (1989) 164-168.
[14] Benhamou S, Dynamic approach to space and habitat use based on
biased random bridges. PLoS One, 6 (2011) e14592.
[15] Potts JR, Lewis MA, How do animal territories form and change?
Lessons from 20 years of mechanistic modelling. Proc Roy Soc B (in
review)
[16] Turchin P, Quantitative Analysis of Movement: Measuring and Modeling
Population Redistribution in Animals and Plants, Sinauer Associates,
1998.
18

[17] Okubo A, Levin SA, Diffusion and Ecological Problems: Modern Perspectives, Springer, 2001.
[18] Burt WH, Territoriality and home range concepts as applied to mammals. J Mammal, 24 (1943) 346-352.
[19] Fortin D, Beyer HL, Boyce MS, Smith DW, Duchesne T, Mao JS, Wolves
influence elk movements: Behavior shapes a trophic cascade in Yellowstone National Park. Ecology 86 (2005) 1320-1330.
[20] Latombe G, Fortin D, Parrott L. Spatio-temporal dynamics in the response of woodland caribou and moose to the passage of gray wolf. J.
Anim. Ecol. (2013) doi: 10.1111/1365-2656.12108
[21] Vanaka AT, Fortin D, Thakera M, Ogdene M, Owena C, Greatwood S,
Slotow R, Moving to stay in place - behavioral mechanisms for coexistence of African large carnivores. Ecology (2013) doi: 10.1890/13-0217.1
[22] Burnham KP, Anderson DR, Model Selection and Multimodel Inference:
A Practical Information-Theoretic Approach, Springer, 2002.
[23] Moorcroft PR, Barnett AH, Mechanistic home range models and resource selection analysis: a reconciliation and unification. Ecology 89
(2008) 1112-1119.
[24] Barnett AH, Moorcroft PR, Analytic steady-state space use patterns
and rapid computations in mechanistic home range analysis. J. Math.
Biol. 57 (2008) 139-159.
[25] Potts JR, Mokross K, Stouffer PC, Lewis MA, Step selection techniques
uncover the environmental predictors of space use patterns in flocks of
Amazonian birds. (in review)
[26] Moorcroft PR, Lewis MA, Mechanistic home range analysis. Princeton
University Press, 2006.
[27] Lewis MA, White KAJ, Murray JD, Analysis of a model for wolf territories. J. Math. Biol. 35 (1997) 749-774.
[28] Moorcroft PR, Territoriality and carnivore home ranges. PhD Dissertation, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, 1997.
19

[29] Giuggioli L, Potts JR, Harris S, Animal interactions and the emergence
of territoriality. PLoS Comput. Biol. 7 (2011) 1002008
[30] Giuggioli L, Potts JR, Harris S, Brownian walkers within subdiffusing
territorial boundaries. Phys. Rev. E 83 (2012) 061138.
[31] Giuggioli L, Potts, JR, Harris S, Predicting oscillatory dynamics in the
movement of territorial animals. J. Roy. Soc. Interface 9 (2012) 15291543.
[32] Potts JR, Harris S, Giuggioli L, Territorial dynamics and stable home
range formation for central place foragers. PLoS One 7 (2012) e34033.
[33] Potts JR, Harris S, Giuggioli L, An anti-symmetric exclusion process
for two particles on an infinite 1D lattice. J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 44
(2011) 485003.
[34] Potts JR, Mokross K, Lewis MA, A unifying framework for quantifying the nature of animal interactions. (in review) preprint on
arXiv:1402.1802
[35] Short MB, Brantingham PJ,Bertozzi AL, Tita GE, Dissipation and displacement of hotspots in reaction-diffusion models of crime. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (2010) 3961-3965.
[36] Smith LM, Bertozzi AL, Brantingham PJ, Tita GE, Valasik M, Adaptation of an ecological territorial model to street gang spatial patterns
in Los Angeles. Discrete and Continuous Dynamical Systems 32 (2012)
3223-3244.
[37] Hillen T, Painter KJ, Transport and anisotropic diffusion models for
movement in oriented habitats. In: Lewis M, Maini P, Petrovskii S
(Eds.), Dispersal, Individual Movement and Spatial Ecology: A Mathematical Perspective. Springer, Heidelberg, 2013.
[38] McKane AJ, Newman TJ, Stochastic models in population biology and
their deterministic analogs. Phys. Rev. E 70 (2004) 041902.
[39] McKane AJ, Newman TJ, Predator-Prey Cycles from Resonant Amplification of Demographic Stochasticity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005) 218102.

20

[40] Alonso D, McKane AJ, Pascual M, Stochastic amplification in epidemics. J. Roy. Soc. Interface 4 (2007) 575-582.
[41] Hamelin F, Lewis MA, A differential game theoretical analysis of mechanistic models for territoriality. J. Math. Biol. 61 (2010) 665-694.
[42] Mech DL, Wolf pack buffer zones as prey reservoirs. Science 198 (1977)
320-321.

0.0105
10

Probability density

0.0090
0.0075

5

Y

0.0060
0

0.0045
−5

0.0030
0.0015

−10
−10

−5

0

X

5

10

0.0000

Figure 1: Expected spatial patterns from a random walk. Three paths
of 100-step random walks with exponential step-length distribution are shown, as
described by equation (1) with δ = 1. Each path has a different shape, cross,
dot or triangle, at the start/end of its steps. The contours denote the utilisation
distribution described by mathematical analysis of the random walk, from equation
(10). This displays a very simple example of the predicted spatial patterns that
can arise by mathematical analysis of an animal movement model.

21

Figure 2: Where next? This example demonstrates the probability of an
animal’s next move, dependent on two factors: (a) collective interactions
via the strength of conspecific territorial marks and (b) environmental interactions via resource quality. Both aspects can be modelled separately or
together, then the models can be tested against the data using hypothesis
testing or model prediction to find out if either significantly affect movement
processes. The strength of territory marks in this example does not change
in the Y -direction, so that animal 1 has territory on the left and animal 2
on the right. The probability of animal 1’s (resp. animal 2’s) next position
after some time interval τ , given that it’s current position is in the middle of
the landscape (black dot), is shown in panel (c) (resp, panel d). As each animals moves, it marks the terrain causing the territorial profile to change over
time, which in turn influences the other animal’s movements. This feedback
mechanism can cause territorial confinement to emerge (reproduced from
[34]).

22

6
0

Wolf Pack/Scent Density Functions
1
2
3
4
5

pack 1 (u)
pack 2 (v)
Scent 1 (p)
Scent 2 (q)

0.0
den 1

0.2

0.4
0.6
Distance (x)

0.8

1.0
den 2

Figure 3: One-dimensional model results Sample solutions for the onedimensional partial differential equation model equation (15). Note the segregation of u and v and the bowl-shaped scent densities for p and q (based
on [27]).

23

Figure 4: Mechanistic models capturing coyote territorial patterns. The
top panel shows the best fit of equation (18) to data on coyotes in Lamar Valley,
24 panel shows the same for equation (19).
Yellowstone National Park and the bottom
Contour lines show the space use distributions of the best-fit model, whereas dots
give relocation fixes for coyotes. Different colours represent positions of different
packs. The coordinates are measure in UTM. Reproduced with permission from
[3].

Figure 5: Output from an individual-level model of territory formation.
Contours show the utilisation distribution of various animal positions from an
individual based model of territory formation with periodic boundary conditions.
Each colour denotes a different animal’s territory (based on [29]).

25

Figure 6: Schematic of an analytic model of animal movement within
a dynamic territory. Territory borders move in a subdiffusive fashion owing
to territorial exclusion. The process that keeps the territories at this average
width is represented by two springs, one vertical and one horizontal. The animal,
represented by a filled circle in panel (a), moves as a random walker, with a
certain amount of correlation between the direction of successive steps. Panel (a)
represents this setup, while panel (b) demonstrates how overlaps between adjacent
home ranges arise from this model as animal positions are measured over time.
In panel (b), the mean position of the territory border is represented by the solid
black line, while the average extent of the movement of this border to the left and
right is represented by the dashed grey lines (based on [10]).

26

