AIRBORNE ULTRASONIC TACTILE DISPLAY BRAIN–COMPUTER
INTERFACE PARADIGM

KATSUHIKO HAMADA

arXiv:1404.4184v1 [q-bio.NC] 16 Apr 2014

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan

HIROMU MORI
Life Science Center of TARA, University of Tsukuba, Japan

HIROYUKI SHINODA
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan

TOMASZ M. RUTKOWSKI∗
Life Science Center of TARA, University of Tsukuba, Japan
RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Japan

Abstract. We study the extent to which contact–less and airborne ultrasonic tactile display
(AUTD) stimuli delivered to the palms of a user can serve as a platform for a brain computer
interface (BCI) paradigm. Six palm positions are used to evoke combined somatosensory
brain responses, in order to define a novel contact-less tactile BCI. A comparison is made with
classical attached vibrotactile transducers. Experiment results of subjects performing online
experiments validate the novel BCI paradigm.

Contents
1. Introduction
2. Materials and Methods
3. Results and Conclusions
Author contributions
Acknowledgements
References

2
2
3
5
5
5

E-mail addresses: tomek@bci-lab.info.
author.

∗ Corresponding

1

2

K. HAMADA ET AL.

1. Introduction
State–of–the–art brain computer interfaces (BCIs) are typically based on mental visual or
auditory paradigms, as well as motor imagery paradigms, which require extensive user training
and good eyesight or hearing. In recent years, alternative solutions have been proposed to make
use of a tactile modality [MPSNP06, BVE10, MMM+ 12] to enhance brain–computer interfacing
efficiency. The concept reported in this paper further extends the brain’s somatosensory channel
by the application of a contact–less stimulus generated with an airborne ultrasonic tactile display
(AUTD) [ITS08]. The rationale behind the use of the AUTD is that, due to its contact–less
nature, it allows for a more hygienic application, avoiding the occurrence of skin ulcers (bedsores)
in patients in a locked–in state (LIS). This paper reports very encouraging results with AUTD–
based BCI (autdBCI) in comparison with the classical paradigm of vibrotactile transducer–based
somatosensory stimulus (vtBCI) attached to the user’s palms [MMM+ 12]. The rest of the paper
is organized as follows. The next section introduces the materials and methods used in the study.
The results obtained in online experiments with 13 healthy BCI users are then discussed. Finally,
conclusions are formulated and directions for future research are outlined.

2. Materials and Methods
Thirteen male volunteer BCI users participated in the experiments. The users’ mean age was
28.54, with a standard deviation of 7.96 years. The experiments were performed at the Life Science Center of TARA, University of Tsukuba, at the University of Tokyo and at RIKEN Brain
Science Institute, Japan. The online (real-time) EEG autdBCI and vtBCI paradigm experiments
were conducted in accordance with the WMA Declaration of Helsinki - Ethical Principles for
Medical Research Involving Human Subjects and the procedures were approved and designed in
agreement with the ethical committee guidelines of the Faculty of Engineering, Information and
Systems at University of Tsukuba, Japan. The AUTD stimulus generator produced vibrotactile
contact–less stimulation of the human skin via the air using focused ultrasound [ITS08, Ham14].
The effect was achieved by generating an ultrasonic radiation static force produced by intense
sound pressure amplitude (a nonlinear acoustic phenomenon). The radiation pressure deformed
the surface of the skin on the palms, creating a tactile sensation. An array of ultrasonic transducers mounted on the AUTD created the focussed radiation pressure at an arbitrary focal point by
choosing a phase shift of each transducer appropriately (the so–called phased array technique).
Modulated radiation pressure created a sensation of tactile vibration similar to the one delivered
by classical vibrotactile transducers attached to the user’s palms. The AUTD device developed
by the authors [ITS08, Ham14] adhered to ultrasonic medical standards and did not exceed the
permitted skin absorption levels (approximately 40 times below the limits). The effective vibrotactile sensation was set to 50 Hz [Ham14]. As a reference, in the second vtBCI experiment,
contact vibrotactile stimuli were also applied to locations on the users’ palms via the transducers
HIHX09C005-8. Each transducer in the experiments was set to emit a square acoustic frequency
wave at 50 Hz, which was delivered from the ARDUINO micro–controller board with a custom
battery–driven and isolated power amplifier and software developed in–house and managed from
a MAX 6 visual programming environment. The two experiment set-ups above are presented
in Figure 1. Two types of experiments were performed with the volunteer users. Psychophysical experiments with button–press responses were conducted in order to test uniform stimulus
difficulty levels from response accuracy and time measurements. The subsequent online BCI
EEG experiments evaluated the autdBCI paradigm efficiency and allowed for a comparison with
the classical skin contact–based vtBCI reference. In both the above experiment protocols, the
users were instructed to spell sequences of six digits representing the stimulated positions on

3.1.

20

3

3.1.

AIRBORNE ULTRASONIC TACTILE DISPLAY BRAIN–COMPUTER INTERFACE PARADIGM

A user's palms with attached 3.2.
vibrotactile transducers used in vtBCI
experiments. The stimulus locations are
represented by digits to be spelled.

The AUTD array with
ultrasonic
2
3.3.
transducers used to create the
contact-less tactile pressure
sensation.
30Hz

33.2

21

A user
during
249×2
= 498

the autdBCI
experiment with both palms
placed under the AUTD array
with ultrasonic transducers.
3.3

3.2
250mm

Figure 1. Tactile
stimulus set-ups for autdBCI
and vtBCI experiments.
3.2.1
2.0gf
1cm
HiWave
12mm

3.2.

2.0gf
12mm
2

HIHX09C005-8[26]
150Hz

their palms. The training instructions were presented visually by means of the BCI2000 pro2
gram [SM10] with the numbers 1 − 6 representing the palm locations
as depicted in the left panel
3.1
of Figure 1. The EEG signals were captured with an EEG amplifier system g.USBamp by g.tec
Medical Engineering GmbH, Austria, using 16 active electrodes.
The electrodes were attached
3.3
2
to the head locations: Cz, Pz, P3, P4, C3, C4, CP5, CP6, P1, P2, POz, C1, C2, FC1, FC2,
and FCz, as in the 10/10 extended international system. The ground electrode was attached
NT-9UH2PK
to the FPz position, and the reference was attached to the left earlobe. No
electromagnetic
interference was observed from the AUTD or vibrotactile transducers operating with frequencies
2
249×2 = 498
notch–filtered together with power line interference from the EEG. The EEG signals captured
were processed online with a BCI2000–based application [SM10],10using a 1stepwise linear dis60
50
criminant analysis (SWLDA)
classifier [KSC+ 06] with =features
drawn 10from the 0 − 800
ms ERP 1
30Hz
intervals. The stimulus length and inter–stimulus–interval
were set to 400 ms, and the number
3.3
of averages
in BCI trials was set to 15 in order to collect
enough data for the classifier
training.
1
60×6
= 360
250mm
The EEG recording sampling rate was set 1cm
at 512 Hz, and the high and low pass filters were set
atHiWave
0.1 Hz and 60 Hz, respectively.
The notch filter to remove power line interference was set
HIHX09C005-8[26]
for a rejection
150Hz band of 48 ∼ 52 Hz. Each user performed three experiment sessions (randomized
90 targets and 450 non-targets each), which were later averaged for the online SWLDA classifier.
3.1

3. Results and Conclusions
The averaged evoked responses to targets and non–targets are depicted together with standard error bars in Figure 2. The BCI six digit sequences spelling accuracy analyses for both the
experiments for the various averaging options are summarized in Figure 3. The chance level was
of 16.6%. The mean accuracies for 15-trial averaged ERPs were 63.8% and 69.4% for autdBCI
and vtBCI, respectively. The maximum accuracies were 78.3% and 84.6% respectively. The differences were not significant, supporting the concept of AUTD–based tactile stimulus usability
for BCI. However, a single trial classification offline analysis of the collected responses resulted in
mean accuracies of 83.0% for autdBCI and 53.8% for vtBCI, leading to a possible 19.2 bit/min
and 7.9 bit/min, respectively. In the case of the autdBCI, only a single user’s results were bordering on the level of chance, and four subjects attained 100% (10 trials averaging). On average,
lower accuracies were obtained with the classical vtBCI, with which three users bordered on the
level of chance, and only one user scored 100% accuracy level in SWLDA–classified averaged
responses. This case study demonstrates results obtained with a novel six–command–based aut-

[27]

1
6

×10

60

4

K. HAMADA ET AL.

Figure 2. The autdBCI (blue - targets; red - non–targets) and vtBCI (green targets; black - non–targets) grand mean averaged ERP responses, together with
standard error bars. Due to limited space, of the 16 measured, only electrodes
Cz and Pz are presented.

dBCI paradigm. We compared the results with classical vibrotactile transducer stimuli already
generated. The experiment results obtained in this study confirm the validity of the contact–less
autdBCI for interactive applications and the possibility to further improve the results with the
utilization of single trial–based linear classification. The EEG experiment with the paradigm
confirms that contact–less (airborne) tactile stimuli can be used to create six command–based
interfaces. The results presented offer a step forward in the development of novel neurotechnology applications. Due to the still not very high interfacing rate achieved by users in the case
of online BCI, the current paradigm obviously requires improvement and modification. These
requirements determine the major lines of study for future research.
However, even in its current form, the proposed autdBCI can be regarded as a practical
solution for LIS patients (locked into their own bodies despite often intact cognitive functioning),
who cannot use vision or auditory-based interfaces due to sensory or other disabilities.

Figure 3. Averaged autdBCI and vtBCI six digits spelling accuracy results
colour coded separately for each user, with standard error bars depicted.

AIRBORNE ULTRASONIC TACTILE DISPLAY BRAIN–COMPUTER INTERFACE PARADIGM

5

Author contributions
Designed and performed the EEG experiments: KH, HM, TMR. Analyzed the data: KH,
HM, TMR. Conceived the concept of the AUTD–based BCI paradigm: TMR, HS. Supported
the project: HS, TMR. Wrote the paper: KH, TMR.
Acknowledgements
Hiromu Mori and Tomasz M. Rutkowski were supported in part by the Strategic Information
and Communications R&D Promotion Program (SCOPE) no. 121803027 of The Ministry of
Internal Affairs and Communications in Japan.
References
[BVE10]

Anne-Marie Brouwer and Jan B F Van Erp. A tactile P300 brain-computer interface. Frontiers in
Neuroscience, 4(19), 2010.
[Ham14]
Katsuhiko Hamada. Brain-computer interface using airborne ultrasound tactile display. Master thesis,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, March 2014. In Japanese.
[ITS08]
Takayuki Iwamoto, Mari Tatezono, and Hiroyuki Shinoda. Non-contact method for producing tactile sensation using airborne ultrasound. In Manuel Ferre, editor, Haptics: Perception, Devices and
Scenarios, volume 5024 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 504–513. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008.
[KSC+ 06] Dean J Krusienski, Eric W Sellers, François Cabestaing, Sabri Bayoudh, Dennis J McFarland,
Theresa M Vaughan, and Jonathan R Wolpaw. A comparison of classification techniques for the
P300 speller. Journal of Neural Engineering, 3(4):299, 2006.
[MMM+ 12] Hiromu Mori, Yoshihiro Matsumoto, Shoji Makino, Victor Kryssanov, and Tomasz M. Rutkowski.
Vibrotactile stimulus frequency optimization for the haptic BCI prototype. In Proceedings of The 6th
International Conference on Soft Computing and Intelligent Systems, and The 13th International
Symposium on Advanced Intelligent Systems, pages 2150–2153, Kobe, Japan, November 20-24, 2012.
[MPSNP06] G.R. Muller-Putz, R. Scherer, C. Neuper, and G. Pfurtscheller. Steady-state somatosensory evoked
potentials: suitable brain signals for brain-computer interfaces? Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, 14(1):30–37, March 2006.
[SM10]
G. Schalk and J. Mellinger. A Practical Guide to Brain–Computer Interfacing with BCI2000.
Springer-Verlag London Limited, 2010.

