Mathematical model of livestock and wildlife: Predation
and competition under environmental disturbances

arXiv:1409.0024v2 [q-bio.PE] 4 Feb 2015

M. F. Lagunaa,∗, G. Abramsona,b , M. N. Kupermana,b , J. L. Lanatac , J. A.
Monjeaud,e
a Centro

Atómico Bariloche and CONICET, R8402AGP Bariloche, Argentina
b Instituto Balseiro, R8402AGP Bariloche, Argentina
c Instituto de Investigaciones en Diversidad Cultural y Procesos de Cambio, CONICET,
R8400AHL Bariloche, Argentina
d Fundación Bariloche and CONICET, R8402AGP Bariloche, Argentina
e Laboratório de Ecologia e Conservação de Populações, Departamento de Ecologia,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil

Abstract
Inspired by real scenarios in Northern Patagonia, we analyze a mathematical
model of a simple trophic web with two herbivores and one predator. The
studied situations represent a common practice in the steppes of Argentine
Patagonia, where livestock are raised in a semi-wild state, either on the open
range or enclosed, coexisting with competitors and predators. In the present
work, the competing herbivores represent sheep and guanacos, while the predator is associated with the puma. The proposed model combines the concepts
of metapopulations and patches dynamics, and includes an explicit hierarchical
competition between species, which affects their prospect to colonize an empty
patch when having to compete with other species. We perform numerical simulations of spatially extended metapopulations assemblages of the system, which
allow us to incorporate the effects of habitat heterogeneity and destruction.
The numerical results are compared with those obtained from mean field calculations. We find that the model provides a good theoretical framework in several
situations, including the control of the wild populations that the ranchers exert to different extent. Furthermore, the present formulation incorporates new
terms in previously analyzed models, that help to reveal the important effects
due to the heterogeneous nature of the system.
Keywords: Livestock-wildlife coexistence, Hierarchical competition,
Predation, Habitat destruction

∗ Corresponding

author
Email addresses: lagunaf@cab.cnea.gov.ar (M. F. Laguna),
abramson@cab.cnea.gov.ar (G. Abramson), kuperman@cab.cnea.gov.ar (M. N. Kuperman),
jllanata@conicet.gov.ar (J. L. Lanata), amonjeau@fundacionbariloche.org.ar (J. A.
Monjeau)

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

February 5, 2015

1. Introduction
The mathematical modeling of ecological interactions is an essential tool in
predicting the behavior of complex systems across changing scenarios, such as
those arising from climate change or environmental degradation. The literature
abounds with examples of predator-prey models [1, 2, 3], of intra- and interspecific competition [4, 5, 6], of the relation between species richness and area
size [7, 8] and of habitat fragmentation [9, 10, 11]. However, considerable effort still needs to be made in the integration of all these mechanisms together.
Our intention is to advance towards the modeling of trophic web complexity in
successive approximations. In this paper we take a first step in this direction:
modeling a predator-prey-competition system in environments subjected to disturbances. We present as a case study the dynamics of a simple trophic web. As
a paradigm of a more complex ecosystem, we analyze here the case of a single
predator and two competing preys in the Patagonian steppe. Specifically, we
focus on two native species: puma (Puma concolor, a carnivore) and guanaco
(Lama guanicoe, a camelid), and on sheep (Ovis aries) as an introduced competitor to the native herbivore and further prey of the pumas. This system is
the result of a long sequence of ecological and historical events that we briefly
outline below.
The native mammalian fauna of Patagonia is composed of survivors of five
main processes of extinction. One of the most relevant is known as the Great
American Biotic Interchange (GABI) in which, upon the emergence of the Isthmus of Panama about 3 million years ago, the South American biota became
connected with North America [12]. The last main event occurred during the
Quaternary glaciations, when climate change was combined with the arrival of
humans for the first time in the evolutionary history of the continent [13]. This
cast of species, resistant to these natural shocks, was afterwards not exempt
from threats to their survival.
Pumas and guanacos, currently the two largest mammals in Patagonia, coexisted with humans for at least 13000 years with no evidence of shrinkage in their
ranges of distribution until the twentieth century [14, 15, 16]. There are records
of a huge abundance of guanacos in sustainable coexistence with Tehuelche
hunters, until shortly before the arrival of the European immigrants [17, 18].
In 1880-1890, as a consequence of what has been called the “Conquest of the
Desert” or “Wingka Malón” in Argentina, the indigenous highly mobile hunters
were almost exterminated or driven from their ancestral territories by the campaigns of the Argentine military army [19]. Large and continuous extensions
of the Patagonian steppe were subdivided into private ranches by means of a
gigantic grid of fences, and 95% of it was devoted to sheep farming [20]. The introduction of sheep significantly altered the ecological interactions of the Patagonian fauna and flora [21]. Ranchers, descendants of Europeans, built a new
niche where the puma, as a predator of sheep, and the guanaco, as competitor
for forage, became part of the list of enemies of their productive interests and
were therefore fought [20].

2

1.1. The ecological context
Let us describe the current ecological scenario in which these three characteristic players interact. There is evidence of competition between sheep and
guanacos [22, 20], mainly for forage and water. From a diet of 80 species of
plants, they share 76 [23], so that sheep carrying capacity decreases when the
number of guanacos increases. Under natural conditions, the guanaco can be
considered a superior competitor to the sheep, and in fact it has been observed
that the guanacos displace sheep from water sites (including artificial sources).
However, human influence makes the density of guanacos decrease when the
number of sheep increases. What needs to be understood is that there is no
simple and direct competition between guanacos and sheep, but a competition
between guanacos and “livestock,” a term that includes sheep, herder dogs and
humans with their guns. Without these “cultural bodyguards” of barks, bullets
and fences, a herd of guanacos would displace a flock of sheep. As the fields
deteriorate from overgrazing and desertification the guanaco increases its competitive superiority over the sheep, since it is superbly adapted to situations of
environmental harshness, especially water scarcity (e.g., it may drink seawater
in case of extreme necessity). Therefore, the guanaco density tends to increase
naturally as field productivity decreases. However, this natural process is usually offset by an increase in hunting pressure on the guanaco as environmental
conditions worsen, because ranchers want to maximize scarce resources for production. Drought periods catalyze these socio-environmental crises, as the lack
of rain works somewhat like a destroyer of carrying capacity for both wildlife
and livestock.
Predators (pumas and also foxes, Lycalopex culpaeus) are also subject to
permanent removal, because their extermination reduces production costs [20].
The puma naturally hunted guanacos [24], but since the introduction of sheep it
has been dedicated almost completely to these last, as it is a prey that involves
minimal exploration cost (i.e., the energy effort spent in searching for, pursuing
and capturing prey) compared to the high energy cost of capturing the fast and
elusive guanaco that co-evolved with them [25].
Of course, as hunting eradicates the predators, populations of herbivores
have no natural demographic controls and can grow exponentially, as has happened in the case of some nature reserves. Subsequently the uncontrolled growth
of guanaco increases the competition with sheep and, if guanaco populations are
confined and cannot migrate, this may also result in an overconsumption of fodder, excessive destruction of the habitat, and subsequent population collapse by
starvation. Such a case has recently been documented in the nature reserve of
Cabo Dos Bahías in Patagonia [20].
This interaction between the guanaco, puma and sheep is heavily influenced
by management decisions concerning the pastures. For ranchers, the fauna is a
production cost, the tolerance of which can be characterized in three paradigmatic scenarios:
Low conflict scenario. If the cost of the presence of wildlife is financially
compensated by the government or by ecotourism activities related to wildlife

3

watching [22], the ranchers tolerate the presence of wildlife in coexistence with
a livestock density that is not harmful to the ecosystem. If the field changes
from a productive use to a conservative use, the wildlife and the flora recover
very fast (the San Pablo de Valdés case, see [26]).
Medium conflict scenario. In well-managed fields with adequate load, the
carrying capacity is maintained in a healthy enough state to tolerate livestock
and wildlife simultaneously. For this to happen, the field needs a large usable
area. If the field changes from a productive to a conservative use, the wildlife
recovers well, but not as fast as in the previous scenario, since growth is limited by the availability of resources (the case of Punta Buenos Aires, Península
Valdés). In those cases where the area is very large, the recovery is very good
despite the partial deterioration, because the lower load per hectare is offset by
the amount of surface (the case of Torres del Paine National Park, Chile).
High conflict scenario. When the farmer depends exclusively on sheep
production, conflict is high because the wildlife goes against their economic interests. If these are not compensated, wildlife hunting increases and becomes
much more intense as the field deteriorates. Wildlife is shifted to productively
marginal sectors. The farmer prioritizes short-term income above sustaining
long-term productivity of the field. This economic rationality creates a negative
feedback loop: as productivity decreases, the farmer increases livestock density
to try to sustain the same income; this leads to overgrazing and, in turn, to a
further decline in productivity; the farmer then sets out to economically compensate this decline by loading the field even more. The result is a meltdown of
the productive system and the abandonment of the field [20]. The populations of
native herbivores (although they get a rest from the exterminated predators and
the eradicated sheep) fail to recover viable population levels because there are
not enough resources to sustain them, energetically and bio-geo-chemically [27].
As a consequence of this frequent scenario, the density of guanacos, rheas and
other herbivores has decreased considerably in Patagonia [20].
In this paper we study a mathematical model corresponding to a simplified
instance of this ecosystem. Our purpose is to provide a theoretical framework
in which different field observations and conceptual models can be formalized.
The model has been kept intentionally simple at the present stage, in order to
understand the basic behavior of the system in different scenarios, including the
three just described. Subsequent mechanisms will be incorporated and reported
elsewhere.
In the next section the metapopulation model is presented, followed by the
analysis of the main results obtained with the spatially explicit stochastic simulations and the mean field model. Further discussion and future directions are
discussed in the closing section.
2. Analysis
2.1. Metapopulation model
As we said above, let us analyze a system composed of three characteristic
species of the trophic web: two competing herbivores (sheep and guanacos), and
4

a predator (puma). A particularly suited framework to capture the role of a
structured habitat and of the hierarchical competition is that of metapopulation
models [28, 5]. A metapopulation model comprises a large territory consisting
of patches of landscape, that can be either vacant or occupied by any of the
species. By “occupied” we mean that some individuals have their home range,
or their territory, in the patch, and that they keep it there for some time.
This occupation can be a single individual, a family, a herd, etc. Our scale of
description does not distinguish these cases, just the occupation of the patch.
In order to account for human or environmental perturbations that may render
parts of the landscape inhabitable, we consider that a fraction D of the patches
are destroyed and not available for occupation [5, 29].
The dynamics of occupation and abandoning of patches obeys the different
ecological processes that drive the metapopulation dynamics. Vacant patches
can be colonized and occupied ones can be freed, as will be described below.
Predators can only colonize patches already occupied by prey (as in [1], see also
[30]). Predation will be taken into account as an increase in the probability of
local extinction of the population of the herbivores in the presence of a local
population of predators [1].
Also, as in [5], we consider that the two competing herbivores are not equivalent. In this scenario, the superior competitor can colonize any patch that is
neither destroyed nor already occupied by themselves, and even displace the
inferior one when doing so. On the other hand, the inferior competitor can only
colonize patches that are neither destroyed, nor occupied by themselves, nor
occupied by the superior one.
As we mentioned in the Introduction, the size and temperament of guanacos
allow them to displace sheep from the scarce water sources. Besides, being native
to the steppe, they are better adapted to the harsh conditions of vegetation and
water availability. In this spirit, we choose to model the guanaco at the higher
place in the competitive hierarchy. Sheep, being the inferior competitor, need to
display some advantage in order to persist under these conditions. As observed
in [5], this can be implemented in their dynamical parameters: being a better
colonizer, for example. This indeed happens since—as we also mentioned in the
previous section—sheep have the assistance of their owners.
With these conceptual predicaments, inferred from the ecosystem and represented as a diagram in Fig. 1, we can build a simple but relevant spatially
extended mathematical model in the following way. Consider a square grid of
L×L patches, that can be either destroyed (permanently, as a quenched element
of disorder of the habitat), vacant or occupied by one or more of the species.
Let xi denote the fraction of patches occupied by herbivores of species i (with
i = 1, 2 for the superior and inferior ones respectively), and y the fraction occupied by predators. Time advances discretely. At each time step, the following
stochastic processes can change the state of occupation of a patch:
Colonization. An available patch can be colonized by the species α from a
first neighbor occupied patch, with probability of colonization cα (α being x1 ,
x2 and y).
Extinction. An occupied patch can be vacated by species α with probability
5

Figure 1: The conceptual model. Arrows show species interactions in the model. The big
arrow connecting guanacos to sheep represents the asymmetry of the hierarchical competition.

of local extinction eα .
Predation. A patch that is occupied by either prey and by the predator
has a probability of extinction of the prey, given by a corresponding probability
µα (note that µy = 0).
Competitive displacement. A patch occupied by both herbivores can
be freed of the inferior one x2 with probability cx1 . Note that there is no
additional parameter to characterize the hierarchy: the colonization probability
of the higher competitor plays this role.
The colonization process deserves further considerations. On the one hand,
lets us be more specific about the meaning of an available patch. Observe that,
for the herbivores, availability is determined by the destruction, occupation and
the hierarchical competition, as described above. For the predator an available
patch is a patch colonized by any prey. On the other hand, colonization is
the only process that involves the occupancy of neighbors besides the state of
the patch itself. We must calculate the probability of colonization given the
occupation of the neighbors. Let n be the number of occupied neighbors of an
available patch. The probability of being colonized from any of the neighbors
is then the following:
pα = 1 − (1 − cα )n .
(1)
We study the dynamics of this model through a computer simulation performed on a system enclosed by impenetrable barriers (effectively implemented
by destroying all the patches in the perimeter). To perform a typical realization
we define the parameters of the model and destroy a fraction D of patches, which
will not be available for colonization for the whole run. Then, we set an initial
condition occupying at random 50% of the available patches for each herbivore
species. Further, 50% of the patches occupied by any herbivore are occupied
by predators. The system is then allowed to evolve synchronously according to

6

the stochastic rules. Each patch is subject to the four events in the order given
above. A transient time (typically 3000 time steps) elapses before a fluctuating
steady state is reached, where we perform our measurement as temporal and
ensemble averages of the space occupied by each species.
2.2. Predation control and habitat destruction
We have analyzed this system in several scenarios, corresponding to different
values of the parameters. In particular, we show below the dependence of the
state of the system on the probability of extinction of predators and on the
degree of destruction of the habitat, both of which represent typical mechanisms
of anthropogenic origin that affect the populations.
Let us first analyze the fraction of occupied patches of the three species as
a function of the extinction probability of the predator, ey . The probabilities
characterizing the rest of the processes have been chosen to represent the realistic
scenarios discussed above, with the guanaco as the superior competitor, while
the sheep, inferior in the competitive hierarchy, is able to survive thanks to
a higher colonization probability, cx2 > cx1 and lower extinction, ex2 < ex1 .
Besides, we have modeled the predation on sheep as more frequent than that
on guanaco, with µx2  µx1 . The colonization probability of the predators was
chosen in order to have a region of coexistence of the three species.
Figure 2 shows such a case, for a fraction D = 0.3 of destroyed patches
uniformly distributed at random in the grid. We observe several regimes of
occupation of space. On the one hand, as expected, for ey above a threshold
(which in this case is ≈ 0.02), the puma becomes extinct and both herbivores
coexist occupying a fraction of the system around 30%. In this case we observe
that x1 > x2 , but the situation actually depends on D since the superior competitor is more sensitive to the destruction of habitat (also observed in [5, 29]).
Other values of D are reported below.
On the other hand, the behavior of the system for very small values of ey is
counter-intuitive. We see that, even though the extinction of the predator is very
small, they nevertheless become extinct, and so do their preys. The reason for
this is an ecological meltdown during a transient dynamics: the pumas rapidly
fill their available habitat (because they almost do not vacate any occupied
patch, since ey ≈ 0). As a consequence there is an excessive predation and the
preys become extinct. Thereafter the predators follow the same fate. Figure S1
(left panel) in Supplementary Material shows a typical temporal evolution of
this situation.
The most interesting dynamics is observed for intermediate values of the
probability of extinction of the predators. We see that, as expected, the fraction occupied by pumas decays monotonically with ey . The sheep, being better
colonizers than guanacos, are the first to benefit from this lowering pressure
from predation. We see this as a steady increase of the sheep occupation until
some guanacos are able to colonize the system. When this happens, the conditions for the persistence of preys are modified. The sheep are now subject to
both ecological pressures: predation and competitive displacement. As a consequence, we see a reduction of the space occupied by sheep, accompanied by a
7

Figure 2: Controlling the predator. We plot the fraction of occupied patches of the three
species, as a function of the extinction probability of the predator. Each point is the average
of the steady state, measured at the final 2000 steps, and averaged over 100 realizations of
the dynamics (standard deviation shown as error bars). Other parameters are: cx1 = 0.05,
cx2 = 0.1, cy = 0.015, ex1 = 0.05, ex2 = 0.01, µx1 = 0.2, µx2 = 0.8 and D = 0.3

fast growth of the fraction of patches occupied by guanacos. We show in Fig.
S1 (right panel) in Supplementary Material a typical temporal evolution of the
occupations in a situation of coexistence of the three species.
The available area, or the fraction of destroyed habitat, also plays a relevant
role in the final state of the system. Figure 3 shows contour plots corresponding
to the three species in the parameters space defined by ey and D. Note that the
case just discussed of Fig. 2 corresponds to a horizontal section of each of these
graphs. The behavior of the space occupied by guanacos is monotonic both in ey
and D. The threshold above which there is a non-zero occupation is independent
of D, while the value of ey above which the occupation reaches a plateau reduces
linearly with D. At the same time, the value of such occupation is smaller. This
is the same effect on the superior competitor under the destruction of habitat,
as mentioned above.
The most prominent feature of the space occupied by sheep is the existence of
a ridge (seen as an island of brighter green shades in the plot) at intermediate
values of ey , with a local maximum at a certain value of the destruction D.
This is also a consequence of the hierarchical competition between sheep and
guanacos. There is also a local minimum around ey = 0.02 for small values of
D.
In the rightmost panel of Fig. 3 we see that the extinction of pumas for very
low values of ey observed in Fig. 2 persists for all values of D. Observe that the
threshold for extinction moves towards smaller values of the probability ey when
D grows. This is consistent with the known observations of greater sensitivity

8

Figure 3: Role of the habitat destruction. Contour plots of the fraction of patches occupied
by each species, corresponding to parameters ey and D as shown in the axes titles. (left)
guanacos, x1 ; (center) sheep, x2 ; (right) pumas, y. Other parameters as in Fig. 2.

of predators to habitat fragmentation [30]. Besides, the maximum fraction of
occupation is independent of ey and decreases with D. As will be shown below,
this situation changes when the distribution of destroyed patches is not uniform
in the system.
In the Supplementary Material we provide three figures corresponding to the
contour plots of Fig. 3, showing horizontal cuts for several values of D. These
results will be further discussed in the final Section.
2.3. Mean field approximation
Let us briefly discuss a mean field approximation of the spatially extended
model, which is similar to the original Levins model of metapopulations and
subsequent generalizations [31, 1, 32, 2, 33]. It is important to stress that such
a model ignores the short-range correlations between occupied patches that arise
from the local and first-neighbor population dynamics. These correlations, as
we will see in the next Section, play an important role even in the average
behavior of the space occupation. For this reason, we regard the numerical
simulation of the model as a more valuable tool for the analysis of the system.
Nevertheless, some global features of the metapopulations can still be captured
by an analytical model and it is worth some consideration for the insight it
provides in the mechanisms behind the observed phenomena.
Taking into account the four processes described above, the Levins-like mean
field approximation for the three-species model becomes:
dx1
dt
dx2
dt
dy
dt

= cx1 x1 (1 − D − x1 ) − ex1 x1 − µ1 x1 y,

(2)

= cx2 x2 (1 − D − x1 − x2 ) − ex2 x2 − µ2 x2 y − cx1 x1 x2 ,

(3)

= cy y [(x1 + x2 − x1 x2 ) − y] − ey y,

(4)

9

Figure 4: Phase diagram of the mean field model. The plot shows the stationary occupation
of patches of the three species as controlled by the destruction parameter D and the extinction
of predators ey .

where cα , eα and µi are colonization, extinction and predation rates of the
corresponding species. Observe the difference in the colonization terms between
the two competing herbivores, Eqs. (2) and (3). As mentioned above (and as
in [5]) the patches available for colonization by the higher competitor in the
hierarchy, x1 , are those not destroyed and not already occupied: (1 − D − x1 ).
The lower competitor x2 , instead, can colonize patches which, besides, are not
occupied by x1 : (1 − D − x1 − x2 ). The last term of Eq. (3), in addition, stands
for a displacement mechanism of the lower competitor by the higher one. In this
situation the lower competitor can persist only for a certain set of parameters,
granting a better colonization or less extinction rates. Observe, also, that the
colonization term of the predator (Eq. (4)) allows for them only the occupation
of patches already occupied by either prey (similarly to the proposal of [2]).
The form of this term takes care of this interference effect following the rule of
addition of probabilities for the union of the patches already colonized by x1
and x2 . Finally, the predation terms present in Eqs. (2) and (3) are proportional
to the fraction of space occupied by predators which, even in this mean field
without any space dependence, corresponds to a high mobility of predators in
the system.
The phase diagram of Fig. 4 shows the equilibrium state of the system (2)(4), i.e. the steady state of the occupied fractions of the three species. It

10

Uniform distribution of D

guanaco (x )

sheep (x )

1

D = 0.1

occupied fraction

0.6

D = 0.3

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.0
0.04 0.00

0.01

0.02

D = 0.5

0.6

0.4

0.0
0.00

0.0
0.04 0.00

0.03

puma (y)

2

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.03

0.04

puma local extintion (e )
y

Exponential distribution of D

D = 0.1

occupied fraction

0.6

D = 0.3

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0
0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.0
0.04 0.00

0.01

0.02

D = 0.5

0.6

0.0
0.04 0.00

0.03

0.01

0.02

puma local extintion (e )
y

Figure 5: Non-uniform destruction of the habitat. Comparison of the results of simulations
performed with the same values of D (as shown), but with either a uniform (top) or an
exponential distribution in one direction of the grid (bottom). Only the average values are
shown for clarity, since the standard deviations are very small, as those shown in Fig. 2. Each
curve has 120 points (of which only a few are shown with symbols for clarity) and each point
is the average of 100 realizations.

corresponds to the scenarios shown in Fig. 3. It is apparent that the behavior
of the mean field model is qualitatively similar to the results obtained in the
spatially extended computer simulations. In particular, the non-monotonic dependence of the fraction of patches used by sheep with the extinction rate of
pumas stands out as a robust signature of this three-species food web. We will
discuss some implications of this feature in the Discussion.
2.4. Limitations of the mean field approximation
As anticipated, a simple mean field approximation cannot take into account
peculiarities of the dynamics that arise from spatial correlations of the variables.
Of particular relevance in the present context is the distribution of the destroyed
patches. The results shown above correspond to a fraction D of destroyed
patches distributed at random in a uniform manner on the grid. However,
in many situations the distribution of destroyed patches may be non-uniform,
albeit also random. It may follow a gradient, corresponding to an analogous
distribution of resources. Or it may represent some spatially organized human
activities such as agriculture, urban development, roads, etc. Eventually, one
11

may also consider the feedback of the variables of the system on the state of
the habitat, as in the case of desertification due to overgrazing—a phenomenon
that we will explore elsewhere.
We have analyzed several instances in which the aggregation of destroyed
patches affects the state of the system, and we show a simple one here. Consider
that the probability distribution of the D × L2 destroyed patches is random in
one direction of the grid, and decays exponentially in the other direction. (See,
in Fig. S3 of the Supplementary Material, two examples of the uniform and
exponential distributions of destroyed habitat.) With such a distribution, there
is a higher local density of destroyed patches near one of the sides of the system,
decaying towards the opposite side. Characteristic results are shown in Fig. 5,
which compares both uniform and exponential distributions of destruction for
the same three values of D, corresponding to low destruction (left column),
moderate destruction (center) and high destruction of the habitat (right).
We see that the main difference between the two arrangements is the response
of the pumas and guanacos. Both of them seem very sensitive to the spatial
arrangement of unusable patches. The reason for this is not completely clear,
but it seems to arise from the fact that the predators, since they occupy a subset
of the patches colonized by preys, have a more limited chance of survival than
the preys. On the other hand the guanacos that, being the superior competitor
are more susceptible to the destruction of habitat (as observed by [5]), suffer a
similar fate. When the destroyed patches are uniformly distributed in the system
they impose a rather strong handicap for colonization when the value of D is high
(indeed, D = 0.5 is subcritical for the percolation of undestroyed patches [34]).
The top row of Fig. 5, from left to right, corresponds to a progressive reduction
of the occupied space as well as D increases. Eventually, for D = 0.5 we see that
the pumas and the guanacos have almost disappeared. On the other hand, the
bottom row of plots in the same figure shows that the exponential distribution
of the destruction has a much smaller impact on the space occupied by these
species. Indeed, such distribution concentrates the unusable space near one of
the sides of the system, leaving relatively pristine the opposite one. This enables
the colonization of this range with less local hindrance, as if they were effectively
in a smaller system with a lower value of D. Moreover, the threshold of ey for
the extinction of pumas becomes independent of D in this heterogeneous system.
To provide further support to this argument we analyzed another distribution of the destroyed patches. When they are placed as a single block of unusable
space (effectively reducing the available area to a contiguous set of (1 − D)L2
patches), the result is both quali- and quantitatively very similar to the one
presented here of an heterogeneous habitat with an exponentially distribution
of the destruction.
3. Discussion
The results presented in the previous Sections are a sample of the rich phenomenology of the model. There are a number of aspects that deserve further
discussion, and we delve into some of them in this Section. On the one hand,
12

Species
guanaco (x1 )
sheep (x2 )
puma (y)

Low conflict
D = 0.1
0.35 → 0.47
0.26 → 0.00
0.25 → 0.48

Medium conflict
D = 0.3
0.32 → 0.45
0.29 → 0.00
0.02 → 0.17

High conflict
D = 0.5
0.03 → 0.20
0.29 → 0.00
0.00 →< 0.01

Table 1: Modeling of the conflict scenarios. The occupied fractions reported for each species
correspond to the stationary state of the model. The arrows indicate the change of this asymptotic state under the remotion of the sheep and the corresponding change of the parameters
as: cx1 = 0.05 → 0.1, ex1 = 0.05 → 0.025, ey = 0.02 → 0.015, µx1 = 0.2 → 0.3. Other
parameters as in Fig. 2. The habitat has uniform distribution of destroyed patches.

consider that a thorough exploration of the dynamics of a model with three
species and nine parameters is a daunting task. For this reason, we have chosen
to restrict our analysis to a small region in parameter space, bearing in mind the
correspondence to realistic natural phenomena. Nevertheless, concerned by the
robustness of our results, we extended our study to a wider region of parameters
around those reported here. We found no qualitative departure from the shown
results. We also explored the structural stability of the model by incorporating
certain additional mechanisms, namely an exploration cost for predators capable
of resource supplementation (as in [1, 31]), with the same encouraging results.
Let us revisit the three conflict scenarios discussed in the Introduction.
Within the limitations of the present model it is possible to assess some of
their features. The following considerations are summarized in Table 1. Consider first the low conflict scenario, that we can visualize as a coexistence of the
three species in a situation of little overgrazing. Such a situation could correspond to the set of parameters represented in the top-left panel of Fig. 5, with
ey = 0.02 and coexistence of the three species. What would change if the use
of the land changes from productive to conservative? The first change would
be the elimination of the livestock, i.e. x2 = 0. This would be accompanied by
a number of changes in several parameters (see the caption of Table 1). The
disappearance of the “bodyguards” of the sheep would correspond to an increase
in the colonization rate of guanacos, and a decrease of the extinction rates of
guanacos and pumas. The predation pressure on guanacos would also increase
due to the lack of sheep. Observe in the first column of Table 1 the change that
such a scenario produces in the model: a sharp recovery of the wildlife. The
same arguments can be applied to the medium and the high conflict scenarios, as
characterized by increasing values of D (see the center and rightmost panels of
Fig. 5). The medium conflict scenario shows a similar recovery of the guanacos
than the low conflict one, but at a much slower pace (not reported in the table).
It is also remarkable that the high conflict scenario shows just a little recovery
of the guanacos, with almost no effect in the puma population. Actually, the
removal of sheep would improve the available space by, eventually, reducing D.
The treatment of the parameter D as a dynamical variable of the system will
indeed be explored in the future, as will the existence of independent resources
for the various species.

13

0.2

in

c

re

a

si

n

g

D

sheep (

x

2

)

0.3

in

c

re

a

si

n

g

D

ey
ey
ey
ey

= 0.04, exp.

0.1

= 0.02, exp.
= 0.04, unif.
= 0.02, unif.

D
D
D
D

0.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

x

guanaco (

0.6

)

1

Figure 6: Meltdown of the herbivores. The curves show the trajectory of the occupied fraction
in the space defined by the two herbivores, when the patches are progressively destroyed
(as indicated by the arrows, from D = 0 to D = 1). Each curve corresponds to different
distributions of the destroyed patches and probability of extinction of the predator, as shown.
Other parameters as in Fig. 2.

In the Supplementary Material, Fig. S4 shows typical temporal evolutions
corresponding to the three scenarios just discussed.
It is also worth noting the role of the predator as a keystone species. Paine [35]
introduced the concept to characterize the existence of species that, despite their
relative low abundance in an ecosystem, play a highly critical role in the ecological dynamics. The ecosystem may suffer a drastic change if a keystone species
is removed. In most of the cases the keystone species is a predator that can control the distribution and population of large numbers of prey species [36]. Such
cases of top-down control of the ecosystem have even been the subject of field
experimentation [37]. The behavior of the populations of sheep and guanaco as
a function of the abundance of puma may indicate that the latter is acting like
a keystone predator. The change in prevalence of the herbivore species due to
the extinction of the puma has been both verified in the mean field model and
in numerical simulations.
As a final comment, let us insist on the importance of the distribution of the
destroyed patches on its influence on the dynamics. It is known that certain
modes of destruction of habitat, such as fragmentation, are more deleterious

14

than others. In our model we have observed this fact, as discussed in the
relative effect of uniform or exponential distribution of the destroyed patches
(Fig. 5). A clearer way of representing this effect is shown in Fig. 6. Here
we plot the final state of the system in the plane defined by x1 and x2 . Each
point corresponds to a different value of D, with the rest of the parameters as
shown. Two distinct behaviors are observed: one corresponding to the uniform
distribution and another one to the exponential one. Besides, the different
symbols (solid or open) correspond to very different situations: the solid ones
have the puma population completely extinct, while the open ones have threespecies coexistence. The value of D increases as indicated by the arrows. In
the exponential case both species get proportionally reduced with the increase
of D, until the guanacos disappear with a small residual population of sheep.
The presence of pumas in the system can be recognized by a different slope
of this straight line: the predators accelerates the extinction of sheep, their
main prey. On the other hand, the uniform case follows a different course. The
presence of pumas is not relevant in the meltdown of the system. Besides, the
two herbivores are very differently affected. The guanacos are more strongly
affected and disappear earlier, and get extinct at D ≈ 0.6 (see Fig. S5 in the
Supplementary Material). This, indeed, is the critical value of percolation of
destroyed patches on a square lattice [34]. The reason for this is, again, the
relative advantage of sheep that, being the inferior competitor, need a better
colonization rate. This improves their chances of thriving in a space that gets
very fragmented and disconnected as the destruction progresses.
In many situations of conflict between production and conservation, it is
difficult to make ecologically right decisions in terms of sustainability if the
variables are taken separately, ignoring their interactions. We believe that our
results highlight the importance of mathematical models in the decision-making
process, and constitute a valuable contribution for the theoretical framework of
interacting metapopulations.
4. Acknowledgements
We acknowledge financial support from: CONICET (PIP 112-201101-00310),
Universidad Nacional de Cuyo (06/C410), ANPCyT (PICT-2011-0790). The
funding agencies were not involved in the research or the preparation of the
manuscript.
References
[1] R. K. Swihart, Z. Feng, N. A. Slade, D. M. Mason, T. M. Gehring, Effects
of habitat destruction and resource supplementation in a predator-prey
metapopulation model, Journal of Theoretical Biology 210 (2001) 287–303.
[2] J. Bascompte, R. V. Solé, Effects of habitat destruction in a prey-predator
metapopulation model, Journal of Theoretical Biology 195 (1998) 383–393.

15

[3] M. Kondoh, High reproductive rates result in high predation risks: A mechanism promoting the coexistence of competing prey in spatially structured
populations, The American Naturalist 161 (2003) 299–309.
[4] S. Nee, R. M. May, Dynamics of metapopulations: habitat destruction and
competitive coexistence, Journal of Animal Ecology 61 (1992) 37–40.
[5] D. Tilman, R. M. May, C. L. Lehman, M. A. Nowak, Habitat destruction
and the extinction debt, Nature 371 (1994) 65–66.
[6] I. Hanski, Coexistence of competitors in patchy environment, Ecology 64
(1983) 493–500.
[7] M. Rosenzweig, Species diversity in space and time, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK, 1995.
[8] O. Ovaskainen, I. Hanski, The speciesŰarea relationship derived from
species-specific incidence functions, Ecology Letters 6 (2003) 903–909.
[9] I. Hanski, O. Ovaskainen, The metapopulation capacity of a fragmented
landscape, Nature 404 (2000) 755–758.
[10] O. Ovaskainen, K. Sato, J. Bascompte, I. Hanski, Metapopulation models for extinction threshold in spatially correlated landscapes, Journal of
Theoretical Biology 215 (2002) 95–108.
[11] I. Hanski, O. Ovaskainen, Extinction debt at extinction threshold, Conservation Biology 16 (2002) 666–673.
[12] B. D. Patterson, L. P. Costa (Eds.), Bones, clones and biomes. The history
and geography of recent neotropical mammals, The University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, 2012.
[13] P. S. Martin, R. K. Klein, Quaternary extinctions. A prehistoric revolution,
University of Arizona Press, Tucson, USA, 1984.
[14] M. L. Bastourre, G. S. Siciliano, Análisis arqueofaunístico del sitio 5 de la
localidad Tapera Moreira (departamento de Lihué Calel, provincia de La
Pampa), Intersecciones en Antropología 13 (2012) 269–280.
[15] L. Borrero, F. Martin, Tafonomía de carnívoros: un enfoque regional, in:
J. G. Otero (Ed.), Arqueología Sólo Patagonia. Segundas Jornadas de Arqueología de la Patagonia, CENPAT, Puerto Madryn, 1996, pp. 189–198.
[16] M. E. D. Negris, M. P. Cata, Cambios en los patrones de representación
ósea del guanaco en Cerro de los Indios 1 (Lago Posadas, Santa Cruz),
Intersecciones en Antropología 6 (2005) 109–119.
[17] G. C. Musters, Vida entre los Patagones. Un año de excursiones desde el
Estrecho de Magallames hasta el Río Negro (1869-1870), Editorial Continente, Buenos Aires, 2007.
16

[18] J. Claraz, Viaje de exploración al Chubut entre 1865 y 1866, Marymar,
Buenos Aires, 1988.
[19] W. M. Delrío, Memorias de expropiación. Sometimiento e incorporación
indígena en la Patagonia 1872-1943, Universidad Nacional de Quilmes,
Buenos Aires, 2005.
[20] B. A. Marqués, A. Vila, N. Bonino, D. Bran, Impactos potenciales de la
ganadería ovina sobre la fauna silvestre de la Patagonia, Ediciones INTA,
Buenos Aires, 2011.
[21] J. A. Monjeau, Ecología y distribución geográfica de los pequeños
mamíferos del Parque Nacional Nahuel Huapi, Ph.D. thesis, Universidad
Nacional de La Plata (1989).
[22] M. J. Nabte, A. I. Marino, M. V. Rodríguez, A. Monjeau, S. L. Saba, Range
management affects native ungulate populations in Península Valdés, a
World Natural Heritage, PLOS ONE 8 (2013) e5655.
[23] R. Baldi, A. Pelliza-Sbriller, D. A. Elston, S. D. Albon, High potential for
competition between guanacos and sheep in Patagonia, Journal of Wildlife
Management 68 (2004) 924–938.
[24] A. J. Novaro, M. C. Funes, R. S. Walker, Ecological extinction of native
prey of a carnivore assemblage in Argentine Patagonia, Biological Conservation 92 (2000) 25–33.
[25] J. R. Rau, J. E. Jiménez, Diet of puma in coastal and andean ranges of
southern Chile, Studies of Neotropical Fauna and Environment 37 (2002)
201–205.
[26] M. Nabte, Desarrollo de criterios ecológicos para la conservación de
mamíferos terrestres en Península Valdés, Ph.D. thesis, Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales (2010).
[27] W. T. Flueck, J. M. Smith-Flueck, J. A. Monjeau, Protected areas and extensive productions systems: a phosphorus challenge beyond human food,
BioScience 61 (2011) 582.
[28] P. K. David Tilman (Ed.), Spatial Ecology: the role of space in population
dynamics and interspecific interactions, Monographs in Population Biology,
Princeton University Press, 1997.
[29] J. Bascompte, R. V. Solé, Habitat fragmentation and extinction thresholds
in spatailly explicit models, Journal of Animal Ecology 65 (1996) 465–473.
[30] D. S. Srivastava, M. K. Trzcinski, B. A. Richardson, B. Gilbert, Why are
predators more sensitive to habitat size than their prey? insights from
bromeliad insect food webs, The American Naturalist 172 (2008) 761–771.

17

[31] C. J. Melián, J. Bascompte, Food web structure and habitat loss, Ecology
Letters 5 (2002) 37–46.
[32] K. C. Harding, J. M. McNamara, A unifying framework for metapopulation
dynamics, The American Naturalist 160 (2) (2002) 173–185.
[33] M. Roy, K. Harding, R. D. Holt, Generalizing Levins metapopulation model
in explicit space: Models of intermediate complexity, Journal of Theoretical
Biology 255 (2008) 152–161.
[34] A. Bunde, S. Havlin, Fractals and disordered systems, Springer-Verlag,
1991.
[35] R. T. Paine, A note on trophic complexity and community stability, The
American Naturalist 103 (929) (1969) 91–93.
[36] L. S. Mills, M. E. Soule, D. F. Doak, The keystone-species concept in
ecology and conservation, BioScience 43 (4) (1993) 219–224.
[37] J. Terborgh, L. Lopez, P. Nuñez, M. Rao, G. Shahabuddin, G. Orihuela,
M. Riveros, R. Ascanio, G. H. Adler, T. D. Lambert, L. Balbas, Ecological
meltdown in predator-free forest fragments, Science 294 (2001) 1923–1926.

18

Supplementary Material for
Mathematical model of livestock and wildlife: Predation and
competition under environmental disturbances
M. F. Laguna1,*, G. Abramson1,2,*, M. N. Kuperman1,2,*, J. L. Lanata3,*and J. A. Monjeau4,5,*
1 Centro Atómico Bariloche and CONICET, R8402AGP Bariloche, Argentina
2 Instituto Balseiro, R8402AGP Bariloche, Argentina
3 Instituto de Investigaciones en Diversidad Cultural y Procesos de Cambio, CONICET, R8400AHL Bariloche,
Argentina
4 Fundación Bariloche and CONICET, R8402AGP Bariloche, Argentina
5 Laboratório de Ecologia e Conservação de Populações, Departamento de Ecologia, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil

Section 1. Temporal evolution
In this section we provide details of the dynamical behavior of the system. We show in Fig. S1
two single runs corresponding to the parameters of Fig. 2 of the main paper, for the cases
ey=0.001 and 0.017. The left panel corresponds to a negligible extinction of the predator, which
induces a meltdown of the system. This situation is probably unobservable in any real system
due to the unrealistic small value of the mortality of the predator. The right panel shows a
situation in which the three species coexist.

Figure S1. Fraction of occupied patches for the three species as a function of time. The value of the puma local
extinction ey for each case is indicated in the panels. Other parameters as in Fig. 2 of the main paper.

Section 2. The role of the habitat destruction
Figure S2 shows three plots which complement the Fig. 3 of the main paper. Each curve is a
horizontal cut of that contour plot, corresponding to different values of the parameter D. For the
guanacos (left panel), note that the threshold of extinction is independent of D. In the central
panel, observe the local maximum of occupation by sheep in the curves, corresponding to the
*

E-mail addresses: lagunaf@cab.cnea.gov.ar, abramson@cab.cnea.gov.ar, kuperman@cab.cnea.gov.ar,
jllanata@conicet.gov.ar, amonjeau@fundacionbariloche.org.ar

ridge mentioned in the discussion of Fig. 3. For the pumas (rightmost panel), note the maximum
of the curves at the same value of ey, and decreasing with D. Also, note that this specie has a
threshold for extinction has a threshold which decreases with the increase of D.

Figure S2. Dependence of occupied fractions on D and ey, for the three species. Other parameters as in Fig. 3 of the
main paper.

Section 3. Spatial distribution of destruction
As we discuss in Section II D of the main paper, the spatial distribution of the destroyed patches
plays a relevant role in the species survival. Here we plot two examples of how the habitat is
simulated, for the case of D=0.3. Left panel correspond to a uniform distribution of D whereas
right panel shows an exponential distribution of D.

Figure S3. Examples of partially destroyed habitats, for D = 0.3. The system is a lattice of 100×100 patches. Black
ones are destroyed.

Section 4. Conflict scenarios
In this section we show the evolution of the three species for the different conflict scenarios
presented in Table 1 of the main paper. Left panel shows the situation for a low conflict
scenario, modelled as a system with a low level of destruction (D=0.1). Medium and high

conflict scenarios correspond to D=0.3 and D=0.5 respectively. In all the cases, the three species
coexist during the first 5000 time steps. At time t=5000, all sheep are removed from the system
(i.e., x2 is set to 0) and the parameters are changed as indicated in Table 1. In the first to cases
the native species are recovered, whereas in the high conflict case the pumas remain absent. In a
real situation, a repopulation might occur by migration from more distant regions, not
considered in this model. Note that the medium conflict scenario needs twice the temporal steps
to reach the stationary state compared with the low conflict case.

Figure S4. Temporal evolution of the three species, for three conflict scenarios as described in the text. At t = 5000
the removal of sheep is clearly seen.

Section 5. Ecological meltdown
Figure S5 is an alternative reading of the meltdown of the herbivores discussed around Fig. 6 of
the main text. Here we show results for a single value of ey=0.04 (the case where the pumas are
already extinct). Observe the decaying occupations as D grows. Furthermore, observe that the
exponential distribution of patches permits the persistence of both species at higher destruction
values.

Figure S5. Meltdown of the herbivores. Occupied fraction of patches as a function of the fraction of destroyed
habitat. Other parameters as in Fig. 2 of the main paper.

