Universality in the morphology and mechanics of coarsening amyloid fibril networks
L. G. Rizzi,1 D. A. Head,2 and S. Auer1
1
2

School of Chemistry, University of Leeds, LS2 9JT, Leeds, UK.
School of Computing, University of Leeds, LS2 9JT, Leeds, UK.
(Dated: September 25, 2014)

arXiv:1409.6876v1 [physics.bio-ph] 24 Sep 2014

Abstract
Above a critical concentration a wide variety of peptides and proteins self-assemble into amyloid fibrils
which entangle to form percolating networks called hydrogels. Such hydrogels have important applications as
biomaterials and in nanotechnology, but their applicability often depends on their mechanical properties for
which we currently have no predictive capability. Here we use a peptide model to simulate the formation of
amyloid fibril networks, and couple these to elastic network theory to determine their mechanical properties.
The simulations reveal that the time-dependence of morphological quantities characterizing the network
length scales can be collapsed onto master curves by using a time scaling function that depends on the
interaction parameter between the peptides. The same scaling function is used to unveil a universal, nonmonotonic dependence of the shear modulus with time. The obtained insight into the structure-function
relationship between the peptide building blocks, network morphology and network mechanical properties can
aid experimentalists to design amyloid fibril networks with tailored mechanical properties.

in rheological measurements where the crosslinks can be
regarded as fixed23–26 . Importantly, all of the mentioned
theoretical approaches assume that the filaments are
identical, and thus have the same bending rigidity, or
equivalently persistence length, at every point in the
network. This assumption is a good approximation for
filaments such as actin, but is not valid for amyloid fibril
networks, where the fibril thickness varies throughout the
network27–29 . Furthermore, these previous studies considered procedurally-defined, static networks; the time
evolution of the network morphology was not considered.
The objective of this study is to model the formation
of amyloid fibril networks to determine their mechanical
properties from elastic network theory without making
the aforementioned assumptions.

The formation of amyloid fibril networks proceeds in
two stages. Firstly, peptides or proteins assemble into
amyloid fibrils that share a common cross-β structure
formed of intertwined layers of β-sheets extending in the
direction parallel to the fibril axis1,2 . The lengthening
and thickening of the fibrils can be attributed to strongly
directional backbone hydrogen bonding and weaker sidechain interactions, respectively. At later times, the amyloid fibrils can entangle into a percolating network3 with
a morphology characterised by various lengths including
the distance between crosslinks. Although amyloid fibrils
are often associated with devastating diseases including
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease4 , amyloid networks
are emerging as an important class of material with
applications in biosensing, nanoelectronics, tissue engineering and drug delivery5–7 . However, many of these
applications depend strongly on the networks mechanical
properties, for which we currently have no predictive
structure-function relation between the bulk network
stiffness and the properties of individual proteins without
making assumptions regarding the fibril morphology,
cross-linker dynamics, and the local deformation regime.
Theoretical and experimental studies characterizing
the mechanical properties of single, isolated amyloid
fibrils show that their elastic modulus and bending stiffness are comparable to semiflexible filaments like actin,
keratin, collagen and spider silk8–11 . Recent rheology
experiments demonstrate that the shear modulus of
amyloid fibril networks can be altered by changes in
the amino acid sequence of the peptides12,13 and the
ionic strength of the solution14–17 , indicating that design
principles for such networks might exist. The viscoelastic
response of semiflexible polymer networks can be immediately related to the properties of individual filaments
under the assumption of affinity, i.e. that the microscopic deformation field follows the applied macroscopic
strain18–22 . Relaxing this assumption has thus far only
been possible for the zero-frequency response of athermal
networks, formally corresponding to the elastic plateau

Modelling amyloid fibril network formation
Our simulations use a peptide model similar to those
used in recent studies on the aggregation of amyloid fibrils30–33 , where the peptides in their virtually
fully extended (β-strand) conformation are described as
hexagons positioned on a two-dimensional (2D) lattice
with triangular symmetry (Supplementary Fig. 1a). The
use of a triangular lattice ensures that the mechanical
properties of the fibril network are isotropic at large
length scales34 as well as enabling the correct stacking of
β-sheets in fibrils35 (Supplementary Fig. 1b). The model
shares similarities with the anisotropic Potts model,
where only nearest-neighbor interactions along the three
symmetry axes of the triangular lattice are considered.
The hexagon has two opposing strong bonding sides that
allow the formation of directional backbone hydrogen
bonds. This strong bond energy E is denoted by
the dimensionless parameter ψ = E/kB T , where kB
is Boltzmann’s constant and T the temperature. The
remaining four sides of the hexagon allow the formation
of weaker bonds modelling the side-chain interactions
between the peptides. This bond energy Eh is denoted
1

b

a

Figure 1. Amyloid fibril network. a, Amyloid fibril network obtained for ξ = 10 with N = 31130 peptides on a 2D lattice
with linear size L = 256 at time t = 105 MC steps. Fibrils that are part of the percolation network are shown with a black
border. The three possible orientations of the fibrils on the triangular lattice are distinguished by three different colours (yellow,
brown, and orange). b, Corresponding elastic network representation where fibril crosslinks are represented by circles and the
fibrils between crosslinks by line segments.

Morphology of coarsening amyloid fibril networks
The time evolution of the mean fibril thickness hii, the
mean crosslink distance hli, and the mean fibril length
hmi is shown in Fig. 2 for anisotropy ratios ξ = 7,
10, and 14, at a coverage θ = N/L2 = 0.5. As can
be seen in the insets to this figure, all lengths enter a
coarsening regime where they monotonically increase, i.e.
the fibrils become thicker and longer and the crosslink
positions become further apart as the network evolves.
Increasing the anisotropy ratio ξ delays the onset of
coarsening. A similar effect, where the dynamics of
the system is slowed down due to stronger effective
interparticle interactions, has been observed in colloidal
gels and glasses40,41 . As demonstrated in Fig. 2, the
time dependence of each morphological quantity of the
network obtained for different anisotropy ratios can be
collapsed onto a single master curve by rescaling the time
as tξ = te−∆ξ , where ∆ξ = ξ − ξ0 with ξ0 an arbitrary
origin (here we take ξ0 = 7). It is not only the mean
of the morphological quantities that collapse, but also
their distribution functions as shown in Supplementary
Fig. 3. The coarsening exponents αi = 0.16 ± 0.02, αl =
0.18 ± 0.02, and αm = 0.17 ± 0.02 of the morphological
quantities can be obtained by fitting the data points
αl
i
for times ln(tξ ) > 6 to hii ∼ tα
ξ , hli ∼ tξ , and
αm
hmξ i ∼ tξ , respectively. The mean fibril length was
additionally scaled by an arbitrary function w(ξ) (inset
of Fig. 2c), giving hmξ i = hmiew(ξ) , but this does not
affect the scaling with time. The measured exponents are
consistent with a common value ≈ 0.17, demonstrating
that all network lengths obey the same scaling during
coarsening. Note that, if one identifies the fibril area
s ≈ i × m as a domain size, the growth law s ∼ tξαi +αm
is consistent with the 1/3 exponent derived analytically

ψh = Eh /kB T . The β-strands can self-assembly laterally
into β-sheets by forming strong hydrogen bonds that are
parallel to the fibril lengthening axis, and the fibril can
thicken due to the formation of weaker bonds between
side-chains (Supplementary Fig. 1b). Here we fix ψh = 1
while varying ψ, to study effect of the ratio ξ = ψ/ψh of
the hydrogen bond energy to the side-chain bond energy.
A value of ξ = 14 has been estimated for the Aβ40
peptide32 .
In order to model the formation of amyloid fibril
networks we perform Monte Carlo (MC) simulations
similar to those described in ref.30 . We perform displacement moves of peptides to nearest neighbor lattice
sites, and rotation moves so that the peptide can change
its orientation. At the beginning of a simulation, N
peptides are randomly placed and oriented on a periodic 2D triangular lattice of linear size L. In all
our simulations we set L = 256. As we only use
physically plausible moves, there is a correspondence
between the number of MC steps (MCs) and real time
as suggested in refs.30,33,36 . A typical configuration is
shown in Fig. 1a. The fibril network obtained is very
similar to those observed in experiments37,38 . We use
the Hoshen-Kopelman algorithm39 to identify individual
amyloid fibrils, which enable us to characterized them
by their thickness i and length m (see Supplementary
Fig. 1b). The identification of fibrils also allows us to
obtain a elastic network representation of the system as
shown in Fig. 1b. The crosslink positions are taken to
be the geometric centres of the overlap region between
different fibrils (see Supplementary Fig. 2), with the
distance between two connected crosslinks defined as the
crosslink length l. Note that not all fibrils identified in
the system are part of the percolating network (Fig. 1a).
2

Figure 2. Morphology of coarsening amyloid fibril networks. a, Scaled and unscaled (inset) time dependence of the
mean thickness hii. b, Scaled and unscaled (inset) time dependence of mean crosslink length hli. c, Scaled time dependence of
mean fibril length hmξ i = hmiew(ξ) , where the values of the function w(ξ) used are shown in the inset. The data is obtained
from configurations for a coverage θ = 0.5 at times t = 4n MCs, with n = 1, 2, . . . , 12. Averages were obtained from 25
independent simulations. Error bars are smaller than the symbols. Dashed lines are fits for ln(tξ ) > 6 as discussed in the text.

periods when the thinner fibrils (formed for ξ = 14) yield
stronger networks than thicker fibrils. Most experiments
on the formation of amyloid fibril networks are performed
on a time scale of tens of minutes, where the shear
modulus displays either an increasing or a constant behaviour14,16,44,45 . However, one set of longer experiments
suggested a slight decrease in G after hours46 , and atomic
force microscopy imaging has demonstrated significant
changes to network morphology over a timescale of
days37,47 , for which mechanical properties are not usually
measured. This suggests extending the data acquisition
window may reveal a similar non-monotonicity to Fig. 3.
In addition, the behaviour of G/E f resembles that of
weakly-interacting colloidal aggregates which measurably
weaken prior to visual collapse48 . We hypothesise this
weakening shares a common mechanism to that observed
in our results, although the final collapse under gravity
(with its associated step change in the bulk symmetry)
presumably has a different origin.
Insight into the mechanism underlying network weakening can be gained by measuring mechanical and morphological quantities simultaneously. We evaluated the
shear modulus normalised to the affine prediction Gaff
(computed from Eq. 1 for identical networks with affine
displacements ~uνaff ) as in previous works24,26 , and monitored the mean network connectivity z given by the
average value of the coordination numbers, zν , from all
internal crosslinks. As depicted in Fig. 4a, we found that
G/Gaff for different anisotropies ξ can be collapsed onto
a series of master curves, with one such curve for each
coverage θ. The decreasing region of G/Gaff coincides
with the onset of a decrease in z as indicated in the diagram, and indeed snapshots reveal a reduction in network
connectivity over these times (see Supplementary Fig. 5).
Thus, the mechanical weakening of the network is due to
its increased sparsity. As with the fibril length hmξ i it
was also necessary to scale the magnitude of G/Gaff by
ξ-dependent factors f (ξ) and g(ξ) as shown in Figs. 4c

for the isotropic case, i.e. the 2D spin-exchange Ising
model42,43 , despite the fibrils in our networks forming
anisotropic shapes.
Mechanics of amyloid fibril networks
We now turn our attention to understanding how the
structural changes in the network affects its mechanical
properties. Starting from the network representation as
in Fig. 1b, one can mimic an applied strain γ by imposing
horizontal displacements to the boundary crosslinks as
shown in Supplementary Fig. 4. The internal crosslinks
then relax to new positions, causing an increase ∆Eelastic
in the total elastic energy of the network. For the linear
response (γ  1), one can use ∆Eelastic to extract the
shear modulus26,34 ,
G=

2∆Eelastic
,
γ2A

(1)

where A is the total system area. The shear modulus
G thus depends on the displacement vectors ~uν of all
crosslinks, which contribute to ∆Eelastic as detailed in
Methods. These displacement vectors ~uν are obtained
by performing high-dimensional numerical optimization
to minimize ∆Eelastic with respect to each displacement
degree of freedom24 . For all measurements we consider
γ = 0.02 to avoid non-linear responses due to high strain
values. Our method generalises a previous lattice-based
model26 by permitting variations in fibril thickness and
crosslink distances (see Methods).
In Fig. 3 we present results for the time-dependent
behaviour of the normalized shear modulus G/E f , where
E f is the Young’s modulus of a fibril. It is evident that
small changes in both the anisotropy ξ and the coverage θ
lead to large changes in G spanning orders of magnitude,
with an overall trend for higher values of G/E f with
increasing θ. Moreover, the variation is non-monotonic in
time, in contrast to the monotonic coarsening of the morphological quantities discussed above, and there are time
3

Figure 3. Time-dependence of the shear modulus. Panels a, b, c corresponds to results obtained for networks with
coverages θ = 0.5, 0.525, and 0.55, respectively. Averages and errors bars were obtained from 25 independent simulations.
Additional points at times t = 10n (n ∈ N) are also included.

factors mean that, at fixed rescaled times tξ , higher ξ
yields higher G/Gaff , and correspondingly higher values
of z. For all values of θ and ξ, the values of z are
located below the central force threshold (zCF = 4 for 2D
systems), and G/Gaff  1 as evident in Fig. 4a. Thus all
of our networks correspond to a non-affine deformation
regime, and consistent with prior observations26 most
of the elastic energy takes the form of fibril bending,
with ∆Ebending /∆Eelastic fluctuating around 0.9 (see
Supplementary Fig. 6).
Concluding remarks
Identifying universal behaviours, such as in time-cure superposition curves46,49,50 , can accelerate the development
of novel materials by reducing the number of independent
parameters that need to be assayed. Our simulations
have revealed a simple time scaling function that depends
on the anisotropy ξ of interaction between peptides,
which collapses data for both morphological and mechanical quantities. The proposed scaling function should
benefit experimentalists in the design of amyloid-based
materials, since it permits the extrapolation of the timedependent mechanical response of the amyloid fibril networks from the behaviour of peptide systems with known
interactions. Our findings indicate that features like
the non-zero shear modulus for connectivities lower than
zCF and the non-affine response, which are commonly
overlooked in the modelling of hydrogels21,22 , should
be included in further descriptions of amyloid fibril
networks. Finally, we note that our hybrid approach to
measure the elastic moduli of a fiber network as it forms
and grows represents a new direction for fiber network
modelling that can be extended to other fibrous and
porous materials in general, including inorganic materials
such as colloidal gels40 .

Figure 4. Time-scaling of the shear modulus. a,b
Shear modulus ratio G/Gaff and mean network connectivity
z against the rescaled time tξ , respectively. Data collapse is
obtained separately for each coverage θ. Vertical grey bars
denote regions near the maximum and minimum of G/E f .
c,d Values of the scaling functions g(ξ) and f (ξ) for the shear
modulus ratio and connectivity, respectively.

Methods
and 4d, but this does not alter the times tξ corresponding
to the local minimum and maximum in G/Gaff . These

Elastic network model. Here we employ a modified version
of a lattice-based elastic network model26 to evaluate ∆Eelastic

4

spring constant and bending rigidity are written, respectively,
2
4
as kνµ = gνµ πRνµ
E f /lνµ and κνβµ = gνβ gβµ πRνβ
E f /4,
where Rνµ is the radius of the cross-section of the fibril, E f
its Young’s modulus, and gνµ = 1 for connected crosslinks
or 0 otherwise. The radius Rνµ is taken to be half of the
fibril thickness iνµ of the fibril segment linking the crosslink
pair ν and µ. We normalise both constants by E f , giving
0
kνµ
= kνµ /E f = gνµ πi2νµ /4 lνµ and κ0νβµ = κνβµ /E f =
gνβ gβµ πi4νβ /64. Note that although we have neglected

as the sum of the changes in stretching and bending energies.
The change in the stretching energy is defined as
∆Estretching =

1X
kνµ (δlνµ )2
2 ν<µ

,

(2)

where the sum is over all unique pairs of adjacent connected
crosslinks ν and µ, kνµ is the spring constant of the fibril
segment connecting them, and δlνµ is the segment’s extension
due to the displacement vectors at each end, i.e. δlνµ =
~
uνµ · ˆ
lνµ with ~
uνµ = ~
uµ − ~
uν and ˆ
lνµ = ~lνµ /|~lνµ |. The change
in the bending energy is defined similarly,
∆Ebending =

(δθνβµ )2
1X
κνβµ ¯
2
lνβµ

,

the mechanical anisotropy of the fibrils, our key findings
are expected to hold as long as the bending modulus
scales with thickness as κνβµ ∝ i4νβ . This is predicted
by theoretical calculations for protein fibre bundles with
bundling springs ψ times weaker than fibre springs, separated by one monomer, for which R4 scaling is expected51
up to R2 ≈ 100, far in excess of our simulations. In
addition, computational resources limited the network
construction to 2D, but we employ 3D fibril properties
so that our results can be experimentally realisable, for
instance by confining the network to a Langmuir trough.
Permitting out-of-plane displacements can significantly
alter the measured moduli52 , but for actin networks the
Langmuir trough was shown to suppress such modes53 so
we do not include these displacements in our calculations.

(3)

νβµ

where the sum is over adjacent crosslinks along the same
fibril, κνβµ is the bending rigidity of the corresponding fibril,
¯
lνβµ = (lνβ + lβµ )/2 is the mean crosslink length, and δθνβµ
denotes the change in angle between the two consecutive fibril
segments νβ and βµ. Note that the initial angle is generally
not zero, but using the change in angle δθνβµ means that
the unstrained network has zero elastic energy, i.e. there
are no pre-stresses. We estimate the coupling constants kνµ
and κνβµ by treating the fibrils as slender, defect-free elastic
bodies with a uniform circular cross-section34 . Thus the

[1] Adamcik, J. & Mezzenga, R. Proteins fibrils from a
polymer physics perspective. Macromolecules 45, 1137
(2012).
[2] Fitzpatrick, A. W. P. et al. Atomic structure and
hierarchical assembly of a cross-β amyloid fibril. P. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 110, 5468 (2013).
[3] Schleegert, M. et al. Amyloids: From molecular structure
to mechanical properties. Polymer 54, 2473 (2013).
[4] Chiti, F. & Dobson, C. M. Protein misfolding, functional
amyloid, and human disease. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 75,
333 (2006).
[5] Cherny, I. & Gazit, E. Amyloids: Not only pathological
agents but also ordered nanomaterials. Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. 47, 4062 (2008).
[6] Bowerman, C. J. & Nilsson, B. L. Self-assembly of
amphipathic β-sheet peptides: Insights and applications.
Biopolymers 98, 169 (2012).
[7] Reynolds, N. P., Charnley, M., Mezzenga, R. & Hartley,
P. G. Engineered lysozyme amyloid fibril networks support cellular growth and spreading. Biomacromolecules
15, 599 (2014).
[8] Smith, J. F., Knowles, T. P. J., Dobson, C. M., MacPhee,
C. E. & Welland, M. Characterization of the nanoscale
properties of individual amyloid fibrils. P. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 43, 15806 (2006).
[9] Keten, S., Xu, B., Ihle, B. & Buehler, M. J. Nanoconfinement controls stiffness, strength and mechanical toughness of beta-sheet crystals in silk. Nat. Mater. 9, 359
(2010).
[10] Knowles, T. P. J. & Buehler, M. J. Nanomechanics
of functional and pathological amyloid materials. Nat.
Nanotechnol. 6, 469 (2011).
[11] Volpatti, L. R. & Knowles, T. P. J. Polymer physics

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

5

inspired approaches for the study of the mechanical
properties. J. Polymer Sci. B: Pol. Phys 52, 281 (2014).
Tang, C., Ulijn, R. & Saiani, A. Effect of glycine
substitution on Fmoc-diphenylalanine self-assembly and
gelation properties. Langmuir 27, 14438 (2011).
Adler, J., Scheidt, H. A., Krüger, M., Thomas, L. &
Huster, D. Local interactions influence the fibrillation
kinetics, structure and dynamics of Aβ(1-40) but leave
the general fibril structure unchanged. Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 16, 7461 (2014).
Ozbas, B. B., Rajagopal, K. K., Schneider, J. P. J.
& Pochan, D. J. Salt-triggered peptide folding and
consequent self-assembly into hydrogels with tunable
modulus. Macromolecules 37, 7331 (2004).
Riley, J. M., Aggeli, A., Koopmans, R. J. & McPherson,
M. J. Bioproduction and characterization of a pH
responsive self-assembling peptide. Biotech. Bioeng. 103,
241 (2009).
Bolisetty, S., Harnau, L., Jung, J.-M. & Mezzenga,
R. Gelation, phase behaviour, and dynamics of βlactoglobulin amyloid fibrils at varying concentrations
and ionic strengths. Biomacromolecules 13, 3241 (2012).
Boothroyd, S., Miller, A. F. & Saiani, A. From fibres to
networks using self-assembling peptides. Farad. Discuss.
2013, 13 (2013).
Pritchard, R., Huang, Y. Y. S. & Terentjev, E. M. Mechanics of biological networks: From the cell cytoskeleton
to connective tissue. Soft Matter 10, 1864 (2014).
Broedersz, C. P. et al. Cross-link governed dynamics
of biopolymers networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 238101
(2010).
Wolff, L., Fernandez, P. & Kroy, K. Inelastic mechanics
of sticky biopolymer networks. New J. Phys. 12, 053024

(2010).
[21] Basu, A. et al. Nonaffine displacements in flexible
polymer networks. Macromolecules 44, 1671 (2011).
[22] Wen, Q., Basu, A., Janmey, P. A. & Yodhb, A. G. Nonaffine deformations in polymer hydrogels. Soft Matter 8,
8039 (2012).
[23] Head, D. A., Levine, A. & MacKintosh, F. Deformation
of cross-linked semiflexible polymer networks. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 91, 108102 (2003).
[24] Head, D. A., Levine, A. & MacKintosh, F. Distinct
regimes of elastic response and deformation modes of
cross-linked cytoskeletal and semiflexible polymer networks. Phys. Rev. E 68, 061907 (2003).
[25] Heussinger, C. & Frey, E. Floppy modes and nonaffine
deformations in random fiber networks. Phys. Rev. Lett.
97, 105501 (2006).
[26] Broedersz, C. P., Mao, X., Lubensky, T. C. & MacKintosh, F. C. Criticality and isostaticity in fibre networks.
Nat. Phys. 7, 983 (2011).
[27] Kolsofszki, M., Karsai, A., Soós, K., Penke, B. & Kellermayer, M. S. Z. Thermally-induced effects in oriented
network of amyloid β25-35 fibrils. Prog. Colloid Polym.
Sci. 135, 169 (2008).
[28] Xue, W. F., Homans, S. W. & Radford, S. E. Amyloid fibril length distribution quantified by atomic force
microscopy single-particle image analysis. Protein Eng.
Des. Sel. 22, 489 (2009).
[29] Morris, R. J. et al. Mechanistic and enviromental control
of the prevalence and lifetime of amyloid oligomers. Nat.
Comm. 4, 1891 (2013).
[30] Zhang, J. & Muthukumar, M. Simulations of nucleation
and elongation of amyloid fibrils. J. Chem. Phys. 130,
035102 (2009).
[31] Cabriolu, R., Kashchiev, D. & Auer, S. Breakdown of
nucleation theory for crystals with strongly anisotropic
interactions between molecule. J. Chem. Phys. 137,
204903 (2012).
[32] Kashchiev, D., Cabriolu, R. & Auer, S. Confounding the
paradigm: Peculiarities of amyloid fibril nucleation. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 1531 (2013).
[33] Irback, A., Jonsson, S., Linnemann, N., Linse, B. &
Wallin, S. Aggregate geometry in amyloid fibril nucleation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 058101 (2013).
[34] Landau, L. D. & Lifshitz, E. M. Theory of Elasticity
(Butterworth-Heineman Oxford, 1986).
[35] Nguyen, H. D. & Hall, C. K. Kinetics of fibril formation
by polyalanine peptides. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 9074
(2005).
[36] Linse, B. & Linse, S. Monte Carlo simulations of protein
amyloid formation reveal origin of sigmoidal aggregation
kinetics. Mol. Biosyst. 7, 2296 (2011).
[37] Karsai, A. et al. Potassium-dependent oriented growth
of amyloid β25-35 fibrils on mica. Nanotechnology 18,
345102 (2007).
[38] Li, H. et al. Peptide diffusion and self-assembly in
ambient water nanofilm on mica surfaces. J. Phys. Chem.
B 113, 8795 (2009).
[39] Hoshen, J. & Kopelman, R. Percolation and cluster
distribution. I. Cluster multiple labeling technique and
critical concentration algorithm. Phys. Rev. B 14, 3438
(1976).
[40] Lu, P. J. & Weitz, D. A. Colloidal particles: crystals,
glasses, and gels. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 4,
217 (2013).

[41] Hunter, G. L. & Weeks, E. R. The physics of the colloidal
glass transition. Rep. Prog. Phys. 75, 066501 (2012).
[42] Amar, J. G., Sulivan, F. E. & Mountain, R. D. Monte
Carlo study of growth in the two-dimensional spinexchange kinetic Ising model. Phys. Rev. B 37, 196
(1988).
[43] Mitchell, S. J. & Landau, D. P. Phase separation in a
compressible 2D Ising model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 025701
(2006).
[44] Aggeli, A. et al. Responsive gels formed by the spontaneous self-assembly of peptides into polymeric β-sheet
tapes. Nature (1997).
[45] Greenfield, M. A., Hoffman, J. R., de la Cruz, M. O. &
Stupp, S. I. Tunable mechanics of peptide nanofiber gels.
Langmuir 26, 3641 (2010).
[46] Gosal, W. S., Clark, A. H. & Ross-Murphy, S. B. Fibrillar β-lactoglobulin gels: part 2. dynamic mechanical
characterization of heat-set systems. Biomacromolecules
5, 2420 (2004).
[47] Usov, I., Adamcik, J. & Mezzenga, R. Polymorphism in
bovine serum albumin fibrils: morphology and statistical
analysis. Farad. Discuss. 166, 151 (2013).
[48] Kamp, S. W. & Kilfoil, M. L. Universal behavior in
the mechanical properties of weakly aggregated colloidal
particles. Soft Matter 5, 2438 (2009).
[49] Corrigan, A. M. & Donald, A. M. Particle tracking
microrheology of gel-forming amyloid fibril networks.
Eur. Phys. J. E 28, 457 (2009).
[50] Corrigan, A. M. & Donald, A. M. Passive microrheology
of solvent-induced fibrillar protein networks. Langmuir
25, 8599 (2009).
[51] Bathe, M., Heussinger, C., Claessens, M. M. A. E.,
Bausch, A. R. & Frey, E. Cytoskeletal bundle mechanics.
Biophys. J. 94, 2955 (2008).
[52] Müller, P. & Kierfeld, J. Wrinkling of random and regular
semiflexible polymer networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112,
094303 (2014).
[53] Boatwright, T., Levine, A. J. & Dennin, M. Mechanical
reorganization of cross-linked F-actin networks at the airbuffer interface. Soft Matter 7, 7851 (2011).

Acknowledgements
L.G.R. acknowledges support from the Brazilian agency
CNPq (Grant No 245412/2012-3). D.A.H. acknowledges support from the Biomedical Health Research Centre, University
of Leeds, UK.

Author contributions
S.A., D.A.H., and L.G.R conceived and designed the experiments. L.G.R. performed the experiments. S.A., D.A.H., and
L.G.R. analysed the data. All authors discussed the results,
and wrote the manuscript.

Additional information
Supplementary information is attached in this arXiv version
of the paper.

Competing financial interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

6

Supplementary Information:
networks.
L. G. Rizzi, D. A. Head, S. Auer

Universality in the morphology and mechanics of coarsening amyloid fibril

a

b

m

thickening

-sheet
weak bond
strong bond

lengthening

Supplementary Figure 1. Peptide model. a, Interacting peptides in their β-strand conformation are represented as
hexagons. Each hexagon has two opposing strong bonding sides (shown in black) that allow the formation of directional
backbone hydrogen bonds (black dashed lines) and four sides (shown in red) that allow the formation of weaker bonds (red
dotted lines) corresponding to the interactions between side-chains. The three possible orientations of the hexagons on a
triangular lattice are distinguished by the three different colours (yellow, brown, and orange). b, Amyloid fibril composed of
three β-sheet layers. The hexagons self-assemble laterally into β-sheets by forming strong hydrogen bonds that are parallel to
the fibril lengthening axis, and fibril thickening is due the formation of weaker bonds. The fibril length m is taken to be the
number of lattice sites between the peptides at the two fibril ends (in the direction of the fibril lengthening axis), while the
fibril thickness is taken to be i = np /m, where np is the total number of peptides in the fibril. For the shown fibril m = 9 and
i = 23/9 = 2.6.

7

Supplementary Figure 2. Network crosslinks. The crosslink positions ν and µ (green circles) of three amyloid fibrils are
taken to be the geometric centre of the positions of the peptides in the crosslink region (highlighted with blue border). The
crosslink length lνµ is the distance between the the crosslinks ν and µ, and the thickness iνµ of the fibril segment linking the
crosslink pair ν and µ is taken to be the thickness i of the fibril connecting them.

8

Supplementary Figure 3. Distribution functions of the morphological quantities of the network. For each value of
ξ the histograms correspond to two representative configurations taken at the rescaled times ln(tξ ) ∼ 5.4 and ∼ 9.4 for a fixed
coverage θ = 0.5 (snapshots of the corresponding configurations are displayed in Supplementary Fig. 5 below). Considering
the values of anisotropy ξ = 7, 10, and 14, the panels a, d, and g shows histograms for the fibril thickness, i, panels b, e, and
h presents histograms for the fibril length, m, and panels c, f, and i displays histograms for the crosslink length, l. Although
the configurations were taken at different times t and from systems with different values of ξ, the distributions are very similar.

9

Supplementary Figure 4. Reference and sheared configurations of the amyloid fibril network. The elastic network
representation of the system enable us to mimic an applied strain γ by imposing a horizontal displacement to the boundary
crosslinks (the orange and red circles correspond to the position of the reference and sheared crosslinks, respectively). The
positions of the internal crosslinks of the sheared configuration (blue circles) are obtained by a high-dimensional numerical
optimization algorithm to minimize the change in the elastic energy ∆Eelastic of the network, which allows us to determine the
shear modulus G of a given configuration using Eq. 1 of the main text.

10

Supplementary Figure 5. Universal reduction in network connectivity. Representative configurations of the amyloid
fibril network at two different rescaled times. Configurations a, c, and e corresponds to rescaled time ln(tξ ) ∼ 5.4 (near the
maximum of the normalized shear modulus G/E f in Fig. 4), while configurations b, d, and f corresponds to rescaled time
ln(tξ ) ∼ 9.4 (near the minimum of G/E f in Fig. 4). All configurations were obtained for a coverage θ = 0.5.

11

Supplementary Figure 6. Fraction of bending elastic energy. Scaled time evolution of the ratio between the changes
in the bending and total elastic energies of the network. Panels a, b, c display curves obtained for networks with coverages
θ = 0.5, 0.525, and 0.55, respectively. Averages and errors bars obtained from 25 independent simulations.

12

