Motile Geobacter dechlorinators migrate into a model source
zone of trichloroethene dense non-aqueous phase liquid:
experimental evaluation and modeling
Jo Philips a,1,* (jo.philips@ugent.be)
Alexey Miroshnikov b (alexeym@cns.umass.edu)
Pieter Jan Haest a,2 (pieterjan.haest@agt.be)
Dirk Springael a (dirk.springael@ees.kuleuven.be)
& Erik Smolders a (erik.smolders@ees.kuleuven.be)

a

Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences,

Division of Soil and Water Management,
KU Leuven (University of Leuven),
Kasteelpark Arenberg 20, B-3001 Heverlee BELGIUM
Tel: +3216321609, Fax: +3216321997
b

Department of Mathematics and Statistics,

University of Massachusetts,
Lederle Graduate Research Tower, Amherst MA 01003-9305, USA
* Corresponding author

1

Current address: Laboratory for Microbial Ecology and Technology,

Ghent University, Coupure Links 653A, B-9000 Gent, BELGIUM
2

Current address: A.G.T. n.v., Kontichsesteenweg 38, B-2630

Aartselaar, BELGIUM

1

ABSTRACT
Microbial migration towards a trichloroethene (TCE) dense non-aqueous phase liquid
(DNAPL) could facilitate the bioaugmentation of TCE DNAPL source zones. This
study characterized the motility of the Geobacter dechlorinators in a TCE to cisdichloroethene dechlorinating KB-1TM subculture. No chemotaxis towards or away
from TCE was found using an agarose in-plug bridge method. A second experiment
placed an inoculated aqueous layer on top of a sterile sand layer and showed that
Geobacter migrated several centimeters in the sand layer in just 7 days. A random
motility coefficient for Geobacter in water of 0.24 ± 0.02 cm2 day-1 was fitted. A third
experiment used a diffusion-cell setup with a 5.5 cm central sand layer separating a
DNAPL from an aqueous top layer as a model source zone to examine the effect of
random motility on TCE DNAPL dissolution. With top layer inoculation, Geobacter
quickly colonized the sand layer, thereby enhancing the initial TCE DNAPL dissolution
flux. After 19 days, the DNAPL dissolution enhancement was only 24% lower than
with an homogenous inoculation of the sand layer. A diffusion-motility model was
developed to describe dechlorination and migration in the diffusion-cells. This model
suggested that the fast colonization of the sand layer by Geobacter was due to the
combination of random motility and growth on TCE.

KEYWORDS
Microbial migration; random motility; reductive dechlorination; bio-enhanced TCE
DNAPL dissolution; Geobacter; KB-1TM culture; bioaugmentation.

2

HIGHLIGHTS
 Geobacter dechlorinators are motile, but not chemotactic to TCE
 Geobacter dechlorinators quickly colonized model TCE DNAPL source zone and
initiated bio-enhanced DNAPL dissolution
 Diffusion-motility model indicates that fast colonization is due to combination of
random motility and growth on TCE

1

INTRODUCTION

Trichloroethene (TCE) has become a widespread groundwater pollutant, as a result of
its extensive use as a solvent in industry. Remediation of aquifers contaminated with
this chemical is challenging, since TCE forms dense non-aqueous phase liquids
(DNAPL) in the subsoil. Bioremediation can be used to clean up such contaminations,
as several anaerobic bacteria grow with the reductive dechlorination of TCE to cisdichloroethene (cis-DCE) (Bradley, 2003). In the vicinity of a chlorinated ethene
DNAPL, this dechlorination reaction can enhance the DNAPL dissolution flux and, as
such, result in a reduced remediation time (Yang and McCarty, 2000). Dechlorination in
a contaminated aquifer can be slow or lacking and, in such cases, bioaugmentation, i.e.
the injection of a dechlorinating culture, can initiate bio-enhanced DNAPL dissolution
(Adamson et al., 2003; Sleep et al., 2006). However, the low-permeability zones formed
by DNAPLs are hard to reach if bacterial transport only relies on the groundwater flow
(Singh and Olson, 2008). Microbial migration towards a DNAPL could largely
accelerate the bioaugmentation of DNAPL source zones (Ford and Harvey, 2007; Singh
and Olson, 2008). Microbial migration can be due to random motility, i.e. swimming of
the bacterial cells in random directions. In addition, some bacteria are positive or

3

negative chemotactic, i.e. they direct their swimming respectively towards or away from
a chemical gradient. Both random motility and positive chemotaxis could increase the
migration towards a DNAPL, whereas negative chemotaxis could prevent the exposure
to the toxic TCE concentrations adjacent to a TCE DNAPL (Ford and Harvey, 2007;
Singh and Olson, 2008).
Motility and chemotaxis have been demonstrated for aerobic bacteria degrading various
environmental pollutants (Pandey and Jain, 2002; Singh and Olson, 2008). The aerobe
Pseudomonas putida G7, for instance, is chemotactic towards naphthalene and was
found to enhance the dissolution of this compound (Marx and Aitken, 2000; Law and
Aitken, 2003). Chemotaxis towards TCE was observed for the aerobe Pseudomonas
putida F1, which cometabolically converts TCE (Parales et al., 2000), whereas another
study reported that this species migrated away from a dissolving TCE DNAPL (Singh
and Olson, 2010). Among the anaerobic contaminant degraders, motility was observed
for several perchloroethene (PCE) and TCE dechlorinating bacteria, including
Geobacter lovleyi SZ (Holliger et al., 1998; Sung et al., 2006). Bacteria highly related to
the latter species are responsible for the TCE to cis-DCE dechlorination by the
commercially available KB-1TM culture often used for bioaugmentation (Duhamel and
Edwards, 2007; Philips et al., 2012). So far, however, it remains unknown whether
dechlorinating bacteria are able to migrate into a TCE DNAPL source zone and can
initiate bio-enhanced DNAPL dissolution. Therefore, the aim of this study was to
investigate the motility and potential chemotaxis of Geobacter dechlorinators and to
examine the effect of their migrational properties on the dissolution of a TCE DNAPL.
All experiments used a TCE to cis-DCE dechlorinating KB-1TM subculture, containing
dechlorinators highly similar to Geobacter lovleyi SZ (Philips et al., 2012). Firstly, a

4

chemotaxis assay was conducted, but no evidence for chemotaxis by the culture towards
or away from TCE was found. A second experiment quantified the random motility of
the Geobacter dechlorinators by sampling an initially sterile sand layer, on top of which
an inoculated aqueous layer was placed. A third experiment investigated the effect of
the motility of the Geobacter dechlorinators on the dissolution of a TCE DNAPL.
Hereto, model source zones were created using our previously described diffusion-cell
setup (Philips et al., 2011). Finally, a diffusion-motility model was used to clarify how
the motility of Geobacter contributed to the dechlorination observed in the diffusioncell experiment.

2

MATERIAL AND METHODS
2.1

Medium and culture

Anaerobic defined medium was prepared as described by Haest et al. (2011), except that
the concentration of yeast extract was lowered to 10 mgL-1. Briefly, this medium uses
30 mM 3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid (MOPS, pKa =7.2) and 15 mM
hydroxide to buffer the pH, while 1 mM cysteine was used as reducing agent. A KB1TM subculture dechlorinating TCE to cis-DCE with formate as electron donor was used
as inoculum in all experiments. This KB-1TM subculture was grown on 1.6 mM TCE to
stimulate acclimatization to high TCE concentrations, while only TCE to cis-DCE
conversion was stimulated to obtain high TCE dechlorination rates. Formate was chosen
as electron donor because of its good pH buffering capacity (Philips et al., 2013b)and
was added in an amount equivalent for the conversion of TCE to cis-DCE. The
composition of this KB-1TM subculture was described previously (Philips et al., 2012).
In general, this culture consists of dechlorinating species highly similar to Geobacter

5

lovleyi SZ and fermenting species related to Clostridium, while Dehalococcoides
dechlorinators were outcompeted. Dechlorination by this culture occurs at TCE
concentrations below 2.6 mM (Philips et al., 2013a).

2.2

Chemotaxis assay

Chemotaxis towards or away from TCE was assessed using the agarose-in-plug bridge
method (Yu and Alam, 1997). Pure TCE liquid was stained with 0.5 g·L-1 Oil-Red-O
and several droplets were mixed with a warm solution of 2% low-melting-temperature
agarose. 10 µl of this mixture was placed on a microscope slide and a cover slip
supported by two other cover slips was immediately placed over the drop. Control plugs
were made without the addition of TCE liquid. The KB-1TM subculture was flooded
around the plug inside a glovebox with N2/H2 (95/5) atmosphere. The slides were
incubated up to 30 min. The plugs were visualized using dark field microscopy.

2.3

Motility experiment

The motility of the KB-1TM subculture in a porous medium was studied using two 12
cm long glass cylinders with a 3.3 cm internal diameter and sampling ports spaced
about 5 mm lengthwise (Philips et al., 2011). These cylinders contained a 9 cm sand
layer with on top a 3 cm aqueous layer to which the inoculum was added. The sand
layer was created by mixing sterile anaerobic medium with sterile sand in a glovebox
with N2/H2 (95/5) atmosphere. The sand was of the same type as described before
(Philips et al., 2011) and was sterilized beforehand by autoclaving a slurry of sand and
deionized water and drying it at 60°C. A dense and homogeneous packing of the sand
layer was obtained by stirring the sand and tapping the glass with a rubber stick. The top

6

layer (25 mL) consisted of anaerobic medium inoculated with 60 volume % of the KB1TM subculture, which corresponded with respectively 8107 and 2108 Geobacter and
bacterial 16S rRNA gene copies per mL, as determined with quantitative PCR (qPCR)
(described below). No TCE or formate was added. Incubation was performed at 20 °C.
One cylinder was sampled four days after the start of the experiment, whereas the other
cylinder was sampled after seven days. Pore water samples were taken for DNA
analysis.

2.4

Diffusion-cell experiment

The effect of the motility of Geobacter dechlorinators on TCE DNAPL dissolution was
studied in model source zones using a three-layer diffusion-cell setup (Philips et al.,
2011). This setup uses the same glass cylinders as described above, in which 3 layers
are created, i.e. a central 5.5 cm sand layer, a lower 3.5 cm DNAPL layer and an upper
3 cm aqueous layer. The DNAPL layer is an aqueous solution containing pure TCE
droplets and is continuously stirred to maintain the saturated TCE concentration. The
aqueous top layer is frequently replaced with fresh medium to provide electron donor
and to remove the chloroethenes.
All diffusion-cells were filled in a glovebox with N2/H2 (95/5) atmosphere using the
same type of sand as described previously. To allow comparison with previous
experiments, a first set of diffusion-cells was inoculated in the sand layer. In these
diffusion-cells, sterile sand was homogenously mixed with anaerobic medium
inoculated with 0.6, 6 or 60 volume % of the KB-1TM subculture. These inoculation
densities corresponded with 4105, 4106 or 4107 Geobacter 16S rRNA gene copies per
mL and 1106, 1107 or 1108 bacterial 16S rRNA gene copies per mL, as determined

7

with qPCR (described below). Treatments were performed in triplicate (0.6%) or in
duplicate (6 and 60%). Top layers were refreshed twice a week with fresh medium
containing 4 mM formate.
A second set of diffusion-cells investigated the effect of the motility of the Geobacter
dechlorinators on TCE DNAPL dissolution by inoculating the top layer. Before
inoculation, these diffusion-cells were operated under abiotic conditions for three
weeks. During this period, top layers were replaced twice a week with fresh medium.
Measurement of the pore water TCE concentrations showed that at the end of this
period the TCE concentration linearly declined through the sand layer from the
saturation TCE concentration (8.4 mM) at the DNAPL layer to an about zero
concentration at the top layer (results not shown). We previously obtained a similar
TCE concentration profile and explained that this linear profile is the expected steadystate in abiotic conditions (Philips et al., 2011). After abiotic steady-state TCE
concentrations were established, the top layer of these diffusion-cells was inoculated
with 0.6, 6 or 60 volume % of the KB-1TM subculture. These inoculation densities
correspond with the cell densities given above. Treatments were performed in duplicate
(0.6 and 6%) or triplicate (60%). The top layer was not refreshed during the first week
after inoculation to allow microbial migration towards the sand layer. Afterwards, top
layers were again refreshed twice a week with fresh medium. The top layers were
amended with 4 mM formate as electron donor, once the biotic conditions commenced.
Incubation of all diffusion-cells was performed at 20°C. Pore water samples were taken
19 days after inoculation. Samples of duplicate diffusion-cells were taken for analysis of
the chlorinated ethene concentrations, whereas the remaining triplicate diffusion-cells
were sampled for DNA analysis.

8

2.5

Analytical methods

Pore water concentrations of TCE and cis-DCE were analyzed using GC-FID (Haest et
al., 2010a). Stock solutions of these compounds in methanol were used as external
standards. The DNeasy Blood and Tissue kit (Qiagen) was used to extract DNA from
pore water samples (Philips et al., 2012) and Geobacter and bacterial 16S rRNA gene
copy numbers were quantified with real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) (Haest et al.,
2011). An aqueous control sample was included in each combined DNA extraction and
qPCR run, for reasons described previously (Philips et al., 2012). The obtained 16S
rRNA gene copy numbers correspond with cell densities (Philips et al., 2012). The
detection limit for the qPCR analysis was 1·104 16S rRNA gene copies per mL.
Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP) was performed on amplified
bacterial 16S rRNA gene fragments as previously described (Philips et al., 2012).

2.6

Calculation of the random motility coefficient

The experimental results of the motility experiment were used to calculate a random
motility coefficient for Geobacter. Random motility is mathematically described
similarly to solute diffusion (Ford and Harvey, 2007). As such, random motility
coefficients are analogues of diffusion coefficients. Therefore, Equation 1 was adapted
from the analytical solution for solute diffusion in a semi-infinite region (Datta, 2002),
assuming a zero initial Geobacter cell density in the sand layer and a constant
Geobacter cell density at the top:
c geo  c geo ,top




z



 1  erf

 2 D

geo ,eff  t 




(1)

9

Where cgeo is the Geobacter cell density in the pore water (cellsL-1), cgeo,top is the
Geobacter cell density in the top layer (cellsL-1), t is the time (day), z is the distance
from the top layer (cm) and Dgeo,eff (cm2day-1) is the effective random motility
coefficient for Geobacter in the sand. Optimization was performed using least square
difference minimization with Microsoft Excel Solver and the macro SolverAid of
Macrobundle was used to calculate the standard error. As we explained previously
(Philips et al., 2011), the porosity of the sand θ can be used to calculate the tortuosity ξ
of the sand, which relates the effective random motility coefficient in sand to the
random motility coefficient in water (Dgeo,0):
D geo,eff    D geo, 0  

2.7

1

2

 D geo,0

(2)

Modeling

The results of the diffusion-cell experiment were analyzed with a diffusion-motility
model to clarify how the motility of Geobacter contributed to the dechlorination. We
previously used a model that incorporated TCE self-inhibition, i.e. inhibition of the
dechlorination reaction at elevated TCE concentrations, to describe TCE dechlorination
and growth of Geobacter in liquid batch systems (Philips et al., 2013a). That existing
model was here extended to a diffusion-motility model that included a random motility
term for Geobacter, analogue to the diffusion term for TCE. Chemotaxis was not
incorporated, since no experimental proof for chemotaxis towards or away of TCE was
found. The exponential growth term used previously was replaced with a logistic
growth term, for reasons explained in the results section. This logistic growth term
assumes that the growth rate declines if a maximum Geobacter cell density is

10

approached (McMeekin et al., 1993). The resulting diffusion-motility model is
described by the system of partial differential equations:
 c
 2 cTCE
 TCE  DTCE 
 k cell  cGEO
z 2
 t
 c
 2 c DCE
DCE

D

 k cell  cGEO

DCE
z 2
 t
 c

 2 cGEO
c
 YGEO  k cell  cGEO  1  GEO
 GEO  DGEO 
2
z
 t
 cGEO ,max

(3)

  k d  cGEO



Where cTCE, is the TCE concentration (mmolL-1), cDCE, is the DCE concentration
(mmolL-1), cGEO is the Geobacter cell density (cellsL-1), t is the time (day), z is the
distance from the DNAPL layer (cm), YGEO is the growth yield of Geobacter
(cellsmmol-1), kd is the microbial decay coefficient (day-1), cGEO,max is the maximum
Geobacter cell density (cellsL-1), DTCE is the diffusion coefficient for TCE (cm2day-1),
DDCE is the diffusion coefficient for DCE (cm2day-1), and DGEO is the random motility
coefficient for Geobacter (cm2day-1). The cell specific dechlorination rate kcell
(mmolcell-1day-1) depends on the TCE concentration (Haest et al., 2010a):
k cell 

k cell ,max  cTCE

K

s ,TCE

 c
 cTCE   1   TCE
  EC 50






bi






(4)

Where kcell,max is the maximum cell specific dechlorination rate (mmolcell-1day-1),
Ks,TCE is the half saturation concentration (mmolL-1), EC50 is the TCE concentration at
which the cell specific dechlorination rate is halved compared to the maximum rate
because of the TCE self-inhibition (mmolL-1) and bi (-) is related to the slope of the cell
specific dechlorination rate at the EC50 concentration.

11

Retardation of TCE in the central layer was not incorporated, since the used sand was
inert and contained no organic matter. In addition, we assumed that all Geobacter cells
remained in the pore water and did not attach to the sand.
The system of partial differential equations (3) was solved over the domain

z  [3.5,8.5] . This domain was split into three zones to model the three-layers of the
diffusion-cells, setting the domain for the bottom, central and top layer respectively [3.5,0], [0,5.5] and [5.5,8.5] (Figure S1). For the central layer, a porosity θ was assumed.
For the top layer, the diffusion and random motility coefficients in water were used,
while for the central layer these coefficients were adjusted using the tortuosity as
described by Equation (2) (Figure S1A). For the bottom layer, only the Geobacter cell
densities were modeled, the TCE and DCE concentrations were set constant in this layer
(Figure S1D). The effect of the mixing in the DNAPL layer on the Geobacter cell
densities was modeled by setting the random motility coefficient thousand times higher
than that in water (Figure S1A). The diffusion and motility fluxes at both sides of the
boundary between different layers were set equal, manifesting the conservation of mass
and biomass respectively (Figure S1A). The initial conditions and boundary conditions
used in the model are depicted in Figure S1B-D.
The system of reaction-diffusion equations (3) was solved using an explicit-implicit
method. We employed the Crank-Nicholson scheme to handle the linear terms in system
(3), while for the nonlinear terms we used the predictor-corrector method in order to
avoid solving nonlinear systems of algebraic equations (Thomas, 1995; Butcher, 2003).
All parameters were derived from experiments described here or previously (Table S1),
except for the parameter kcell,max, which was adjusted to fit the experimental results
(described below).

12

The sensitivity of the diffusion-motility model towards its various parameters was
analyzed using Morris’ one-at-a-time (OAT) design (Morris, 1991; Mertens et al.,
2005). Shortly, this method determines the distribution of the elementary effect each
parameter has on the model outcome using different parameter combinations. We
evaluated a total of 1000 parameter combinations. The effect of DGEO, kcell,max, EC50, bi,
Ks,TCE, YGEO, kd and cGEO,max was investigated over the parameter intervals given in Table
S1, which are mostly chosen as a factor 3 around the parameter values used by the
model. Other model parameters were assumed constant. The effect on the model
outcome was evaluated as the root mean square error between the modelled and
experimental TCE and cis-DCE concentrations at day 19 with both sand and top layer
inoculation and for all three different inoculation densities.

3

RESULTS
3.1

Chemotaxis assay

The agarose-in-plug bridge method (Yu and Alam, 1997) was used to test for
chemotaxis towards or away from TCE. Microscopic observation of the bacterial cells
around the plugs showed that several cells were motile. Nevertheless, the distribution
of cells around the plugs with TCE was similar to that around control plugs (Figure 1).
No accumulation of cells at or away from the edge of the TCE-containing plugs could
be seen, as has previously been observed for other bacteria using similar plugs
containing TCE (Parales et al., 2000; Singh and Olson, 2010). As such, no evidence
for chemotaxis by the KB-1TM subculture towards or away from TCE was found.

3.2

Motility experiment

13

The motility of the KB-1TM subculture was studied by inoculating an aqueous layer on
top of a sterile sand layer. Measured 16S rRNA gene copy numbers at day 4 were
generally lower than at day 7 at corresponding distances from the top layer (Figure S2).
By day 7, the Geobacter cells had migrated over a distance of at least 4.4 cm (Figure 2).
At this distance, the Geobacter cell density was two orders of magnitude lower than in
the top layer. Over the same distance, bacterial 16S rRNA gene copy numbers dropped
only one order of magnitude. Also the RFLP profiles suggested that the Geobacter
subpopulation had migrated slower than the total bacterial population, as only the RFLP
profiles for the two samples closest to the top layer showed correspondence with the
RFLP profile of Geobacter lovleyi SZ (Figure 2). In the middle of the examined sand
layer part, RFLP profiles corresponded with the RFLP profiles of the Clostridium1 and
Clostridium7 operational taxonomic units (OTU) (Philips et al., 2012). The RFLP
profiles for the samples at the largest distance from the top layer corresponded with the
RFLP profile of a yet unidentified species (Philips et al., 2012). The faster migration of
the fermentative species in comparison to Geobacter could be explained by a higher
motility, but is in part likely also due to their growth on the yeast extract and cysteine in
the medium (Philips et al., 2013c).
The Geobacter 16S rRNA gene copy numbers measured in this experiment were used to
calculate a random motility coefficient for Geobacter. The use of Equation 1 presumes
no growth for Geobacter, which is likely correct since no TCE was present in the
systems. Equation 1 fitted the experimental data rather well, as a coefficient of
determination (R2) of 0.79 was obtained between log transformed observed and
predicted cell densities (Figure S2). This resulted in an effective random motility
coefficient in the sand of 0.15 ± 0.02 cm2 day-1, which corresponds to a random motility

14

coefficient in water of 0.24 ± 0.02 cm2 day-1.This value is well in the range of
previously reported motility coefficients (Ford and Harvey, 2007) and is of the same
order of magnitude as the diffusion coefficient of TCE (Table S1).

3.3

Diffusion-cell experiment

Diffusion-cells were used as model source zones to investigate the effect of
dechlorinator motility on TCE DNAPL dissolution. To allow comparison with previous
experiments, a first set of diffusion-cells was inoculated in the central sand layer. Three
different inoculation densities were applied, but did not result in significantly different
TCE and cis-DCE concentration profiles 19 days after inoculation (Figure 3A). In all
diffusion-cells with sand layer inoculation, the TCE concentration at day 19 declined
from the saturated TCE concentration (8.4 mM) at the DNAPL layer to a concentration
below 0.6 mM at a distance of 2.0 to 2.5 cm from the DNAPL (Figure 3A). The cisDCE concentration was maximal at about 2 cm distance from the DNAPL and
decreased towards the DNAPL and the top layer. These concentration profiles resulted
in a DNAPL dissolution enhancement of a factor 2.5 ± 0.3 in comparison to abiotic
dissolution (calculated as described by Philips et al. (2011)). We previously showed that
similar TCE and cis-DCE concentration profiles remained unchanged beyond day 18
(Philips et al., 2011). As such, with sand layer inoculation, the TCE and cis-DCE
concentration profiles measured at day 19 were in steady-state, irrespectively of the
applied inoculation density.
A second set of diffusion-cells was inoculated in the top layer to investigate the effect of
dechlorinator motility on TCE DNAPL dissolution. Similarly as for the first set of
diffusion-cells, concentration profiles in the diffusion-cells with top layer inoculation

15

were independent of the applied inoculation density (Figure 3B). Before inoculation of
the top layer, the linearly decreasing abiotic steady-state TCE concentration profile was
established as described in the methods section. Nineteen days later, the TCE
concentration in all diffusion-cells with top layer inoculation declined below the
detection limit at about 3.5 cm from the DNAPL, whereas the cis-DCE concentration
was maximal at about 2.5 cm distance from the DNAPL (Figure 3B). This resulted in a
DNAPL dissolution enhancement factor of 1.9 ± 0.3 in comparison to abiotic
dissolution. These results demonstrate that Geobacter cells, migrating out of the top
layer, were able to dechlorinate in the sand layer and succeeded in enhancing the initial
DNAPL dissolution flux. At day 19, however, the TCE concentration profiles were 24%
less steep than in the first set of diffusion-cells (Figure 3). Pore water sampling of the
second set of diffusion-cells was therefore repeated at day 26 and by that time, the TCE
concentration profiles were similar (results not shown) to those measured at day 19 in
the diffusion-cells with sand layer inoculation (Figure 3A). This shows that with top
layer inoculation, the concentration profiles were not yet at steady-state at day 19,
whereas steady-state concentrations were attained one week later.
An additional diffusion-cell in each set was sampled to examine the microbial
distribution. Pore water samples taken at day 19 from the diffusion-cell with sand layer
inoculation showed two distinctive zones (Figure 4A). In the lower part of the sand
layer, Geobacter 16S rRNA gene copy numbers were high and comparable to the
bacterial 16S rRNA gene copy numbers. Even adjacent to the DNAPL layer, where the
TCE concentrations were toxic (> 2.6 mM), Geobacter cell densities were almost two
orders of magnitude higher than at inoculation. The RFLP profiles for the lower part of
the sand layer corresponded with the RFLP profile of Geobacter lovleyi SZ. In the

16

upper part of the sand layer, Geobacter 16S rRNA gene copy numbers were one order
of magnitude lower than bacterial 16S rRNA gene copy numbers. The RFLP profiles
for this part of the sand layer corresponded with the RFLP of an unidentified species
(Philips et al., 2012). Similar results were previously related to the TCE concentration
(Philips et al., 2012).
For the diffusion-cell with top layer inoculation, the pore water samples taken at day 19
showed a microbial distribution consisting of three zones (Figure 4B). In the upper sand
layer part of this diffusion-cell, Geobacter and bacterial 16S rRNA gene copy numbers
and RFLP profiles were similar to those in the upper sand layer part of the diffusion-cell
with sand layer inoculation (Figure 4). In the middle part of the sand layer, where the
TCE dechlorination occurred, the Geobacter 16S rRNA gene copy numbers were high
and similar to the bacterial 16S rRNA gene copy numbers (Figure 4B). The RFLP
profiles for this part of the sand layer corresponded with the RFLP profile of Geobacter
lovleyi SZ. Closer to the DNAPL layer, both Geobacter and bacterial cell densities
dropped several orders of magnitude and the RFLP profiles had a low intensity (Figure
S2B). These results suggest that by day 19 the Geobacter cells migrating out of the top
layer had not yet arrived in the zone adjacent to the TCE DNAPL.

3.4

Modeling results

A diffusion-motility model (Equation 3) was used to analyze the results of the diffusioncell experiment. This model used the kinetic and growth parameters previously derived
from a liquid batch experiment (Philips et al., 2013a), while the random motility
coefficient for Geobacter (DGEO) was obtained from the motility experiment of this
study (Table S1). Initially, the diffusion-motility model was solved assuming

17

exponential growth for Geobacter, similarly as in our previous batch model (Philips et
al., 2013a). This initial model, however, predicted a maximum Geobacter cell density of
1·109 cells·mL-1 (results not shown), whereas in the diffusion-cells the Geobacter cell
densities were not higher than 5·107 copies·mL-1 (Figure 4). As a consequence, the TCE
dechlorination rate was overestimated, as this model predicted a complete conversion of
TCE to cis-DCE at less than 1 cm distance from the DNAPL layer (results not shown).
Experimental Geobacter cell densities in our previous batch experiment were also not
higher than 5·107 copies·mL-1 (Philips et al., 2013a), but exponential growth described
the growth of Geobacter well, likely since in the batch systems Geobacter only grew on
a single addition of TCE, resulting in a limited increase in cell numbers. With a
continuous TCE supply as in the diffusion-cells, however, chemical and physical
limitations are likely to constrain growth beyond a certain maximum cell density. For
this reason, logistic growth was incorporated in the diffusion-motility model (Equation
3) and the maximum Geobacter cell density observed in the diffusion-cell experiment
was set as cGEO,max (Table S1). Similarly, Haest et al. (2010b) incorporated a reduced
dechlorination rate at elevated dechlorinator cell densities in order to describe
dechlorination in flow-through columns.
The diffusion-motility model incorporating logistic growth

and using the kinetic

parameters as derived from a previous batch experiment (Philips et al., 2013a)
underestimated the dechlorination rate. At day 19, the model predicted that steady-state
chlorinated ethene concentration profiles would only be attained for the treatment
combining sand layer inoculation with a high inoculation dose (Figure S3), while the
steady-state TCE concentration profile was somewhat less steep than experimentally
observed. For this reason, the parameter value for kcell,max was increased with a factor of

18

1.9 in comparison to the previously derived value (Philips et al., 2013a) to fit the
chlorinated ethene concentration profiles. The maximum cell specific dechlorination
rate (kcell,max) is highly correlated with the Geobacter growth yield, which has an
uncertainty of more than a factor two due to the variability in the quantification of
microbial numbers by qPCR (Philips et al., 2012). This uncertainty could explain why a
doubling of kcell,max was required to describe dechlorination in the diffusion-cells.
Alternatively, the required increase of kcell,max might be due to a higher maximum cell
specific dechlorination rate in the sand then in batch, as has previously been reported by
others. Schaefer et al. (2009), for instance, explained that only a 200-times higher
relative dechlorination rate in comparison to batch could describe dechlorination in their
soil column experiment. In addition, Sabalowsky and Semprini (2010) had to adjust
their kinetic parameters obtained from batch in order to describe dechlorination in a
continuous flow stirred tank reactor and a recirculating packed column.
The diffusion-motility model using the adjusted parameter value for kcell,max fitted the
measured chlorinated ethene concentration profiles well (Figure 5). For sand layer
inoculation, this model correctly described that steady-state chlorinated ethene
concentration profiles were attained before day 19 at all inoculation densities (Figure
5A). In addition, for top layer inoculation, the model correctly predicted that chlorinated
ethene concentration profiles were not yet at steady-state by day 19 (Figure 5B). The
modeled transient TCE concentration profiles, however, varied with different
inoculation densities (Figure 5B), in contrast to the experimental results (Figure 3B).
Furthermore, the model correctly described the high Geobacter cell densities close the
to DNAPL with inoculation of the sand layer (Figure 5A), while for top layer
inoculation the low Geobacter cell densities in the lower part of the sand layer were

19

overestimated by the model. In addition, the model overestimated the Geobacter cell
densities in the upper part of the sand layer with both inoculation methods (Figure 5).
A Morris’ OAT sensitivity analysis was performed to investigate the sensitivity of the
model towards its various parameters (Figure S4). This sensitivity analysis shows that
the random motility coefficient of Geobacter has an intermediate effect on the model
outcome, while the model was most sensitive to the growth parameters YGEO and
cGEO,max and to the kinetic parameters kcell,max and EC50. The parameters bi, Ks,TCE and kd
had a low impact on the model, which is in agreement with our previous findings (Haest
et al., 2010b; Philips et al., 2013a). Visualization of the sensitivity of the model towards
some of its parameters shows that a factor 4 change in DGEO,0 has a low effect on the
modeled TCE concentrations, but has a clear impact on the modeled Geobacter cell
densities (Figure S4A). In addition, a factor 4 difference of the growth yield Ygeo shows
a large effect on both the modeled TCE concentrations and Geobacter cell densities
(Figure S4B).
The diffusion-motility model allows to investigate the case of immotile Geobacter
dechlorinators. Immotile colloids of the size of a bacterium have a Brownian diffusion
coefficient which is three orders of magnitude lower than the random motility
coefficient for Geobacter reported in this study (Ford and Harvey, 2007). As such, the
case of immotile Geobacter cells was modeled by setting the value for DGEO,0 103 times
lower than reported in Table S1. For sand layer inoculation, immotile Geobacter cells
would not have resulted in different chlorinated ethene concentration profiles than
experimentally observed, but Geobacter cell densities would only have been high in the
middle part of the sand layer where dechlorination occurs (Figure S6A). For top layer
inoculation, however, the model shows that by day 19 immotile Geobacter cells would

20

have migrated only a few millimeters in the sand layer, while there would have been
hardly any enhancement of the DNAPL dissolution (Figure S6B).

4

DISCUSSION
4.1

The combination of random motility and growth explains the rapid
enhancement of TCE DNAPL dissolution in diffusion-cells

The dechlorinators in the studied KB-1TM subculture are related to Geobacter lovleyi SZ
(Philips et al., 2012), for which flagellar motility was previously described (Sung et al.,
2006). Microscopic observation confirmed that the cells in the studied KB-1TM
subculture were motile, but no evidence for chemotaxis towards or away from TCE was
found (Figure 1). Nevertheless, chemotaxis genes and associated genes expressing yet
unknown signaling functions have been found in the genome of several Geobacter
species (Tran et al., 2008). As such, a further investigation of chemotaxis by the
Geobacter dechlorinators in the KB-1TM culture towards other potential attractants and
repellents, like electron donors, nutrients and degradation products, is warranted. In
addition, it was found that the fermentative Clostridium species in the KB-1TM
subculture were motile and even migrated faster than the Geobacter dechlorinators
(Figure 2). It should further be examined whether bioaugmentation can benefit for the
motility of these fermenters. This study, however, continued by investigating whether
the random motility of the Geobacter dechlorinators could contribute to an effective
bioaugmentation of TCE DNAPL source zones.
A motility experiment, in which an inoculated top layer was placed above a sterile sand
layer, showed that the Geobacter dechlorinators were able to migrate several
centimeters into the sand layer in just 7 days (Figure 2). In addition, the migration of

21

the Geobacter dechlorinators was examined in model source zones using a diffusioncell setup. The diffusion-cell experiment demonstrated that Geobacter cells migrating
out of the top layer managed to rapidly enhance the initial TCE DNAPL dissolution flux
in the sand layer (Figure 3B). The developed diffusion-motility model (Equation 3)
allowed to simulate the case of immotile Geobacter dechlorinators, which suggested the
important role of random motility in the fast colonization of the sand layer (Figure
S6B). The sensitivity analysis, however, found that the random motility coefficient only
had an intermediate impact on the modeled chlorinated ethene concentrations and that
the model was most sensitive to the growth and kinetic parameters (Figure S4).
Consequently, it was the combined effect of random motility and growth of the
Geobacter dechlorinators on the dechlorination of TCE that explains the rapid DNAPL
dissolution enhancement in the diffusion-cells.

4.2

The experimental Geobacter cell densities can be explained by random
motility

In the diffusion-cell with sand layer inoculation, Geobacter cell densities adjacent to the
DNAPL layer were significantly higher than at inoculation, even though the TCE
concentrations in this zone were toxic (> 2.6 mM) (Figure 4A). We obtained similar
findings from previous diffusion-cell experiments and argued before that these results
might be explained by random motility (Philips et al., 2012). The diffusion-motility
model developed in this study well described the high Geobacter cell densities adjacent
to the DNAPL (Figure 5A). Simulating immotile Geobacter cells, this model showed
that the Geobacter cell densities would remain close to the inoculation density in the
lower part of the sand layer and would increase almost two orders of magnitude around

22

the distance from the DNAPL where the TCE concentration drops below 2.6 mM
(Figure S6A). As such, the diffusion-motility model indicates that random motility was
the main mechanism for high Geobacter cell densities close to the DNAPL in the
diffusion-cell with sand layer inoculation.
The diffusion-motility model overestimated the low Geobacter cell densities measured
adjacent to the DNAPL in the diffusion-cell with top layer inoculation (Figure 5B).
However, the diffusion-motility model simulated the experimental Geobacter cell
densities better by decreasing the random motility coefficient for Geobacter (DGEO,0)
with a factor 4 (Figure S5A). The parameter DGEO,0 was fit on Geobacter 16S rRNA
gene copy numbers quantified by qPCR analysis, for which we previously found a large
variability (Philips et al., 2012). As such, the clear overestimation of low Geobacter cell
densities measured adjacent to the DNAPL with top layer inoculation could be due to an
inaccurate random motility coefficient.
Experimental Geobacter cell densities in the upper part of the sand layer were
significantly lower than in the dechlorination zone with both inoculation methods
(Figure 4). In previous diffusion-cell experiments, we observed a similar drop of the
Geobacter cell densities of about one order of magnitude between the zones of the sand
layer with and without TCE (Philips et al., 2012; Philips et al., 2013c). The diffusionmotility model, however, overestimated the Geobacter cell densities in the upper sand
layer part (Figure 5). By assuming random motility, the diffusion-motility model
predicts the development of a constant Geobacter cell density equal to cGEO,max
throughout most of the sand layer (Figure 5A: HD). As such, the low Geobacter cell
densities in the upper part of the sand layer are in contradiction with random motility
and rather suggest that the Geobacter dechlorinators have some sort of mechanism to

23

accumulate in the lower part of the sand layer where TCE is present. Nevertheless,
random motility was sufficient to describe the TCE dechlorination patterns throughout
the diffusion-cells and the Geobacter cell densities in the other parts of the sand layer
(Figure 5).

4.3

Low impact of the inoculation density

The inoculation density did not affect the chlorinated ethene concentration profiles
measured in the different diffusion-cells (Figure 3). Similar chlorinated ethene
concentration profiles were even recorded for top layer inoculation, although the
concentration profiles were still transient at the time of sampling (Figure 3). The
diffusion-motility model, in contrast, predicted that transient concentration profiles
would depend on the inoculation density (Figure 5B). However, both the experimental
and model results agreed that steady-state chlorinated ethene concentration profiles
were independent of the inoculation density (Figure 5), illustrating the low impact of the
applied inoculation density on the dechlorination in the diffusion-cells. Similarly, Haest
et al.(2010b) found by modeling that the initial number of dechlorinators was of low
importance for dechlorination in flow-through columns. In the diffusion-cells of the
current study, the different inoculation densities led to initial differences in cell densities
and dechlorination rates, but these differences were likely readily eliminated due to a
fast microbial growth.

4.4

Implications for source zone bioremediation

Bioaugmentation is seen as a valuable strategy to initiate dechlorination in TCE
contaminated aquifers (Major et al., 2002; Adamson et al., 2003; Sleep et al., 2006). In

24

a contaminant plume, the ground water flow can help spreading an applied inoculum,
but a DNAPL is typically formed in a low-permeability zone and is thus difficult to
reach via the ground water. Therefore, the success of bioaugmentation of a DNAPL
source zone largely depends on the migration mechanisms of the applied bacteria,
(Singh and Olson, 2008). The Geobacter dechlorinators in the studied KB-1TM
subculture are not chemotactic towards or away from TCE, but their random motility
resulted in a fast colonization of the sand layer and the biological enhancement of TCE
DNAPL dissolution. As such, Geobacter containing dechlorinating cultures seem a
suitable choice for the bioaugmentation of TCE DNAPL source zones. It should be
noted, however, that the diffusion-cell setup used in this study only simulates a
simplified DNAPL source zone, in which no bacteria can exit the system or migrate out
the source zone. At the edge of a real DNAPL source zone, the groundwater flow likely
rinses a large part of the applied bacteria away. Bacteria showing positive chemotaxis
towards the contaminant, therefore, might be more effective in colonizing a DNAPL
source zone that just randomly motile bacteria. Using the diffusion-cell setup, we
demonstrated that different inoculation levels had no effect on the final dechlorination
rate. In real source zones, however, the number of bacteria that overcome the
groundwater flow and effectively enter the source zone might largely depend on the
applied inoculation dose. Finally, it should be noted that this study only investigated the
degradation of TCE to cis-DCE, since dechlorination beyond cis-DCE is mostly
inhibited in DNAPL source zones (Yang and McCarty, 2000; Adamson et al., 2004).
Only the stimulation of cis-DCE to ethene dechlorination downstream of the DNAPL
source zone will allow for a complete decontamination of TCE.

25

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Fanny Hamels for her assistance in performing the experimental work. This
research was funded as a Ph.D. Fellowship of the Research Foundation – Flanders
(FWO).

26

REFERENCES

Adamson, D.T., Lyon, D.Y., Hughes, J.B., 2004. Flux and product distribution during
biological

treatment

of

tetrachloroethene

dense

non-aqueous-phase

liquid.

Environmental Science & Technology 38, 2021-2028.
Adamson, D.T., McDade, J.M., Hughes, J.B., 2003. Inoculation of DNAPL source zone
to initiate reductive dechlorination of PCE. Environmental Science & Technology
37, 2525-2533.
Bradley, P.M., 2003. History and ecology of chloroethene biodegradation: A review.
Bioremediation Journal 7, 81-109.
Butcher, J.C., 2003. Numerical methods for ordinary differential equations. John Wiley
& Sons, New York.
Datta, A.K., 2002. Biological and bioenvironmental heat and mass transfer. Marcel
Dekker, New York.
Duhamel, M., Edwards, E.A., 2007. Growth and yields of dechlorinators, acetogens,
and methanogens during reductive dechlorination of chlorinated ethenes and
dihaloelimination of 1,2-dichloroethane. Environmental Science & Technology 41,
2303-2310.
Ford, R.M., Harvey, R.W., 2007. Role of chemotaxis in the transport of bacteria
through saturated porous media. Advances in Water Resources 30, 1608-1617.
Haest, P.J., Philips, J., Springael, D., Smolders, E., 2011. The reactive transport of
trichloroethene is influenced by residence time and microbial numbers. Journal of
Contaminant Hydrology 119, 89-98.
Haest, P.J., Springael, D., Smolders, E., 2010a. Dechlorination kinetics of TCE at toxic
TCE concentrations: Assessment of different models. Water Research 44, 331-339.

27

Haest, P.J., Springael, D., Smolders, E., 2010b. Modelling reactive CAH transport using
batch experiment degradation kinetics. Water Research 44, 2981-2989.
Holliger, C., Hahn, D., Harmsen, H., Ludwig, W., Schumacher, W., Tindall, B.,
Vazquez, F., Weiss, N., Zehnder, A.J.B., 1998. Dehalobacter restrictus gen. nov. and
sp. nov., a strictly anaerobic bacterium that reductively dechlorinates tetra- and
trichloroethene in an anaerobic respiration. Archives of Microbiology 169, 313-321.
Law, A.M.J., Aitken, M.D., 2003. Bacterial chemotaxis to naphthalene desorbing from
a nonaqueous liquid. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 69, 5968-5973.
Major, D.W., McMaster, M.L., Cox, E.E., Edwards, E.A., Dworatzek, S.M.,
Hendrickson, E.R., Starr, M.G., Payne, J.A., Buonamici, L.W., 2002. Field
demonstration of successful bioaugmentation to achieve dechlorination of
tetrachloroethene to ethene. Environmental Science & Technology 36, 5106-5116.
Marx, R.B., Aitken, M.D., 2000. Bacterial chemotaxis enhances naphthalene
degradation in a heterogeneous aqueous system. Environmental Science &
Technology 34, 3379-3383.
McMeekin, T.A., Olley, J.N., Ross, T., Ratkowsky, D.A., 1993. Predictive
microbiology: theory and application. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Mertens, J., Madsen, H., Kristensen, M., Jacques, D., Feyen, J., 2005. Sensitivity of soil
parameters in unsaturated zone modelling and the relation between effective,
laboratory and in situ estimates. Hydrological Processes 19, 1611-1633.
Morris, M.D., 1991. Factorial sampling plans for preliminary computational
experiments. Technometrics 33, 161-174.
Pandey, G., Jain, R.K., 2002. Bacterial chemotaxis toward environmental pollutants:
Role in bioremediation. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 68, 5789-5795.

28

Parales, R.E., Ditty, J.L., Harwood, C.S., 2000. Toluene-degrading bacteria are
chemotactic

towards

the

environmental

pollutants

benzene,

toluene,

and

trichloroethylene. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 66, 4098-4104.
Philips, J., Haest, P.J., Springael, D., Smolders, E., 2013a. Inhibition of Geobacter
dechlorinators at elevated trichloroethene concentrations is explained by a reduced
activity rather than by an enhanced cell decay. Environmental Science & Technology
47, 1510-1517.
Philips, J., Hamels, F., Smolders, E., Springael, D., 2012. Distribution of a
dechlorinating community in relation to the distance from a trichloroethene dense
non-aqueous phase liquid in a model aquifer. FEMS Microbiology Ecology 81, 636647.
Philips, J., Maes, N., Springael, D., Smolders, E., 2013b. Acidification due to microbial
dechlorination near a trichloroethene DNAPL is overcome with pH buffer or formate
as electron donor: Experimental demonstration in diffusion-cells. Journal of
Contaminant Hydrology 147, 25-33.
Philips, J., Springael, D., Smolders, E., 2011. A three-layer diffusion-cell to examine
bio-enhanced dissolution of chloroethene dense non-aqueous phase liquid.
Chemosphere 83, 991-996.
Philips, J., Van Muylder, R., Springael, D., Smolders, E., 2013c. Electron donor
limitations reduce microbial enhanced trichloroethene DNAPL dissolution: A fluxbased analysis using diffusion-cells. Chemosphere 91, 7-13.
Sabalowsky, A.R., Semprini, L., 2010. Trichloroethene and cis-1,2-dichloroethene
concentration-dependent toxicity model simulates anaerobic dechlorination at high

29

concentrations. II: Continuous flow and attached growth reactors. Biotechnology and
Bioengineering 107, 540-549.
Schaefer, C.E., Condee, C.W., Vainberg, S., Steffan, R.J., 2009. Bioaugmentation for
chlorinated ethenes using Dehalococcoides sp.: Comparison between batch and
column experiments. Chemosphere 75, 141-148.
Singh, R., Olson, M.S., 2008. Application of bacterial swimming and chemotaxis for
enhanced bioremediation. In: Shah, V. (Ed.). Emerging Environmental Technologies.
Springer, USA, pp. 149-172.
Singh, R., Olson, M.S., 2010. Kinetics of trichloroethylene and toulene toxicity to
Pseudomonas putida F1 Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 29, 56-63.
Sleep, B.E., Seepersad, D.J., Mo, K., Heidorn, C.M., Hrapovic, L., Morrill, P.L.,
McMaster, M.L., Hood, E.D., LeBron, C., Lollar, B.S., Major, D.W., Edwards, E.A.,
2006. Biological enhancement of tetrachloroethene dissolution and associated
microbial community changes. Environmental Science & Technology 40, 36233633.
Sung, Y., Fletcher, K.F., Ritalaliti, K.M., Apkarian, R.P., Ramos-Hernandez, N.,
Sanford, R.A., Mesbah, N.M., Loffler, F.E., 2006. Geobacter lovleyi sp nov strain
SZ, a novel metal-reducing and tetrachloroethene-dechlorinating bacterium. Applied
and Environmental Microbiology 72, 2775-2782.
Thomas, J.W., 1995. Numerical partial differential equations: finite difference methods.
Springer, New York.
Tran, H.T., Krushkal, J., Antommattei, F.M., Lovley, D.R., Weis, R.M., 2008.
Comparative genomics of Geobacter chemotaxis genes reveals diverse signaling
function. BMC Genomics 9.

30

Yang,

Y.R.,

McCarty,

P.L.,

2000.

Biologically

enhanced

dissolution

of

tetrachloroethene DNAPL. Environmental Science & Technology 34, 2979-2984.
Yu, H.S., Alam, M., 1997. An agarose-in-plug bridge method to study chemotaxis in the
Archaeon Halobacterium salinarum. FEMS Microbiology Letters 156, 265-269.

31

Figure 1: Chemotaxis assay using agarose plugs without TCE (A) and with TCE
(stained with Oil-Red-O) (B). The TCE droplets in the agarose plug of B can be seen by
their red color (indicated by arrows). The small white dots are individual cells.

32

Figure 2: Number of Geobacter and bacterial 16S rRNA gene copies per mL pore water
and RFLP profiles in relation to the distance from the top layer for samples taken seven
days after inoculation of an aqueous layer on top of a sterile sand layer. Top layers were
inoculated with respectively 8107 and 2108 Geobacter and bacterial 16S rRNA gene
copies per mL. The RFLP profiles are given in the order of the corresponding 16S
rRNA gene copy number data points of the graph above. Error bars on the 16S rRNA
gene copy numbers indicate the standard deviation on duplicate qPCR measurements of
the same extracted DNA sample. Numbered control lanes correspond as follows: 1,
Geobacter lovleyi SZ; 2, Clostridium1 OTU; and 3, Clostridium7 OTU (Philips et al.,
2012).

33

Figure 3: Pore water TCE and cis-DCE concentrations in relation to the distance from
the DNAPL layer for samples taken from diffusion-cells 19 days after inoculation of the
sand layer (A) or of the top layer (B) using three different inoculation densities, i.e. LD:
4105, ND: 4106 and HD: 4107 Geobacter 16S rRNA gene copies per mL. Before
inoculation of the top layer, the linearly decreasing abiotic steady-state TCE
concentration profile (dashed line) was established. Different inoculation densities did
not result in significantly different TCE and cis-DCE concentration profiles.

34

Figure 4: The number of Geobacter and bacterial 16S rRNA gene copies per mL pore
water and RFLP profiles in relation to the distance from the top layer for diffusion-cells
sampled 19 days after inoculation of the sand layer (A) or of the top layer (B). Before
inoculation of the top layer, the linearly decreasing abiotic steady-state TCE
concentration profile was established. The initial Geobacter copy numbers are indicated
by the dotted lines. The RFLP are given in the order of the corresponding 16S rRNA
gene copy number data points of the graph above. Error bars on the 16S rRNA gene
copy numbers indicate the standard deviation on duplicate qPCR measurements of the

35

same extracted DNA sample. Numbered control lanes correspond as follows: 1,
Geobacter lovleyi SZ; 2, Clostridium1 OTU; and 3, Clostridium7 OTU (Philips et al.,
2012).

36

Figure 5: Modeled TCE and cis-DCE concentrations and Geobacter 16S rRNA gene
copy numbers according to the diffusion-motility model versus the experimental results
obtained at day 19 after inoculation of the sand layer (A) or the top layer (B) of
diffusion-cells, using three different inoculation densities, i.e. LD: 4105, ND: 4106 and
HD: 4107 Geobacter 16S rRNA gene copies per mL. Experimental Geobacter 16S
rRNA gene copy numbers were only determined for sand layer inoculation combined

37

with a low inoculation density and for top layer inoculation combined with a high
inoculation density.

38

Graphical abstract

39

SUPPORTING INFORMATION:
Motile Geobacter dechlorinators migrate into a model source zone
of trichloroethene dense non-aqueous phase liquid: experimental
evaluation and modeling

Jo Philips a,1,* (jo.philips@ugent.be)
Alexey Miroshnikov b (alexeym@cns.umass.edu)
Pieter Jan Haest a,2 (pieterjan.haest@agt.be)
Dirk Springael a (dirk.springael@ees.kuleuven.be)
& Erik Smolders a (erik.smolders@ees.kuleuven.be)

a

Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Division of Soil and Water
Management, KU Leuven (University of Leuven),
Kasteelpark Arenberg 20, B-3001 Heverlee, BELGIUM
Tel: +3216321609, Fax: +3216321997

b

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Massachusetts,
Lederle Graduate Research Tower, Amherst MA 01003-9305, USA

*

Corresponding author

1

Current address: Laboratory of Microbial Ecology and Technology, Ghent University,
Coupure Links 653A, B-9000 Ghent, BELGIUM

2

Current address: A.G.T. n.v., Kontichsesteenweg 38, B-2630 Aartselaar, BELGIUM

Supporting Information includes:
9 pages
1 table
5 figures
S1

Table S1: Parameter values used in the diffusion-motility model and intervals used for the
sensitivity analysis.

Value

Interval sensitivity analysisf

6.0·10-11 a

1.0 10-11·- 9.0 10-11

EC50 (mmol·L-1)

2.13 b

1-4

bi (-)

12.66 b

8 - 14

Ks,TCE (mmol·L-1)

4.19·10-3 c

1.4·10-3 – 1.3 10-2

YGEO (cell·mmol-1)

9.4·109 b

3 109 – 3·1010

kd (day-1)

0.031 b

0.01 – 0.09

cGEO,max (cell·mL-1)

5·107 e

1.5 107- 1.5·108

DTCE,0 (cm2·day-1)

0.83 d

-

DGEO,0 (cm2·day-1)

0.24 e

0.06 – 0.72

CTCE,sat (mmol·L-1)

8.4

-

0.38 d

-

Parameter
kcell,max (mmol·cell-1·day-1)

θ (-)

a

Parameter value adjusted to fit the experimental results.

b

Parameter value experimentally determined or optimized from a previous batch experiment
(Philips et al., 2013).

c

Parameter value optimized previously (Haest et al., 2010).

d

Parameter value experimentally determined previously (Philips et al., 2011).

e

Parameter value experimentally determined in this study.

f

For most parameters, the intervals were chosen as a factor 3 around the parameter value,
while for EC50 and bi an acceptable interval around the parameter was chosen.

S2

DNAPL
layer
-3.5

D geo 
1000  D geo,0

J left  J right

B

C

D

5.5

0

A

D0 

top
layer

sand layer

c w,left
z

     D0 

cTCE ,sat

cTCE ,sat

8.5

DTCE    DTCE ,0

DTCE  DTCE,0

DDCE    DDCE,0

DDCE  DDCE,0

Dgeo    Dgeo,0

Dgeo  Dgeo,0

c w,right
z

J left  J right
    D0 

c w,left
z

 D0 

z

c w,right
z

c geo,inoculum

c geo,inoculum

cTCE,sat
All concentrations
set to zero every
3.5 days

no flux boundary
for cgeo

no flux boundary

S3

Figure S1: Conditions used to solve the diffusion-motility model.
A: Diffusion and random motility coefficients (D) in the central sand layer were adjusted
from the coefficients in water (D0) using the tortuosity ξ. The mixing in the DNAPL layer was
modeled by setting the random motility coefficient 1000 times higher than that in water.
Equal diffusion and motility fluxes (J) were assumed on the boundaries between different
layers, with cw the concentration or cell density in the water or pore water and θ the porosity.
B: Initial conditions for sand layer inoculation. The Geobacter cell density in the pore water
of the central layer was set to one of the different inoculation levels applied (cgeo,inoculum). Cell
densities in the DNAPL and top layer were set zero. The TCE concentration in the DNAPL
layer was set to the saturated TCE concentration (cTCE,sat). The TCE concentrations throughout
the sand and top layer were set zero. All DCE concentrations were set zero.
C: Initial conditions for top layer inoculation. The Geobacter cell density in the top layer was
set to one of the different inoculation levels applied (cgeo,inoculum). Zero cell densities were set
throughout the sand and DNAPL layer. The TCE concentration in the DNAPL layer was set
to the saturated TCE concentration (cTCE,sat). The TCE concentration in the sand layer was set
to the linearly decreasing steady-state abiotic TCE concentration profile (Philips et al., 2011).
A zero TCE concentration was set for the top layer. All DCE concentrations were set zero.
D: Boundary conditions for all diffusion-cells. At all times, the TCE and DCE concentration
in the DNAPL layer were set to the saturated TCE concentration (cTCE,sat) and zero,
respectively. The model incorporated motility of Geobacter through the DNAPL layer, the
bottom of the diffusion-cell was set as a zero flux boundary for the Geobacter cell densities.
The model incorporated diffusion of TCE and DCE and motility of Geobacter through the top
layer, the top of the diffusion-cell was set as a zero flux boundary. Every 3.5 days, all
concentrations and cell densities in the top layer were reset to zero to model the top layer
refreshment.
Red lines: TCE concentrations, blue lines: DCE concentrations, green lines: Geobacter cell
densities.

S4

Figure S2: The motility experiment inoculated an aqueous layer on top of a sterile sand layer.
(A) Geobacter 16S rRNA gene copies were measured after 4 and 7 days and were used to fit
Equation 1 in order to determine an effective random motility coefficient for Geobacter in the
sand. (B) A coefficient of determination (R2) of 0.79 was obtained between log transformed
observed and predicted cell densities.

S5

Figure S3: Outcome of the diffusion-motility model assuming immotile Geobacter cells
versus the experimental TCE and cis-DCE concentrations and Geobacter 16S rRNA gene
copy numbers 19 days after inoculation of the top layer, using three different inoculation
densities, i.e. LD: 4105, ND: 4106 and HD: 4107 Geobacter 16S rRNA gene copies per mL.
Immotile colloids of the size of a bacterium have a Brownian diffusion coefficient which is
three orders of magnitude lower than the random motility coefficient for Geobacter reported
in this study (Ford and Harvey, 2007). As such, the case of immotile Geobacter cells was
modeled by setting the value for DGEO,0 103 times lower than given in Table S1.

S6

Figure S4: Effect of a 4 times change in parameter value of DGEO,0 (A) and YGEO (B) on the
modeled TCE concentrations and Geobacter cell densities 19 days after inoculation of the top
layer with 4107 Geobacter 16S rRNA gene copies per mL.

S7

Figure S5: Outcome of the diffusion-motility model using the parameters as in Table S1
(black line) and of the model assuming immotile Geobacter cells (red line) versus
experimental Geobacter 16S rRNA gene copy numbers 19 days after inoculation of the sand
layer with an inoculation density of 4105 Geobacter 16S rRNA gene copies per mL
(indicated by dotted line). The case of immotile Geobacter cells was modeled by setting the
value for DGEO,0 103 times lower than given in Table S1.

S8

REFERENCES
Ford, R.M., Harvey, R.W., 2007. Role of chemotaxis in the transport of bacteria through
saturated porous media. Advances in Water Resources 30, 1608-1617.
Haest, P.J., Springael, D., Smolders, E., 2010. Dechlorination kinetics of TCE at toxic TCE
concentrations: Assessment of different models (vol 44, pg 1, 2010). Water Research 44,
2995-2995.
Philips, J., Haest, P.J., Springael, D., Smolders, E., 2013. Inhibition of Geobacter
dechlorinators at elevated trichloroethene concentrations is explained by a reduced activity
rather than by an enhanced cell decay. Environmental Science & Technology 47, 15101517.
Philips, J., Springael, D., Smolders, E., 2011. A three-layer diffusion-cell to examine bioenhanced dissolution of chloroethene dense non-aqueous phase liquid. Chemosphere 83,
991-996.

S9

