Nucleic Acids Research 43, D485-D493, 2015

ComPPI: a cellular compartment-specific database for
protein–protein interaction network analysis
Daniel V. Veres1,† , Dávid M. Gyurkó1,† , Benedek Thaler1,2 , Kristóf Z. Szalay1 ,
Dávid Fazekas3 , Tamás Korcsmáros3,4,5 and Peter Csermely1,*
1Department

of Medical Chemistry, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Faculty of Electrical Engineering
and Informatics, Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Budapest, Hungary, 3Department of Genetics,
Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary, 4 TGAC, The Genome Analysis Centre, Norwich, UK and 5 Gut Health
and Food Safety Programme, Institute of Food Research, Norwich, UK
ABSTRACT

INTRODUCTION

Here we present ComPPI, a cellular compartmentspecific database of proteins and their interactions
enabling an extensive, compartmentalized protein–
protein interaction network analysis (URL: http://
ComPPI.LinkGroup.hu). ComPPI enables the user
to filter biologically unlikely interactions, where the
two interacting proteins have no common subcellular localizations and to predict novel properties,
such as compartment-specific biological functions.
ComPPI is an integrated database covering four
species (S. cerevisiae, C. elegans, D. melanogaster
and H. sapiens). The compilation of nine protein–
protein interaction and eight subcellular localization
data sets had four curation steps including a manually built, comprehensive hierarchical structure of
>1600 subcellular localizations. ComPPI provides
confidence scores for protein subcellular localizations and protein–protein interactions. ComPPI has
user-friendly search options for individual proteins
giving their subcellular localization, their interactions and the likelihood of their interactions considering the subcellular localization of their interacting
partners. Download options of search results, wholeproteomes, organelle-specific interactomes and subcellular localization data are available on its website.
Due to its novel features, ComPPI is useful for the
analysis of experimental results in biochemistry and
molecular biology, as well as for proteome-wide studies in bioinformatics and network science helping
cellular biology, medicine and drug design.

Biological processes are separated in the cellular and subcellular space, which helps their precise regulation. Compartmentalization of signalling pathways is a key regulator
of several main biochemical processes, such as the nuclear
translocation-mediated activation of transcription factors
(1). Several proteins are located in more than one subcellular localizations. As an example, IGFBP-2 is a predominantly extracellular protein with a key role in insulin growth
factor signalling (2), while its translocation into the nucleus
results in vascular endothelial growth factor-mediated angiogenesis (3). Another important example is the HIF-1
Alpha with translocation from the cytosol to the nucleus,
where it acts as a transcription factor involved in the maintenance of cellular oxygen homeostasis (4) (Supplementary
Figure S1). Their shuttling between these localizations is
a key regulatory mechanism, which implicates the importance of improving the systems level analysis of compartmentalized biological processes.
Protein–protein interaction data are one of the most valuable sources for proteome-wide analysis (5), especially to
understand human diseases on the systems-level (6) and
to help network-related drug design (7). However, protein–
protein interaction databases often contain data with low
overlap (8), and are designed using different protocols (9),
therefore, their integration is needed to improve our comprehensive knowledge (10). Low-throughput data sets often use several different protein naming conventions causing difficulties in data analysis and integration. Manual curation of data yields a large improvement of data quality
(11).
Interaction data often contain interactions, where the
two interacting proteins have no common subcellular localizations (12). These interactions could be biophysically
possible, but biologically unlikely (13). Thus, these interactions cause data bias that leads to deteriorated reliability
in interactome-based studies (14), especially those involv-

*

To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +361 459 1500; Fax: +361 266 3802; Email: csermely.peter@med.semmelweis-univ.hu

†

The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors.

1

ing subcellular localization-specific cellular processes (15).
Unfortunately, subcellular localization data are incomplete.
Despite the need of experimentally verified subcellular localizations for reliable compartmentalization-based interactome filtering (16), only computationally predicted subcellular localization information is available for a large part
of the proteome. Moreover, subcellular localization data are
redundant, often poorly structured and miss to highlight
the reliability of data (17).
Existing analysis tools involving subcellular localizations
offer the download of filtered interactomes for a subset of
proteins (like MatrixDB (18)). Several databases use only
Gene Ontology (GO (19)) cellular component terms as the
source of the subcellular localization data (such as HitPredict (20) or Cytoscape BiNGO plugin (21)), while GO still
contains data inconsistency despite its highly structured annotations (22). Cytoscape Cerebral plugin (23) generates a
view of the interactome separated into layers according to
their subcellular localization. In different data sets the subcellular localization structure is not uniform, which makes
their comparisons often difficult.
ComPPI-based interactomes introduced here provide a
broader coverage (Supplementary Tables S1 and S2), using several curation steps in data integration. ComPPI offers highly structured subcellular localization data supplemented with Localization and Interaction confidence
Scores, all presented with user-friendly options. As a key
feature ComPPI allows the construction of high-confidence
data sets, where potentially biologically unlikely interactions in which the interacting partners are not localized in
the same cellular compartment, have been deleted. As our
examples will show, this gives novel options of interactome
analysis and also suggests potentially new subcellular localizations and localization-based functions.
DESCRIPTION OF THE DATABASE
Overview of ComPPI
Our goal by constructing ComPPI was to provide a reliable subcellular compartment-based protein–protein interaction database for the analysis of biological processes on
the subcellular level. A key feature of ComPPI is that it allows the filtering of localization-based biologically unlikely
interactions resulting in localization-wise more reliable interaction data. During the integration of 17 databases to
build up ComPPI, we used the following four curation steps
to improve data quality (Figure 1). (i) Source databases
were selected by comparing them to a large number of
other potential databases and their data content was manually reviewed. (ii) Subcellular localization data were consistently structured to a hierarchical subcellular localization
tree (Supplementary Figure S2) containing more than 1600
individual sublocalizations. (iii) We developed an algorithm
to map different protein naming conventions to UniProt accession numbers (24,25). (iv) Finally, a manual follow-up by
six independent experts was performed in order to revise the
data content searching for data inconsistence and false entries, and to test the functions of the web interface (Supplementary Table S3).
ComPPI database includes comprehensive and integrated data of four species (Saccharomyces cerevisiae,

2

Figure 1. Flowchart of ComPPI construction highlighting the four curation steps. Constructing the ComPPI database we first checked the data
content of 24 possible input databases for false entries, data inconsistence
and compatible data structure in order to minimize the bias in ComPPI
coming from the input sources (1). As a consequence we selected nine
protein–protein interaction (BioGRID (29), CCSB (30), DiP (31), DroID
(26), HPRD (27), IntAct (32), MatrixDB (18), MINT (33) and MIPS (28))
and eight subcellular localization databases (eSLDB (37), GO (19), Human Proteinpedia (34), LOCATE (38), MatrixDB (18), OrganelleDB (39),
PA-GOSUB (36) and The Human Protein Atlas (35)) in order to integrate them into the ComPPI data set. The subcellular localization structure was manually annotated creating a hierarchic, non-redundant subcellular localization tree using >1600 GO cellular component terms (19) for
the standardization of the different data resolution and naming conventions (2). All input databases were connected to the ComPPI core database
with newly built interfaces in order to improve data consistency, to allow easy extensibility with new databases and to incorporate automatic
database updates. As part of the curation steps the filtering efficiency of
our newly built interfaces were tested on 200 random proteins for every input databases, and the interfaces were accepted only when all the requested
false-entries and data content errors were filtered, in order to establish
a more reliable content (Supplementary Table S3). During data integration, different protein naming conventions were mapped to the most reliable protein name. In this process we used publicly available mapping tables (UniProt (24) and HPRD (27)). For 30% of protein names we applied
manually built mapping tables with the help of online ID cross-reference
services (PICR (25) and Synergizer (http://llama.mshri.on.ca/synergizer/
translate/)) (3). After data integration Localization and Interaction Scores
were calculated (for detailed description see Figure 2). As an illustration we
show the example of Figure 2 with two interacting proteins (nodes A and B
corresponding to HSP 90-alpha A2 and Survivin, respectively) with shared
cytosolic and nuclear localizations (light blue and orange). Node B has an
additional membrane (yellow) subcellular localization and an extracellular
localization (green). Numbers in the circles of nodes A and B refer to their
Localization Scores. The Interaction Score of nodes A and B is 0.99 (see
Figure 2 for details). The integrated ComPPI data set was manually revised
by six independent experts (4). During the revision two of the six experts
tested our database on 200 random proteins each to ensure high-quality
control requirements, and searched for exact matches between the entries
in the input sources and the ComPPI data set. All the experts searched for
false entries, data inconsistency, protein name mapping errors in the downloadable data and tested the operation of the online services as well. After
the revision we updated our source databases, their interfaces, the subcellular localization tree and the algorithm generating the downloadable data,
in order to acquire all the changes proposed during the tests. As the final
result, the webpage http://ComPPI.LinkGroup.hu is available for search
and download options in order to extract the biological information in a
user-friendly way.

Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster and Homo
sapiens) cataloguing 125 757 proteins, their 791 059 interactions and 195 815 major subcellular localizations in its current, 1.1 version. The proteome-wide data set contains localizations for five main subcellular organelles (nucleus, mitochondrion, cytosol, secretory-pathway, membrane) and
the extracellular compartment. Importantly, 60% of the
ComPPI entries have high resolution cellular localization
data assigning them to one or several of >1600 GO cellular

component terms (19) associating these proteins with distinct subcellular compartments.
Design and implementation
Both protein–protein interaction and subcellular localization data are incorporated to ComPPI automatically using
their own interface to bridge the difference in data structure
(Supplementary Table S3). New interfaces can be added
without limitations. The incoming data are merged to form
a consistent internal data pool using a comprehensive protein name mapping algorithm, in order to deal with the redundancy in the input data sets (http://comppi.linkgroup.
hu/help/naming conventions). The website and the downloadable contents are generated from this integrated internal data pool. All curated parts are stored in separate, yet
interconnected containers to maintain persistency between
ComPPI releases.
The website follows the hierarchical model-viewcontroller design pattern to ensure the separation of the
data layer from the business logic and the user interface.
Each functional unit is implemented as a module to further
support easy maintenance and extensibility. Protein search
algorithms have been extensively optimized, and the served
content is cached to ensure quick response times even on
low-end infrastructure. Due to these features ComPPI can
be easily run on a general laptop or desktop computer.
The downloadable data sets are pre-generated and validated automatically and manually in every release to fulfill our high quality control requirements (Figure 1). The
Python script that generates these data sets also contains
basic tools for data retrieval and manipulation in a networkoriented manner, which enables the user to perform bioinformatics analysis on the interactome using the open source
code and also gives space for further improvement.
End-user documentation is available at the website as tutorials, detailed descriptions and location-specific tooltips.
All components of ComPPI and the underlying software
stack are open source. The source code is available in a
revision controlled repository at http://bificomp2.sote.hu:
22422/comppi/summary.
Third-party tools and technologies were selected with
open accessibility and scientific reproducibility in mind including the Ubuntu Linux 14.04 operating system (http:
//ubuntu.com/), the nginx HTTP server (http://nginx.org/),
the MySQL 5 Community Edition database server (http:
//www.mysql.com/), the git version control system (http:
//git-scm.com/), the PHP 5 scripting language (https://php.
net/), the Symfony 2 PHP framework (http://symfony.com/),
the jQuery JavaScript framework (http://jquery.com/), the
D3.js JavaScript library for network visualization (http:
//d3js.org/) and the Python3 scripting language (https://
python.org/).
Database content and access
Input databases. The low overlap of protein–protein interaction and subcellular localization databases (11) prompted
us to integrate several source databases in order to improve data coverage and quality (Supplementary Figure S3
and Supplementary Table S2). In this process we used pub-

licly downloadable license-free data sources, preferably containing proteome-wide data sets. Protein–protein interaction data were selected to contain only physical interactions
with experimental evidence coming from high-throughput,
as well as low-throughput techniques. We incorporated the
widely used species-specific (DroID (26), HPRD (27), MatrixDB (18) and MIPS (28)) and general (BioGRID (29),
CCSB (30), DiP (31), IntAct (32) and MINT (33)) protein–
protein interaction databases having high data quality, update frequency and freely downloadable latest releases for
academic research.
Subcellular localization data can be obtained from experimental evidence or using predictions. Several source
databases contained only experimentally verified subcellular localization entries (such as Human Proteinpedia (34)
and the Human Protein Atlas (HPA) (35)). Other source
data had only computationally predicted information (such
as PA-GOSUB (36)). Several data sources had integrated
data structure (such as eSLDB (37), GO (19), LOCATE
(38), MatrixDB (18), OrganelleDB (39)) containing data of
both experimental and predicted origin. During the selection of the proteome-wide predicted subcellular localization databases with downloadable content we focused on
the use of prediction algorithms with combined methods
using robust machine learning tools validated on highly reliable training sets.
ComPPI data set. The availability of the data sources differs between various species. As an example ComPPI contains eight protein–protein interaction and eight subcellular
localization databases for human proteins (Supplementary
Figure S3). Database integration was based on protein ID
mapping to the most reliable naming convention available,
primarily to UniProt Swiss-Prot accession numbers (11).
The 4 curation steps (Figure 1) allow the users to access
interaction and localization data at a single resource having a higher coverage and reliability than the incorporated
databases.
The ComPPI database contains three types of predefined
data sets: (i) the compartmentalized interactome catalogues
of those protein–protein interactions, where the interacting
proteins have at least one common subcellular localization,
(ii) the integrated protein–protein interaction data set which
can be customized by the four species included and (iii) the
subcellular localization data set, which is one of the biggest
existing subcellular localization resource with a comprehensive structure for interactome analysis. All downloadable
ComPPI resources are license free and publicly available for
academic and industrial research.
Search and download features
Search features. The internally hyper-linked web application of ComPPI enables even those users, who have no
bioinformatics expertise, to search for the interactions of individual proteins. Search options (http://comppi.linkgroup.
hu/protein search) are available for protein names with autocomplete function giving their subcellular localization,
their interactions and the likelihood of their interactions
considering the subcellular localization of the interacting
partners. Using the Advanced Settings of the Search page

3

the user is able to filter the list of the possible query proteins for species, subcellular localizations and/or localization probability. These settings can be set for the interactors
of the query protein too and are adjustable with the Custom
Settings on the Results page, which allows the filtering of the
interactors for subcellular localizations, localization probability and interaction score. The properties of the query
protein and its interactors are available for download. After filtration only those interactions are exported that fulfill the custom filtering requirements set by the user. Network visualization of the whole or filtered first-neighbour
interactome of the query protein is also available, where
the width of the edges corresponds to the Interaction Score
of the given interaction. These options together provide a
user-friendly web interface for data mining for both nonexperts and computational biologists. A Direct Search option is also available via URL, which gives the opportunity
to interconnect the ComPPI database with other resources,
or to generate multiple searches for data mining.
Download options. All ComPPI data are available for
download at the website. Predefined data sets can be customized by the user to contain only data for a requested
species or localization: (i) Compartmentalized interactomes
have interactions, where the two interacting protein-nodes
have at least one common subcellular localization. These interactomes can be filtered to species besides subcellular localizations. (ii) Integrated protein–protein interaction data
sets contain all the interactions, and can be customized to
the four species included. (iii) Integrated subcellular localization data sets contain proteins together with their localization data. The user can select species and localizations
to customize these data sets. (iv) The current and previous releases of the full database can also be downloaded. A
detailed help and a tutorial for the Search and Download
functions are both available.
Output. ComPPI output data provide lists of interactions,
interaction scores of the interacting proteins and localizations with localization scores. Moreover, the user receives
the PubMed IDs and references of the source databases
for both the interactions and subcellular localizations, and
the additional information (if available) of the data type.
The user-defined interactomes as results of the Basic or Advanced Search options and the predefined data sets on the
Downloads page are available for download in plain text
format to ensure convenient data handling. The complete
current and previous releases of the database are downloadable in SQL format to provide full access to all the data in
ComPPI.
Localization and interaction scores
Subcellular localization structure. Subcellular localization
data are coming from different source databases, containing localizations having experimental evidence (in the followings: experimental), coming from unknown sources (unknown) or predictions (predicted; Figure 2). Experimental
data usually have high resolution, where the exact localization of the protein is often defined, such as the nuclear pore
complex for Nup107 (40). Predicted localizations have usually low resolution. As an example nuclear localization can

4

be predicted from the existence of a nuclear localization signal in the amino acid sequence (41) without any experimental evidence.
Because of the incongruity in the resolution of the localization data and the different naming conventions between the source databases, we standardized the subcellular localization data using GO cellular component terms
(19). In order to solve the problem of the unequivocally
mapped GO terms (Figure 3) we created a manually built,
non-redundant, hierarchical localization tree (Supplementary Figure S2). With the help of this we clustered the >1600
GO cellular component terms to six major compartments
(cytosol, nucleus, mitochondrion, secretory-pathway, membrane, extracellular) (Supplementary Table S4). This new
structure allows ComPPI to store all localization entries
from different sources and to assign the proteins efficiently
to six major compartments (Figure 3 and Supplementary
Figure S4).
Localization and interaction scores. The ComPPI Localization Score is a novel measure to score the probability of a localization for a given protein. The Localization Score depends on the subcellular localization evidence
type (experimental, unknown, predicted) and the number
of sources (Figure 2). The Interaction Score characterizes
the probability of the subcellular localization of a protein–
protein interaction, and is based on the consensus of the
compartment-specific Localization Scores of the interacting
proteins. With the help of the scoring algorithm ComPPI
provides a novel localization probability describing how
likely it is that the protein exists in the given subcellular compartment, and gives the opportunity to build highconfidence interactomes based on the distribution of the interaction scores (Supplementary Figure S5).
Localization Scores are calculated using probabilistic disjunction (marked with operator V) among the different localization evidence types and the number of ComPPI localization data entries of the respective evidence type (Equation (1), see top panel of Figure 2 for details)
ϕLocX = Vres pLocX

(1)

where ϕLocX and pLocX are the Localization Score and the
localization evidence type (experimental, unknown or predicted) for protein X and localization Loc, respectively,
while res is the number of available ComPPI localization
data entries for protein X.
As the first step of Interaction Score calculation,
compartment-specific Interaction Scores are obtained by
multiplying the Localization Scores of the two interactors
for each of the six major compartments. Finally, the Interaction Score is calculated as the probabilistic disjunction
(marked with operator V) of the Compartment-specific Interaction Scores of all major localizations available for the
interacting pair from the maximal number of six major localizations (Equation (2), see bottom panel of Figure 2 for
details)
ϕInt = V6i =1ϕLocA ∗ ϕLocB

(2)

where ϕInt is the Interaction Score, while ϕLocA and ϕLocB
are the Compartment-specific Localization Scores of interacting proteins A and B, respectively.

Figure 2. Calculation of the subcellular localization-based ComPPI scores. We illustrate the Localization Score calculation steps on the examples of Heat
Shock Protein (HSP) 90-apha A2 and Survivin. HSP 90-alpha A2 has two major subcellular localizations, while Survivin has four (ϕnucleusA, ϕcytoA and
ϕextracellularB, ϕmembraneB, ϕnucleusB, ϕcytoB, respectively). Localizations were manually categorized into major localizations before the calculation (see the
text in section ‘Subcellular Localization Structure’ for details). (A) A Localization Score (such as <cytoA) is calculated for every available major subcellular
localization for both HSP 90-alpha A2 and Survivin based on the available localization evidence types and the number of the respective localization data
entries (corresponding to pLocX and Vrec of Equation (1)). The Localization Score calculation uses the optimized localization evidence type weights of
0.8, 0.7 and 0.3 for experimental, predicted or unknown localization evidence types, respectively. (For details of the weight optimization procedure see
section ‘Score Optimization’ of the main text and Supplementary Figure S6.) The Localization Score (i.e. the likelihood for the respective protein to
belong to a major compartment) is represented by the probabilistic disjunction among the different localization evidence types and the number of ComPPI
localization data entries of the respective evidence type (Equation (1)). (B) Calculation of the Interaction Score (ϕInt) is based on the Localization Scores of
the interacting proteins. First, Compartment-specific Interaction Scores (such as ϕcytoInt) are calculated as pair-wise products of the relevant Localization
Scores of the two interacting proteins (HSP 90-alpha A2 and Survivin). The final Interaction Score (ϕInt) is calculated as the probabilistic disjunction of
the Compartment-specific Interaction Scores of all major localizations available for the interacting pair of proteins (in the example four major localizations
for HSP 90-alpha A2 and Survivin) from the maximal number of six major localizations (Equation (2)).

5

All combinations of the experimental, unknown and predicted evidence type weights were set up from 0 to 1 with
0.1 increments. The kernel density of the interactions were
calculated with all these settings (with a bandwidth of 0.01),
which gave us the ratio of interactions belonging to a given
confidence level compared to the distribution of all the interactions. Finally, the 285 possible kernel density solutions
were tested to find the parameter combination that maximizes the number of both the low and high confidence interactions as described above. This resulted in 0.8, 0.7 and 0.3
as the relative evidence type weights for experimental, predicted and unknown data types, respectively (Supplementary Figure S6). Note that this optimization is driven by the
reliability of the subcellular localization data, and was not
tested using gold standard protein–protein interaction data
sets, therefore the Interaction Score reflects the reliability of
the interaction in a subcellular localization-dependent but
not in an interactome-dependent manner.
Application examples

Figure 3. Advantages of ComPPI subcellular localization structure. The
subcellular localization structure of ComPPI is based on a manually curated, non-redundant subcellular localization tree extracted from GO data
(19) containing more than 1600 GO cellular component terms (Supplementary Figure S2). On Figure 3 an example of the redundancy in the GO
cellular component tree structure is shown, where the ‘nuclear pore’ cellular component can be found under several branches in the tree, such as in
the ‘nucleus’ -> ‘nuclear envelope’ -> ‘nuclear pore’ or the ‘membrane’ ->
‘membrane part’ -> ‘intrinsic component of the membrane’ -> ‘integral
component of the membrane’ -> ‘pore complex’ pathways (highlighted in
red). Because of the need of the mapping of high-resolution subcellular localization data into major cellular components (Supplementary Table S4) a
localization tree with a non-redundant structure was built. In our example,
it can be seen that with the help of this structure the ‘nuclear pore’ derives
unequivocally from the ‘nuclear envelope’ term (highlighted in green).

Score optimization. As mentioned before the ComPPI localization evidence type can be experimental, unknown or
predicted. ComPPI characterizes each of these localization evidence types by a parameter called the evidence type
weight to achieve a unified scoring system applicable to the
diverse data sources. To obtain these evidence type weights
we performed their data-driven optimization. Based on the
fact that experimentally validated entries are the most reliable, while localization entries coming from unknown or
predicted origin are less reliable, we set the following order
of evidence type weights: experimental > predicted AND
experimental > unknown as the two requirements of the
optimization process. We chose the HPA database (35) containing only experimentally verified subcellular localizations in order to build a positive control data set, where the
interactors have at least one common localization according to HPA. Our goal was to find a specific ratio of the experimental, unknown and predicted evidence type weights
that maximizes the number of high confidence interactions
in the positive control data set (HPA) and simultaneously
maximizes the number of low confidence interactions in the
ComPPI data set not containing HPA data. These ensure
that the quality of data marked as high confidence will have
a good match to the quality of experimentally verified data.

6

Merging of subcellular localization and interactome
data provides several application opportunities: (i) the
filtration of localization-based biologically unlikely
interactions––where the two interacting proteins have no
common localization and (ii) the prediction of possible new
localizations and localization-based biological functions
(15). Both are important features of ComPPI as illustrated
by an example in this section.
ComPPI-based interaction filtering. First, we made a systematic search for an example, which highlights the importance of the removal of localization-based biologically unlikely interactions looking for key hubs and bridges, where
interaction structure changed the most after the filtering
step. Here we calculated the degree distribution of the whole
human interactome and the high-confidence interactome
(containing 23 265/19 386 proteins and their 385 481/260
829 interactions, respectively) where from the latter biologically unlikely interactions with no common subcellular localizations have already been removed. We also calculated
the distribution of the betweenness centrality in the two
data sets. After these procedures we manually reviewed the
first 20 proteins from the UniProt Swiss-Prot subset (15 258
proteins out of 19 386) with the highest differences in degree
and centrality measures (Supplementary Table S5). EnoylCoA hydratase (crotonase) had the largest absolute change
of degree among the top 20 proteins, thus we selected crotonase as our illustrative example (Figure 4). Crotonase
catalyses the second step in the beta-oxidation pathway of
fatty acid metabolism (42), and is a key member of the crotonase protein superfamily (43). Beta-oxidation takes place
primarily in the mitochondrion (44). Crotonase has only a
mitochondrial ComPPI localization with experimental evidence, which is in agreement with its cellular function.
Crotonase has 71 interacting partners in the integrated
data set, of which only 8 is present in the mitochondrion,
and only 5 have an interaction score equal or higher than
1.8. After the manual review of crotonase neighbours, it
turned out that only one of the 8 mitochondrial interactors
(mitochondrial Hsp70, (45)) has experimental evidence for

Figure 4. Advantages of the ComPPI data set to filter biologically unlikely
interactions and to predict compartment-specific, new properties and functions. The figure shows the interactions of crotonase (enoyl-CoA hydratase,
UniProt ID: P30084), involved in fatty acid catabolism having a mitochondrial localization, and its first neighbours supported with experimental
evidence before and after filtering to mitochondrial localization. Interactions with an Interaction Score below 0.80 are shown with dashed lines. On
one hand, out of the original 71 neighbours of crotonase only 8 remain as
mitochondrial interacting partners with a significantly higher average Interaction Score than the whole first-neighbour network, which highlights
the importance of compartment-specific filtering in the detection of highconfidence interactors in a subcellular localization-dependent manner. On
the other hand, the blue circle of the upper left side of the figure shows
those cytosolic crotonase interacting partners, which are involved in apoptosis, a recently discovered function of crotonase (47–47). Thus, the very
same example also reveals a potential new function of crotonase, which
partially involves its unexpected cytosolic localization, which was recently
verified experimentally (46).

mitochondrial localization. Mitochondrial localization of
the other 7 interactors is not based on strong evidence, while
63 out of 71 interactors have no known mitochondrial localization at all. Figure 4 shows the interactome of crotonase
and its 71 first neighbours containing 428 edges. In the mitochondrial interaction subset only 13 edges remained, while
the high-confidence part contains only 10 interactions (Figure 4). Second neighbours of crotonase contain 82% of the
interactome, and their network contains 14 803 nodes and
319 305 edges. The filtered mitochondrial network of the
second neighbours is much smaller, having only 2107 nodes
and 8381 interactions.

ComPPI-based prediction of new or non-conventional functions. Importantly, 52 out of the 71 interactors, and more
specifically, 7 out of the 8 mitochondrial interacting partners of crotonase have cytosolic localization with a localization probability over 0.95. This indicates that crotonase may have a cytosolic localization as well. Indeed,
crotonase was shown to be overexpressed and localized in
the cytosol in hepatocarcinoma cells, where it contributes
to lymphatic metastatis (46). GO (19) biological process
term enrichment analysis of the mitochondrial crotonase
interacting partners using BiNGO (21) revealed that besides the known function of the crotonase in ‘catabolic process’ the ‘negative regulation of apoptosis’ and related terms
were also significantly enriched (Supplementary Table S6).
In agreement with this, previous studies showed that crotonase is overexpressed in several cancer types (47), and
the knockdown of crotonase decreased cell viability and enhanced cisplatin-induced apoptosis in hepatocellular carcinoma (48). The anti-apoptotic effect of crotonase also exists in breast cancer, where its down-regulation potentiates
PP2-induced apoptosis (49).
These findings may implicate that the high ratio of ‘biologically unlikely’ interactions may also be a result of
a transient and dynamic cytosolic subcellular localization
of crotonase, where the enzyme may be involved in currently not widely crotonase-associated biological processes,
such as the inhibition of apoptosis. Importantly, these
compartment-specific crotonase functions may be applied
as potential therapeutic targets in the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma or breast cancer.
In summary, the crotonase example shows the utility
of ComPPI both (i) to filter low-confidence interactions
concentrating on high-confidence subcellular localizations
and (ii) to predict unknown biological functions in previously unknown or non-conventional subcellular localizations. Another example of ComPPI-based prediction of potential, novel functions besides crotonase, is Monopolar
Spindle 1 protein (MPS1) having a centromere-associated
cytosolic localization (50). We identified a number of relatively undiscovered MPS1 functions related to the ComPPI
analysis of nuclear MPS1 interactome as detailed in Supplementary Figure S7 and Supplementary Table S6.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In summary, ComPPI provides a unique data set for the
analysis of protein–protein interaction networks at the subcellular level. The assembly of the integrated ComPPI
database with manual curation protocols (Figure 1) provides an improvement of both coverage and data quality.
ComPPI subcellular localization data have a novel structure in order to incorporate localizations from different
data sources (Figure 3 and Supplementary Figure S4),
and to reveal compartment-specific biological functions
based on the analysis of the interactomes extended with
high-resolution localization data in a hierarchical structure. With the use of the optimized Localization and Interaction Scores (Figure 2) high-confidence interactomes
could be created for further investigation in the field of
compartment-specific biological processes (15).

7

Comparison of integrated protein–protein interaction
data and the compartmentalized interactome allow the filtering of biologically unlikely interactions, where the interacting partners have no common subcellular localization.
Our examples (Figure 4 and Supplementary Figure S7) illustrate that besides filtering, ComPPI has a strong predictive power to find new localizations of the proteins based
on the underlying network or to suggest new compartmentspecific biological functions. The comprehensive data set for
four species gives the opportunity to analyse evolutionary
aspects of the compartmentalization, such as the prediction
of subcellular localization ortologes (‘localogs’).
The web interface of ComPPI (http://ComPPI.
LinkGroup.hu) provides user-friendly search and download options. Besides the basic Search feature to explore
and download the interactions of individual proteins,
Advanced Settings could be applied to both query proteins
and their interactors. Interactome-wide studies could be
applied using the downloadable compartment-specific
interactomes or the integrated protein–protein interaction
data set, while the integrated subcellular localization data
set is also available on the webpage for further analyses.
ComPPI is available at http://ComPPI.LinkGroup.hu,
and has an open source code, which allows further improvement and the construction of ‘ComPPI-based databases’.
ComPPI is a community-annotated resource, which will
be continuously enriched by a user community of experts
helped by a public issue-tracking system and by feedbacks
from the core-team, and will be updated and upgraded annually for minimum 5 years.
We plan to resolve current ComPPI limitations, such as
the relatively low amount (29% of total) of experimental
subcellular localization entries with the incorporation of
newly available experimental data. Future plans include the
development of improved gold standard-based Localization and network neighbourhood-based Interaction Scores,
as well as further advanced download and search options,
such as advanced localization-based network visualization
and extended number of output formats.
In summary, the ComPPI-based interactomes introduced
here provide a broader coverage, offer highly structured
subcellular localization data, as well as offer Localization
and Interaction confidence Scores, all in a user-friendly
manner. Importantly, ComPPI enables the user to filter biologically unlikely interactions, where the two interacting
proteins have no common subcellular localizations, and to
predict novel subcellular localization as well as localizationbased properties, such as compartment-specific biological
functions.
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Authors acknowledge the members of the LINK-Group
(http://LinkGroup.hu) and Cellular Network Biology
Group (http://NetBiol.elte.hu) for their advice, as well as
Judit Gyurkó for the design of the ComPPI website.

8

FUNDING
Hungarian Science Foundation [OTKA-K83314]; Fellowship in computational biology at The Genome Analysis
Centre (Norwich, UK) in partnership with the Institute of
Food Research (University of Norwich, UK); Biotechnological and Biosciences Research Council, UK [to T.K.];
János Bolyai Scholarship of the Hungarian Academy of
Sciences [to T.K.]. Funding for open access charge: Hungarian Science Foundation [OTKA-K83314].
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.

REFERENCES
1. Hao,N. and O’Shea,E.K. (2012) Signal-dependent dynamics of
transcription factor translocation controls gene expression. Nat.
Struct. Mol. Biol., 19, 31–39.
2. Firth,S.M. and Baxter,R.C. (2002) Cellular actions of the insulin-like
growth factor binding proteins. Endocr. Rev., 23, 824–854.
3. Azar,W.J., Zivkovic,S., Werther,G.A. and Russo,V.C. (2014) IGFBP-2
nuclear translocation is mediated by a functional NLS sequence and
is essential for its pro-tumorigenic actions in cancer cells. Oncogene,
33, 578–588.
4. Semenza,G.L. (2009) Regulation of oxygen homeostasis by
hypoxia-inducible factor 1. Physiology (Bethesda), 24, 97–106.
5. Koh,G.C.K.W., Porras,P., Aranda,B., Hermjakob,H. and
Orchard,S.E. (2012) Analyzing protein-protein interaction networks.
J. Proteome Res., 11, 2014–2031.
6. Vidal,M., Cusick,M.E. and Barabási,A.-L. (2011) Interactome
networks and human disease. Cell, 144, 986–998.
7. Bulusu,K.C., Tym,J.E., Coker,E.A., Schierz,A.C. and Al-Lazikani,B.
(2014) canSAR: updated cancer research and drug discovery
knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Res., 42, D1040–D1047.
8. De Las Rivas,J. and Fontanillo,C. (2010) Protein–protein interactions
essentials: key concepts to building and analyzing interactome
networks. PLoS Comput. Biol., 6, e1000807.
9. von Mering,C., Krause,R., Snel,B., Cornell,M., Oliver,S.G., Fields,S.
and Bork,P. (2002) Comparative assessment of large-scale data sets of
protein-protein interactions. Nature, 417, 399–403.
10. Kamburov,A., Stelzl,U., Lehrach,H. and Herwig,R. (2013) The
ConsensusPathDB interaction database: 2013 update. Nucleic Acids
Res., 41, D793–D800.
11. UniProt Consortium. (2014) Activities at the Universal Protein
Resource (UniProt). Nucleic Acids Res., 42, D191–D198.
12. Wiwatwattana,N. and Kumar,A. (2005) Organelle DB: a cross-species
database of protein localization and function. Nucleic Acids Res., 33,
D598–D604.
13. Levy,E.D., Landry,C.R. and Michnick,S.W. (2009) How perfect can
protein interactomes be? Sci. Signal., 2, pe11.
14. Sprinzak,E., Sattath,S. and Margalit,H. (2003) How reliable are
experimental protein–protein interaction data? J. Mol. Biol., 327,
919–923.
15. Lee,K., Sung,M.-K., Kim,J., Kim,K., Byun,J., Paik,H., Kim,B.,
Huh,W.-K. and Ideker,T. (2014) Proteome-wide remodeling of
protein location and function by stress. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.,
111, E3157–E3166.
16. Nastou,K.C., Tsaousis,G.N., Kremizas,K.E., Litou,Z.I. and
Hamodrakas,S.J. (2014) The human plasma membrane peripherome:
visualization and analysis of interactions. Biomed. Res.
Int., 2014, 397145.
17. Sprenger,J., Fink,J.L. and Teasdale,R.D. (2006) Evaluation and
comparison of mammalian subcellular localization prediction
methods. BMC Bioinformat., 7, Suppl. 5:S3.
18. Chautard,E., Ballut,L., Thierry-Mieg,N. and Ricard-Blum,S. (2009)
MatrixDB, a database focused on extracellular protein-protein and
protein-carbohydrate interactions. Bioinformatics, 25, 690–691.
19. Ashburner,M., Ball,C.A., Blake,J.A., Botstein,D., Butler,H.,
Cherry,J.M., Davis,A.P., Dolinski,K., Dwight,S.S., Eppig,J.T. et al.
(2000) Gene Ontology: tool for the unification of biology. Nat.
Genet., 25, 25–29.

20. Patil,A., Nakai,K. and Nakamura,H. (2011) HitPredict: a database
of quality assessed protein-protein interactions in nine species.
Nucleic Acids Res., 39, D744–D749.
21. Maere,S., Heymans,K. and Kuiper,M. (2005) BiNGO: a Cytoscape
plugin to assess overrepresentation of gene ontology categories in
biological networks. Bioinformatics, 21, 3448–3449.
22. Faria,D., Schlicker,A., Pesquita,C., Bastos,H., Ferreira,A.E.N.,
Albrecht,M. and Falcão,A.O. (2012) Mining GO annotations for
improving annotation consistency. PLoS ONE, 7, e40519.
23. Barsky,A., Gardy,J.L., Hancock,R.E.W. and Munzner,T. (2007)
Cerebral: a Cytoscape plugin for layout of and interaction with
biological networks using subcellular localization annotation.
Bioinformatics, 23, 1040–1042.
24. Huang,H., McGarvey,P.B., Suzek,B.E., Mazumder,R., Zhang,J.,
Chen,Y. and Wu,C.H. (2011) A comprehensive protein-centric ID
mapping service for molecular data integration. Bioinformatics, 27,
1190–1191.
25. Wein,S.P., Cô té,R.G., Dumousseau,M., Reisinger,F., Hermjakob,H.
and Vizcaı́no,J.A. (2012) Improvements in the Protein Identifier
Cross-Reference service. Nucleic Acids Res., 40, W276–W280.
26. Murali,T., Pacifico,S., Yu,J., Guest,S., Roberts,G.G. and Finley,R.L.
(2011) DroID 2011: a comprehensive, integrated resource for protein,
transcription factor, RNA and gene interactions for Drosophila.
Nucleic Acids Res., 39, D736–D743.
27. Keshava Prasad,T.S., Goel,R., Kandasamy,K., Keerthikumar,S.,
Kumar,S., Mathivanan,S., Telikicherla,D., Raju,R., Shafreen,B.,
Venugopal,A. et al. , (2009) Human Protein Reference Database 2009 update. Nucleic Acids Res., 37, D767–D772.
28. Pagel,P., Kovac,S., Oesterheld,M., Brauner,B.,
Dunger-Kaltenbach,I., Frishman,G., Montrone,C., Mark,P.,
Stümpflen,V., Mewes,H.-W. et al. (2005) The MIPS mammalian
protein-protein interaction database. Bioinformatics, 21, 832–834.
29. Chatr-Aryamontri,A., Breitkreutz,B.-J., Heinicke,S., Boucher,L.,
Winter,A., Stark,C., Nixon,J., Ramage,L., Kolas,N., O’Donnell,L.
et al. (2013) The BioGRID interaction database: 2013 update. Nucleic
Acids Res., 41, D816–D823.
30. Yu,H., Tardivo,L., Tam,S., Weiner,E., Gebreab,F., Fan,C.,
Svrzikapa,N., Hirozane-Kishikawa,T., Rietman,E., Yang,X. et al.
(2011) Next-generation sequencing to generate interactome datasets.
Nat. Methods, 8, 478–480.
31. Salwinski,L., Miller,C.S., Smith,A.J., Pettit,F.K., Bowie,J.U. and
Eisenberg,D. (2004) The Database of Interacting Proteins: 2004
update. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, D449–D451.
32. Orchard,S., Ammari,M., Aranda,B., Breuza,L., Briganti,L.,
Broackes-Carter,F., Campbell,N.H., Chavali,G., Chen,C.,
del-Toro,N. et al. (2014) The MIntAct project–IntAct as a common
curation platform for 11 molecular interaction databases. Nucleic
Acids Res., 42, D358–D363.
33. Licata,L., Briganti,L., Peluso,D., Perfetto,L., Iannuccelli,M.,
Galeota,E., Sacco,F., Palma,A., Nardozza,A.P., Santonico,E. et al.
(2012) MINT, the molecular interaction database: 2012 update.
Nucleic Acids Res., 40, D857–D861.
34. Kandasamy,K., Keerthikumar,S., Goel,R., Mathivanan,S.,
Patankar,N., Shafreen,B., Renuse,S., Pawar,H., Ramachandra,Y.L.,
Acharya,P.K. et al. (2009) Human Proteinpedia: a unified discovery
resource for proteomics research. Nucleic Acids Res., 37, D773–D781.

35. Uhlen,M., Oksvold,P., Fagerberg,L., Lundberg,E., Jonasson,K.,
Forsberg,M., Zwahlen,M., Kampf,C., Wester,K., Hober,S. et al.
(2010) Towards a knowledge-based Human Protein Atlas. Nat.
Biotechnol., 28, 1248–1250.
36. Lu,P., Szafron,D., Greiner,R., Wishart,D.S., Fyshe,A., Pearcy,B.,
Poulin,B., Eisner,R., Ngo,D. and Lamb,N. (2005) PA-GOSUB: a
searchable database of model organism protein sequences with their
predicted Gene Ontology molecular function and subcellular
localization. Nucleic Acids Res., 33, D147–D153.
37. Pierleoni,A., Martelli,P.L., Fariselli,P. and Casadio,R. (2007) eSLDB:
eukaryotic subcellular localization database. Nucleic Acids Res., 35,
D208–D212.
38. Sprenger,J., Lynn Fink,J., Karunaratne,S., Hanson,K.,
Hamilton,N.A. and Teasdale,R.D. (2008) LOCATE: a mammalian
protein subcellular localization database. Nucleic Acids Res., 36,
D230–D233.
39. Wiwatwattana,N., Landau,C.M., Cope,G.J., Harp,G.A. and
Kumar,A. (2007) Organelle DB: an updated resource of eukaryotic
protein localization and function. Nucleic Acids Res., 35, D810–D814.
40. Hoelz,A., Debler,E.W. and Blobel,G. (2011) The structure of the
nuclear pore complex. Annu. Rev. Biochem., 80, 613–643.
41. Brameier,M., Krings,A. and MacCallum,R.M. (2007) NucPred–
predicting nuclear localization of proteins. Bioinformatics, 23,
1159–1160.
42. Waterson,R.M. and Hill,R.L. (1972) Enoyl Coenzyme A Hydratase
(Crotonase): catalytic properties of Crotonase and its possible
regulatory role in fatty acid oxidation. J. Biol. Chem., 247, 5258–5265.
43. Hamed,R.B., Batchelar,E.T., Clifton,I.J. and Schofield,C.J. (2008)
Mechanisms and structures of crotonase superfamily enzymes–how
nature controls enolate and oxyanion reactivity. Cell. Mol. Life Sci.,
65, 2507–2527.
44. Turteltaub,W. and Murphy,A. (1987) Subcellular localization and
capacity of ß-oxidation and aldehyde dehydrogenase in porcine liver.
Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 255, 120–126.
45. Bhattacharyya,T., Karnezis,A.N., Murphy,S.P., Hoang,T.,
Freeman,B.C., Phillips,B. and Morimoto,R.I. (1995) Cloning and
subcellular localization of human mitochondrial hsp70. J. Biol.
Chem., 270, 1705–1710.
46. Zhang,J., Sun,M., Li,R., Liu,S., Mao,J., Huang,Y., Wang,B., Hou,L.,
Ibrahim,M.M. and Tang,J. (2013) Ech1 is a potent suppressor of
lymphatic metastasis in hepatocarcinoma. Biomed. Pharmacother.,
67, 557–560.
47. Yeh,C.-S., Wang,J.-Y., Cheng,T.-L., Juan,C.-H., Wu,C.-H. and
Lin,S.-R. (2006) Fatty acid metabolism pathway play an important
role in carcinogenesis of human colorectal cancers by
microarray-bioinformatics analysis. Cancer Lett., 233, 297–308.
48. Chen,Z., Dai,Y.-C., Chen,Z.-X., Xie,J.-P., Zeng,W., Lin,Y.-Y. and
Tan,Q.-H. (2013) Knockdown of ECHS1 protein expression inhibits
hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation via suppression of Akt
activity. Crit. Rev. Eukaryot. Gene Exp., 23, 275–282.
49. Liu,X., Feng,R. and Du,L. (2010) The role of enoyl-CoA hydratase
short chain 1 and peroxiredoxin 3 in PP2-induced apoptosis in
human breast cancer MCF-7 cells. FEBS Lett., 584, 3185–3192.
50. Fisk,H.A., Mattison,C.P. and Winey,M. (2003) Human Mps1 protein
kinase is required for centrosome duplication and normal mitotic
progression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 100, 14875–14880.

485

Supplementary Material to
ComPPI: a cellular compartment-specific database for proteinprotein interaction network analysis
Daniel V. Veres1, Dávid M. Gyurkó1, Benedek Thaler1,2, Kristóf Z. Szalay1, Dávid Fazekas3,
Tamás Korcsmáros3,4,5 and Peter Csermely1,*
Department of Medical Chemistry, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary; 2Faculty of Electrical
Engineering and Informatics, Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Budapest, Hungary;
3
Department of Genetics, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary; 4TGAC, The Genome Analysis Centre,
Norwich, UK; 5Gut Health and Food Safety Programme, Institute of Food Research, Norwich, UK;
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +361-459-1500; Fax: +361-266-3802; Email:
csermely.peter@med.semmelweis-univ.hu; The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first 2
authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.
1

Table of Contents

Supplementary Figure S1. The role of multiple subcellular localizations on the example of
IGFBP-2 and HIF-1 Alpha proteins. ........................................................................................................... 2
Supplementary Figure S2. The localization tree used for the ComPPI subcellular localization
data integration. ............................................................................................................................................. 4
Supplementary Figure S3. The overlap between subcellular localization and protein-protein
interaction input databases used in the assembly of ComPPI. ......................................................... 6
Supplementary Figure S4. Advantages of multiple localization evidence. ..................................... 10
Supplementary Figure S5. The distribution of the ComPPI Localization and Interaction Scores.
.......................................................................................................................................................................... 12
Supplementary Figure S6. Optimization of the ComPPI localization evidence type weights..... 15
Supplementary Figure S7. Advantages of ComPPI: prediction of compartment-specific, new
properties and functions of MPS1. .......................................................................................................... 18
Supplementary Table S1. Comparison of ComPPI with similar tools and databases.................. 20
Supplementary Table S2. Statistics of the ComPPI database. ........................................................... 22
Supplementary Table S3. Comparison of the ComPPI content to the input databases, and the
effects of our filtering algorithms and manual validation steps...................................................... 25
Supplementary Table S4. Mapping of high resolution subcellular localization data into major
cellular components. .................................................................................................................................. 28
Supplementary Table S5. Importance of the removal of localization-based biologically unlikely
interactions. .................................................................................................................................................. 30
Supplementary Table S6. The results of the Gene Ontology biological process enrichment
analysis of the two example proteins, crotonase and MPS1. .......................................................... 33
Supplementary References ....................................................................................................................... 35

1

Supplementary Figure S1. The role of multiple subcellular localizations on the example of
IGFBP-2 and HIF-1 Alpha proteins.

Panel (A) depicts the compartment-specific functions of IGFBP-2. IGFBP-2 is a secreted (dark blue),
predominantly extracellular (green) protein involved in insulin growth factor (IGF) signalling (1).
IGFBP-2 is also localized in the nucleus (orange), where it is required for the activation of VEGFmediated angiogenesis (2). This binary function of IGFBP-2 turned out to be an important prognostic
biomarker in several cancer types, such as breast cancer (3). Panel (B) shows another important
example, HIF-1 Alpha, which is a member of the hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) family, and has a key
importance in the maintenance of cellular oxygen homeostasis, particularly in the response to hypoxia
(4). In order to act as a transcription factor, HIF-1 Alpha has to translocate from the cytosol (light blue)
into the nucleus (orange). HIF-1 Alpha and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)
form a heterodimer in the nucleus, which is required for their stable nuclear association (5). This
regulated transport has key role in HIF-1 Alpha activity control both in healthy conditions (6) and in the
development of cancer (7).

2

3

Supplementary Figure S2. The localization tree used for the ComPPI subcellular localization data
integration.
ComPPI subcellular localization data are assembled from several sources with different naming
conventions and resolution, therefore a standardization step is required before integration. We built a
non-redundant, hierarchical subcellular localization tree based on more than 1,600 Gene Ontology (8)
cellular component terms manually. The tree structure is needed to separate the high resolution
subcellular localization data unequivocally to the 6 major cellular compartments of low resolution for
further analysis (Supplementary Table S4). On the example shown we demonstrate the tree structure
on a segment of the hierarchical subcellular localization tree with the nucleus in focus. The high
resolution data, such as the components of the nuclear pore complex, are highlighted in orange at the
bottom

part

of

the

figure.

The

whole

subcellular

localization

tree

is

downloadable

(http://www.linkgroup.hu/pic/loctree.svg), or available online:
http://bificomp2.sote.hu:22422/comppi/files/c6f5587545cca11928563be40a0f8d6bf4bf45b2/databases
/loctree/loctree.textile

4

5

Supplementary Figure S3. The overlap between subcellular localization and protein-protein
interaction input databases used in the assembly of ComPPI.

Panels (A) and (B) show the overlap between the source subcellular localization and protein-protein
interaction (interactome) databases graphically for all the data and after filtering by species as well.
Nodes in the networks symbolize the source databases, their size is proportional to the number of
proteins originated from the given database. Edges connecting the nodes represent the overlap, their
width correlates with the number of common proteins in the interconnected databases. Interestingly,
these graphs are fully connected, e.g. all databases share proteins with each other (except DroID, a D.
melanogaster-specific database, which has no overlap with databases lacking fruit fly data). The
reason is usually the redundancy between the databases (for example MINT and IntAct share their
data as part of the MIntAct project (9)).
Panels (C) and (D) display numerically the same data as Panel (A) and (B), respectively: the number
of proteins (Y axis) are plotted for every input database (X axis), each bar represents an edge from
Panel (A) or (B). Significant differences can be observed in the amount of source data provided by the
input databases.
Panel (E) shows the number of proteins (Y axis) per source database (X axis) for the given species
compared to the number of proteins in ComPPI (highlighted in orange). The number of common
proteins in all source databases, in databases with more than 5000 proteins, and only in interactome
databases are also represented on the charts. Panel (F) shows the number of interactions (Y axis) for
the given species per interactome source databases (X axis) compared to the number of proteins in
ComPPI (highlighted in orange).
Abbreviations: HPA, Human Protein Atlas; H.Proteinpedia, Human Proteinpedia

6

7

8

9

Supplementary Figure S4. Advantages of multiple localization evidence.

The Venn-diagrams represents the number of proteins with experimental, unknown, predicted, or
mixed localization evidence in the integrated ComPPI subcellular localization dataset and in the subdataset of ComPPI containing GO-based localization data for its proteins. Interestingly, the number of
proteins with only unknown localization evidence is much lower in ComPPI compared to its GO-subset
(57%), while the number of proteins with experimental (264%) and mixed evidence (376%) is higher,
than the estimation based on the number of proteins in ComPPI compared to the GO sub-dataset
(203%). These findings implicate that the integration of subcellular localization data from different
sources having different localization evidence types increases not only the quantity of the data, but
their reliability as well.

10

11

Supplementary Figure S5. The distribution of the ComPPI Localization and Interaction Scores.

Panel (A) shows the distribution histogram of the Localization Scores for the 4 species of ComPPI
separated by the 6 major cellular compartments containing all subcellular localization data. The X axis
represents the confidence intervals of the Localization Score between 0 and 1 by 0.1 increments,
while the Y axis shows the number of proteins belonging to the given compartment. On panel (B) the
distribution histogram of the Interaction Scores is shown for the 4 species of ComPPI containing the
integrated protein-protein interaction data. The X axis depicts the confidence intervals of the
Interaction Score between 0 and 1 by 0.1 increments, while the Y axis shows the number of
interactions in the given confidence interval. See more about the Localization and Interaction Scores
in Figure 2 and Supplementary Figure S6.

12

13

14

Supplementary Figure S6. Optimization of the ComPPI localization evidence type weights.

The flowchart on panel (A) shows the steps of ComPPI localization evidence type weight optimization.
Our goal was to define the ratio of the localization evidence type weights to each other, and to set up a
threshold, above which the interactions are considered trustworthy, i.e. as 'high confidence' as the
known experimental data. Localization evidence types can be experimental, unknown and predicted.
For more details, see the “Localization and Interaction Scores” section in the main text. Each evidence
type has a parameter that defines its weight against the other two types, termed as localization
evidence type weights. To define these weights, we built a positive-control dataset containing only
those interactions, where both interactors are localized in the same subcellular compartment, and this
information was supported with experimental evidence from the Human Protein Atlas database (HPA,
32). We compared the positive-control dataset (56,160 interactions, in green) to all the interactions
from the ComPPI dataset excluding the subcellular localization data from HPA (790,269 interactions,
in grey). Based on the fact that experimentally validated entries are the most reliable, while localization
entries coming from unknown or predicted origin are less reliable, we set the following order of
evidence type weights: experimental > predicted AND experimental > unknown as the two
requirements of the optimization process. All combinations of the experimental, unknown and
predicted localization evidence type weights were set up from 0 to 1 with 0.1 increments. The kernel
density of the interactions were calculated using all these settings, which gave us the ratio of
interactions belonging to a given confidence level compared to the distribution of all the interactions.
Our goal was to find a specific ratio of the experimental, unknown and predicted localization evidence
type weight parameters that maximizes the number of high confidence (HQ) interactions in the positive
control dataset (HPA) and simultaneously maximizes the number of low confidence (LQ) interactions
in the ComPPI dataset not containing HPA data. These ensure that the quality of data marked as high
confidence will match the quality of experimentally verified data. We calculated the 95% confidence
threshold (in red) for the positive-control dataset in order to separate our data into high- and lowconfidence subsets for all the 285 solutions. The 285 possible kernel density solutions were tested to
find the parameter combination that maximizes the number of both the low and high confidence
interactions as described above. The number of HQ HPA interactions is much lower than the number
of LQ interactions, therefore these had to be normalized to avoid any statistical bias. The normalized
values were multiplied to obtain a single value representing the combination of the specific
experimental, unknown and predicted localization evidence type weights. We simultaneously
maximized the number of interactions in the high-confidence positive control dataset (HQ HPA) and
the number of interactions in the low-confidence subset of all the ComPPI interactions not containing
HPA (LQ ALL):

(Eq.1)
The single values were ranked and the largest one was selected, that represented the localization
evidence type weights of 0.8, 0.7 and 0.3 for the experimental, predicted and unknown localization
evidence types, respectively. Panel (B) illustrates the distribution of the Interaction Score after
15

optimization. The X axis shows the Interaction Score, while the Y axis represents the kernel density of
the interaction distribution. The figure shows that Interaction Score distribution for the positive-control
dataset (56,160 interactions, in green) and for the interactions not containing HPA localizations
(790,269 interactions, in grey), which had the largest value of Eq. 1, i.e. which had the optimal set of
localization evidence type weights out of the possible 285 representations. The number of highconfidence interactions in the positive-control dataset with a confidence threshold at 95% equalled
48,567, while the number of high-confidence interactions in the ComPPI dataset excluding HPA was
241,076 (30% of total). The optimal distribution shown represented the 0.8, 0.7 and 0.3 localization
evidence type weight set for the experimental, predicted and unknown localization evidence types,
respectively. The relatively low weight (0.8) of the experimental evidence type means that (i) a single
evidence does not result in highly trusted subcellular localization and (ii) at least two pieces of
experimental evidence are required to have a localization score above 95%. The relatively high weight
(0.7) of the predicted evidence type is in agreement with the high reliability of subcellular localization
prediction methods, while the low weight (0.3) of the unknown evidence type highlights the need of the
validation of data origin. These facts taken together highlight the importance of data integration and
allow a strong filtering of the ComPPI dataset resulting in reliable high-confidence interactions.

16

17

Supplementary Figure S7. Advantages of ComPPI: prediction of compartment-specific, new
properties and functions of MPS1.
The figure shows another example of ComPPI-based prediction of potential, novel functions besides
the example of crotonase detailed in the main text. We choose a well-known dual-specific protein
kinase, the Monopolar Spindle 1 protein (MPS1, UniProt ID: P33981) having a centromere-associated
cytosolic localization (10) and relatively undiscovered functions in its nuclear subcellular localization
resulting in incomplete knowledge of the effect of its inhibitors. MPS1 is a member of the spindle
assembly checkpoint complex (11), and its inhibition causes aneuploidy via mitotic arrest resulting in
apoptosis (12). Importantly, MPS1 also has a nuclear localization (13), which is independent from its
inhibition (14). MPS1 inhibitors are potent anticancer drugs with well-characterized pharmacological
effects (15). These findings raise the idea that MPS1 may have still unknown effects in the nucleus
after its inhibition. However, the exact role of MPS1 in the nucleus remains rather unclear. As one of
the sporadic pieces of related evidence MPS1 mediates epigenetic functions, such as the regulation of
the chromatin organization through the phosphorylation of Condensin-2 (16). Additionally, MPS1 has a
still unknown function attached to the nucleoplasmic side of the nuclear pore complex (13). In ComPPI
has MPS1 has 40 interacting partners. Supplementary Figure S7 shows the interactions of the MPS1
kinase and its first neighbours before and after filtering to nuclear localization using an Interaction
Score threshold of 0.90. 28 of the total 40 of its interactors (70%) have nuclear localization. This result
proposes a more extensive nuclear function of MPS1 than previously suspected. To assess the
putative nuclear functions of MPS1, we built the interactome of the first and second neighbours of
MPS1, and filtered them for nuclear interactions. Gene Ontology (8) enrichment analysis using BiNGO
(17) showed that besides the already known MPS1-related biological functions, such as ‘mitotic cell
cycle checkpoint’ or ‘chromosome separation’, additional functions, such as ‘cellular component
organization’, ‘organelle organization’ and related terms also showed a significant enrichment
(Supplementary Table S6). This is in agreement with the earlier suggestion that MPS1 may have a
role in nuclear assembly and cellular component reorganization during mitosis possibly related to its
localization in the nuclear pore complex (13). The assessment of the function of first and second
MPS1 neighbours revealed 3 second neighbours playing key role in nuclear assembly, (Lamin-B2
(18), LAP2 (19) and Emerin (20)), and 3 others involved in epigenetic regulation of chromatin
condensation and decondensation (Aurora kinase B (21) and C (22), as well as histone
acetyltransferase p300 (23)). Lamin B2 is connected to MPS1 through its 2 first neighbours, where
one of them is the VCP protein (highlighted in green circle). VCP is involved in DNA-damage response
(24), and is known as a regulator of the nuclear envelope reassembly (25). Additionally, three of the
first neighbours of MPS1 are members of the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C)
(highlighted in red circle), a complex having key role in the maintenance of the spindle assembly
checkpoint by the ubiquitination of the Cdc20 (26). Furthermore, APC/C mediates the degradation of
MPS1 and helps the coordination of the re-entry to the cell cycle during environmental stress (27),
which can be a rescue mechanism for cancer cells as well. The potential function of MPS1 in nuclear
reassembly needs further investigation and experimental validation. Despite this uncertainty, this
example also highlights the importance of the analysis of compartment-specific sub-networks and the
predictive power of ComPPI.
18

19

Supplementary Table S1. Comparison of ComPPI with similar tools and databases.

ComPPI is a unique resource, with an integrated protein-protein interaction dataset enriched by the
subcellular localization of the interactors, in order to perform more reliable compartment-specific
analysis of biological processes. We present here only those key examples from the wide set of tools,
databases and scoring algorithms, that had similar purposes to those of ComPPI. Besides a brief
summary some key advantages and disadvantages of the resources, and references to them are
listed. These tools and databases are open source, and mainly use Gene Ontology (8) based
subcellular localization annotations. See Figure 3 in the main text and Supplementary Figures S3 and
S4 for the advantages of the ComPPI structure and the comparison to the integrated source
databases.

20

NAME

Cerebral

SUMMARY

Layout of molecular interaction networks using
subcellular localization annotation.

ADVANTAGES
- easy-to-use Cytoscape plugin
- simple visualization of the subcellular
organization
- input data could be not only GO annotation

BiNGO

Enrichment analysis of GO terms in molecular
networks with user-friendly visualization options.

BioNetBuilder

Interface to create biological networks integrated
from several databases.

CmPI

Reconstruction of the subcellular organization of
the proteins in a 3D virtual cell.

TOOLS

HitPredict

DATABASES

Integrated protein-protein interaction dataset with
predicted confidence levels.

InterMitoBase

Integrated high quality interactome of the human
mitochondrion.

MatrixDB

Manually curated high-quality interaction
database for extracellular proteins and other
molecules.

DISADVANTAGES

PUBMED
ID

- input data are not defined
- difficult to visualize proteins with
multiple localizations
- export option is only for the network
image

17309895

- Cytoscape plugin

- only GO annotations

- enrichment analysis and visualization of GO
cellular component terms
- available for several species
- Cytoscape plugin

- input network has to be imported by
the user
- no export options for the results
- limited number of input databases

- source databases connect via interfaces

- pure-integration without manual
follow-up

- the user could set database parameters before
integration
- ~ 1000 different species
- visualization of the interactome based on
subcellular localization in 3D
- wide options for input data
- downloadable software

- filtering for subcellular localization is
not available, only the visualization

- interactomes for 9 species with confidence
score

- only GO-based localization
information

- confidence score based on structural data, GO
annotation and homology
- download option of high-confidence
interactomes
- high-confidence interactome for mitochondrial
proteins
- integration of KEGG, HPRD, BioGRID, DIP and
IntAct
- graph visualization
- high-quality interactome for the extracellular
matrix
- subcellular localization data for membrane,
secreted and extracellular proteins

- compartment specific networks are
not available
- only 3 input databases (IntAct,
BioGRID and HPRD)

15972284

17138585

23427987

20947562

- only mitochondrial network
- only 490 mitochondrial proteins

21718467

- only for the extracellular matrix
- confidence score for the
interactions is not available

20852260

- several download options
SCORING
ALGORITHM

PRINCESS

Online interface for human protein-protein
interaction confidence evaluation.

- complex scoring system available online

- only for human

- network topology is also included during the
analysis

- subcellular co-localization is based
only on GO annotation

18230642

21

Supplementary Table S2. Statistics of the ComPPI database.

The table shows the brief statistics of the ComPPI dataset after the integration of different sources.
ComPPI contains three types of downloadable datasets, (i) the compartmentalized interactome, where
the interacting proteins have at least one common subcellular localization, (ii) the integrated proteinprotein interaction dataset without localization information, and (iii) the integrated subcellular
localization dataset. ‘Summary Statistics’ shows the summary of the dataset for all 4 species. The
detailed statistics of the three dataset are available for each species for all localizations together and
per each major cellular component. Only the average Localization and Interaction Scores are
represented in this table. For more details about the distribution of Localization and Interaction Scores
see Supplementary Figure S5.

22

SPECIES

DATA TYPE

NUMBER OF
PROTEINS

NUMBER OF MAJOR
LOCALIZATIONS

AVERAGE LOCALIZATION
SCORE

NUMBER OF
INTERACTIONS

AVERAGE INTERACTION
SCORE

517461

0.76

791059

0.49

-

-

COMPARTMENTALIZED INTERACTOME
Summary Statistics

42829

86874

0.76

INTEGRATED PROTEIN-PROTEIN INTERACTION DATASET
Summary Statistics

53168

-

-

INTEGRATED SUBCELLULAR LOCALIZATION DATASET
All Species

Summary Statistics

119432

195815

0.73

All Localizations

19386

47761

0.82

260829

0.88

Cytosol

12801

35498

0.82

185012

0.91

Mitochondrion

1937

6202

0.81

9433

0.92

Nucleus

10820

27540

0.83

156601

0.93

COMPARTMENTALIZED INTERACTOME

H. sapiens

D. melanogaster

C. elegans

S. cerevisiae

Extracellular

5848

20983

0.83

29725

0.96

Secretory Pathway

5114

18299

0.81

27425

0.93

Membrane

8408

27800

0.82

57509

0.91

All Localizations

13332

20970

0.59

137011

0.46

Cytosol

7037

12715

0.62

81199

0.50

Mitochondrion

911

1803

0.61

3717

0.53

Nucleus

5507

9239

0.61

48279

0.51

Extracellular

737

1764

0.61

1482

0.69

Secretory Pathway

2276

4726

0.58

10541

0.44

Membrane

2955

5742

0.64

15758

0.49

All Localizations

4221

7369

0.77

12233

0.68

Cytosol

2369

4664

0.77

6039

0.73

Mitochondrion

181

416

0.75

156

0.71

Nucleus

1995

3685

0.77

5849

0.71

Extracellular

68

151

0.73

80

0.47

Secretory Pathway

809

1752

0.75

1189

0.70

Membrane

629

1295

0.79

1269

0.70

All Localizations

5890

10774

0.82

107387

0.84

Cytosol

3374

7106

0.81

69698

0.85

Mitochondrion

1407

2969

0.78

10668

0.81

Nucleus

2819

5554

0.81

51035

0.89

Extracellular

147

388

0.78

230

0.83

Secretory Pathway

891

2264

0.82

4560

0.91

Membrane

1876

4077

0.83

11891

0.87

23

H. sapiens
D. melanogaster
C. elegans
S. cerevisiae

H. sapiens

D. melanogaster

C. elegans

S. cerevisiae

All Localizations
Cytosol
Mitochondrion
Nucleus
Extracellular
Secretory Pathway
Membrane
All Localizations
Cytosol
Mitochondrion
Nucleus
Extracellular
Secretory Pathway
Membrane
All Localizations
Cytosol
Mitochondrion
Nucleus
Extracellular
Secretory Pathway
Membrane
All Localizations
Cytosol
Mitochondrion
Nucleus
Extracellular
Secretory Pathway
Membrane

INTEGRATED PROTEIN-PROTEIN INTERACTION DATASET
23266
17379
6298
6228
INTEGRATED SUBCELLULAR LOCALIZATION DATASET
71271
123225
0.76
33750
71957
0.77
7541
17509
0.75
29789
57722
0.79
11672
35729
0.80
13460
36444
0.77
27013
61050
0.76
21635
31886
0.55
9192
16260
0.60
1907
3598
0.57
7344
12090
0.58
2178
4714
0.58
4918
9359
0.54
6347
10607
0.60
20046
29281
0.73
7713
13887
0.74
1780
3521
0.72
6245
10924
0.74
1662
3325
0.70
4691
8895
0.72
7190
10579
0.72
6480
11423
0.81
3467
7221
0.81
1513
3124
0.76
2926
5681
0.81
282
762
0.76
999
2477
0.81
2237
4562
0.82

385481
250854
23772
130952

0.60
0.25
0.35
0.69

-

-

24

Supplementary Table S3. Comparison of the ComPPI content to the input databases, and the
effects of our filtering algorithms and manual validation steps.

The table shows the number of interaction and localization entries in the source databases and the
number of them loaded into ComPPI. Different input sources are connected to the ComPPI database
structure using source-specific interfaces. During autoloading or manual validation steps (see Figure 1
for more details in the main text) we filtered out those interactions or localizations from the source
databases, that (1) did not the requirements of ComPPI (e.g. genetic interactions in BioGRID or
localizations in PA-GOSUB with a confidence level below 95%), (2) contained errors in their data
structure (e.g. entries with inconsequent nomenclature), or those that (3) turned out to be biologically
unlikely during our manual review process. We also mapped the different subcellular localization
naming conventions to GO (8) cellular component terms for standardization purposes (Supplementary
Figure S2). The source databases have different protein naming conventions, thus we had to map
these protein names to the most reliable naming convention (visit the relevant Help page for more
details: http://comppi.linkgroup.hu/help/naming_conventions). Due to the inconsistencies in protein
naming conventions some protein names may be mapped to multiple other protein names. For
instance, gene IDs could be mapped to several protein IDs, which phenomenon is based on real
biological processes, such as alternative splicing. This may result in more protein names associated
with a given source than the number of proteins taken from the original source. There are some other
cases, where protein names could not be mapped to the strongest protein naming convention. In
these cases we dropped the entry, so it was not incorporated into the database. Another important
point is that we developed an algorithm in order to export the predefined datasets from the ComPPI
database structure. The export module also went through rigorous manual revision in order to ensure
that there are exact matches between the source data and the output data from ComPPI (see
Supplementary Figure S3 and Table S2 for more details about our output data). Relevant information
of the efficiency of manual curation could be gained in those cases, where source databases, such as
MatrixDB and HPRD use matching protein name conventions and have a consequent data structure.
Taking these facts together this table shows the summarized effect of filtering due to the manual
curation protocols, the filtering due to our special requirements of incorporated data, and the effect of
the protein name mapping.

25

Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Protein-protein Interaction Databases
Source Database

BioGRID

CCSB

DiP

IntAct

MINT

Number of interactions loaded into ComPPI

82358

3328

22970

77216

24945

Number of all the interactions in the source database

340723

2930

22735

124582

48628

Subcellular Localization Databases
Source Database

eSLDB

GeneOntology

OrganelleDB

PA-GOSUB

Number of localizations loaded into ComPPI

8424

12230

7568

3421

Number of all the localizations in the source database

8581

63338

8237

273944

Caenorhabditis elegans
Protein-protein Interaction Databases
Source Database

BioGRID

CCSB

DiP

IntAct

MINT

Number of interactions loaded into ComPPI

15735

9050

3942

11552

5358

Number of all the interactions in the source database

8464

3864

4107

20342

7400

Subcellular Localization Databases
Source Database

eSLDB

GeneOntology

OrganelleDB

PA-GOSUB

Number of localizations loaded into ComPPI

23465

13589

544

11946

Number of all the localizations in the source database

33336

56511

551

974028

Drosophila melanogaster
Protein-protein Interaction Databases
Source Database

BioGRID

DiP

DroID

IntAct

MINT

Number of interactions loaded into ComPPI

100517

24375

198533

26161

22413

Number of all the interactions in the source database

47573

23154

96023

30183

23548

Subcellular Localization Databases
Source Database

eSLDB

GeneOntology

OrganelleDB

PA-GOSUB

Number of localizations loaded into ComPPI

22907

20971

3855

11070

Number of all the localizations in the source database

20815

112652

3816

711788

26

Homo sapiens
Protein-protein Interaction Databases
Source Database

BioGRID

CCSB

DiP

HPRD

IntAct

MatrixDB

MINT

MIPS

Number of interactions loaded into ComPPI

363880

3733

6663

37180

62070

148

23206

421

Number of all the interactions in the source database

230603

3881

5951

39240

101128

1064

33259

1814

Subcellular Localization Databases
Source Database

eSLDB

GeneOntology

HumanProteinAtlas

HumanProteinpedia

LOCATE

MatrixDB

Organelle

PA-GOSUB

Number of localizations loaded into ComPPI

67487

83548

37509

2820

18822

9975

4886

21641

Number of all the localizations in the source database

81988

403734

9122

2900

18724

9975

4955

1566180

27

Supplementary Table S4. Mapping of high resolution subcellular localization data into major
cellular components.
Subcellular localization data come from several sources with different resolution. Therefore, the
integration of high resolution data into major cellular components with low resolution is needed. The
high resolution localization data were mapped manually to the possibly largest and most accurate
subcellular localizations based on the hierarchical branches (parent and children branches) of the
localization tree (Supplementary Figure S2). One or more parent branches were associated with one
of the 6 major subcellular components (cytosol, nucleus, mitochondrion, secretory-pathway,
membrane and extracellular) as shown on the table. Thus, using the united, hierarchical localization
tree we gained low resolution major cellular components, in which there is an unambiguous route in
the tree to one major subcellular component. If a given GO term belongs to an included branch, but it
is located in another major cellular component, then this GO term will be excluded during the mapping.
Currently the localization tree contains 1,644 GO cellular component terms. The number of GO terms
belonging to a given major cellular component is also shown in the last column of the table. The
mapping table of major cellular components is available online here:
http://bificomp2.sote.hu:22422/comppi/files/85e7056adb541d5a18c60792457986c71a3a0ab0/databas
es/loctree/largelocs.yml.

28

MAJOR CELLULAR
COMPONENT

GO TERMS OF THE INCLUDED LOCALIZATION TREE BRANCHES

CYTOSOL

GO:0032994, GO:0002189, GO:0031501, GO:0034464, GO:0032992,
GO:0097057, GO:0008247, GO:0009341, GO:0000151, GO:0005942,
GO:0070864, GO:0043025, GO:0000502, GO:0035693, GO:0035859,
GO:0000131, GO:0097169, GO:0072559, GO:0072557, GO:0044609,
GO:0017122, GO:0033256, GO:0031074, GO:0030956, GO:0043226,
GO:0042763, GO:0019008, GO:0008287, GO:0009349, GO:0030256,
GO:0015627, GO:0012505, GO:0000267, GO:0032153, GO:0044297,
GO:0045177, GO:0045178, GO:0016234, GO:0005930, GO:0005737,
GO:0070725, GO:0005727, GO:0009368, GO:0000178, GO:0032144,
GO:0032996, GO:0005956, GO:0033593, GO:0005953, GO:0005954,
GO:0005952, GO:0030014, GO:0031431, GO:0009330, GO:0017101,
GO:0031588, GO:0045259, GO:0000408, GO:0033588, GO:0005853,
GO:0005850, GO:0005851, GO:0005852, GO:0016281, GO:0009318,
GO:0034708, GO:0000307, GO:0017122, GO:0032045, GO:0035301,
GO:0033256, GO:0008043, GO:0048269, GO:0070438, GO:0072558,
GO:0070419, GO:0045252, GO:0043626, GO:0032299, GO:0071141,
GO:0032797, GO:0009337, GO:0031931, GO:0031932, GO:0072669,
GO:0031371, GO:0034657, GO:0033202, GO:0031074, GO:0034518,
GO:0044446, GO:0031094, GO:0009536, GO:0005773, GO:0042579,
GO:0045170, GO:0032421, GO:0005818, GO:0009295, GO:0043292,
GO:0005856, GO:0043227, GO:0043228, GO:0031090, GO:0031974

NUCLEUS

GO:0005634, GO:0005694, GO:0005667, GO:0035649, GO:0000974,
GO:0002193, GO:0097196, GO:0000441

MITOCHONDRION
SECRETORY-PATHWAY

MEMBRANE

EXTRACELLULAR

GO:0005739, GO:0070069, GO:0016507, GO:0097136
GO:secretory_pathway, GO:0005783, GO:0005793, GO:0005794,
GO:0005801, GO:0005802, GO:0005768, GO:0031410, GO:0042175,
GO:0042175, GO:0031982
GO:0038037, GO:0070195, GO:0002116, GO:0035692, GO:0005892,
GO:0048179, GO:0008328, GO:0042101, GO:0008305, GO:0019814,
GO:0002133, GO:0009986, GO:0042597, GO:0071944, GO:0042995,
GO:0030428, GO:0070938, GO:0030496, GO:0002139, GO:0031252,
GO:0001917, GO:0043209, GO:0005933, GO:0060187, GO:0019867,
GO:0044425, GO:0005886, GO:0030054, GO:0045202
GO:0005576,GO:0031012, GO:0043033, GO:0031838, GO:0097179

GO TERMS OF THE EXCLUDED
LOCALIZATION TREE BRANCHES

GO:0005623, GO:0044464, GO:0043231,
GO:0043232, GO:0043229, GO:0044424,
GO:0005622

NUMBER OF ALL
INCLUDED GO TERMS

535 / 1644

-

353 / 1644

-

78 / 1644

-

185 / 1644

367 / 1644

GO:0016020

-

126 / 1644

29

Supplementary Table S5. Importance of the removal of localization-based biologically unlikely
interactions.

The table demonstrates the importance of the removal of biologically unlikely interactions based on
their localization data. We compared the degree and the betweeness centrality (BC) of the proteins in
the integrated protein-protein interaction (PPI) dataset without subcellular localizations and to the
compartmentalized interactome, where the proteins have at least one common subcellular localization.
The proteins were ranked by the size of the alternations in the degree (Δ Degree (%)) and BC
measures, and only the proteins with UniProt Swiss-Prot (28) name were kept (15,258 proteins out of
19,386) for more reliable further analysis. The table shows the first 20 proteins, ordered by the degree
difference between the compartmentalized dataset and the integrated PPI dataset (Δ Degree). The
subcellular localization of the proteins are also displayed, these can be: (i) subcellular localizations
after the compartmentalization (Compartmentalized Localization), (ii) localizations that were
represented in the first-neighbours of the interactome with less than 5% ratio (Filtered Localizations),
(iii) the predicted localizations, where more than 95% of the first-neighbours are localized in the given
compartment (Possible Localizations), and (iv) the localizations that were represented among the firstneighbours with a range between 5 and 95% (Uncertain Localizations). The table gives information
about how many proteins have no localization data among the first-neighbours, and gives an average
Interaction Score (IS) for the interactions before and after filtering. Our application example is the
Crotonase (Enoyl-CoA hydratase), which is the first in the list (highlighted in yellow). See Figure 4 in
the main text for more details.

30

NUMBER

UNPROT
SWISS-PROT ID

RECOMMENDED PROTEIN NAME

Enoyl-CoA hydratase, mitochondrial

DEGREE

BETWEENESS CENTRALITY

Δ DEGREE

Δ DEGREE
(%)

INTEGRATED
PPI DATASET

COMPARTMENTALIZED
PPI DATASET

INTEGRATED
PPI DATASET

COMPARTMENTALIZED
PPI DATASET

71

8

4855.94

107.43

63

11.27%

57

7

7072.36

9.97

50

12.28%

47

7

8080.17

69.29

40

14.89%

41

3

409.31

2.02

38

7.32%

27

2

1911.21

0.37

25

7.41%

26

3

15548.09

5.00

23

11.54%

1

P30084

2

Q96IL0

3

Q96EY7

4

Q9Y3A4

5

Q8IZ73

6

O14874

7

Q53H82

Beta-lactamase-like protein 2

17

1

3093.07

0.00

16

5.88%

8

Q99551

Transcription termination factor,
mitochondrial

15

1

176.46

0.00

14

6.67%

9

Q9BSE5

Agmatinase, mitochondrial

12

1

350.66

0.00

11

8.33%

10

P23378

Glycine dehydrogenase
(decarboxylating), mitochondrial

10

1

1625.93

0.00

9

10.00%

11

Q9P0P8

Uncharacterized protein C6orf203

9

1

645.26

0.00

8

11.11%

8

1

30.12

0.00

7

12.50%

8

1

174.14

0.00

7

12.50%

Apoptogenic protein 1,
mitochondrial
Pentatricopeptide repeat domaincontaining protein 3, mitochondrial
Ribosomal RNA-processing protein
7 homolog A
RNA pseudouridylate synthase
domain-containing protein 2
[3-methyl-2-oxobutanoate
dehydrogenase [lipoamide]] kinase,
mitochondrial

Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA
synthase, mitochondrial
Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase
FKBP7

12

P54868

13

Q9Y680

14

O95377

Gap junction beta-5 protein

7

1

305.81

0.00

6

14.29%

15

P54317

Pancreatic lipase-related protein 2

7

1

4111.91

0.00

6

14.29%

16

Q08E93

Protein FAM27E3

7

1

249.87

0.00

6

14.29%

17

Q5T7N7

Putative protein FAM27E1

7

1

249.87

0.00

6

14.29%

18

Q6P4F2

7

1

4496.69

0.00

6

14.29%

19

Q9BV35

7

1

86.76

0.00

6

14.29%

20

Q9Y234

7

1

0

0.00

6

14.29%

Adrenodoxin-like protein,
mitochondrial
Calcium-binding mitochondrial
carrier protein SCaMC-3
Lipoyltransferase 1, mitochondrial

31

COMPARTMENTALIZED
LOCALIZATION

FILTERED
LOCALIZATIONS
(<5%)

POSSIBLE
LOCALIZATIONS
(>95%)

1

Mitochondrion (8/71)

-

-

2

Mitochondrion (7/57)

-

-

3

Mitochondrion (7/47)

-

-

4

Mitochondrion (3/41)

Secretory-pathway
(2/41)

-

5

Mitochondrion (2/27)

-

-

6

Mitochondrion (3/26)

-

-

7

Mitochondrion (1/17)

-

-

8

Mitochondrion (1/15)

-

-

9

Mitochondrion (1/12)

-

-

10

Mitochondrion (1/10)

-

-

11

Mitochondrion (1/9)

-

-

12

Mitochondrion (1/8)

-

-

13

Secretory-pathway (1/8)

14

Membrane (1/7),
Extracellular (1/7)

15

Secretory-pathway (1/7),
Extracellular (1/7),
Membrane (1/7)

16

NUMBER

Mitochondrion
(0/8), Membrane
(0/8), Extracellular
(0/8)
Mitochondrion
(0/7), Secretorypathway (0/7)

UNCERTAIN
LOCALIZATIONS
(5%<X<95%)
Cytosol (52/71), Nucleus
(33/71), Membrane (27/71),
Extracellular (21/71),
Secretory-pathway (17/71)
Cytosol (38/57), Nucleus
(28/57), Membrane (19/57),
Secretory-pathway (18/57),
Extracellular (14/57)
Nucleus (34/47), Cytosol
(31/47), Membrane (16/47),
Extracellular (14/47),
Secretory-pathway (13/47)
Nucleus (34/41), Cytosol
(25/41), Membrane (12/41),
Extracellular (5/41)
Cytosol (23/27), Nucleus
(12/27), Membrane (8/27),
Secretory-Pathway (7/27),
Extracellular (5/27)
Cytosol (18/26), Nucleus
(17/26), Membrane (8/26),
Secretory-pathway (6/26),
Extracellular (5/26)
Nucleus (13/17), Cytosol
(12/17), Membrane (5/17),
Extracellular (2/17),
Secretory-pathway (2/17)
Cytosol (11/15), Nucleus
(10/15), Membrane (7/15),
Extracellular (5/15),
Secretory-pathway (4/15)
Nucleus (8/12), Cytosol
(4/12), Secretory-pathway
(1/12), Membrane (1/12),
Extracellular (1/12)
Nucleus (7/10), Cytosol
(5/10), Secretory-pathway
(2/10), Membrane (2/10),
Extracellular (2/10)
Cytosol (6/9), Nucleus (5/9),
Secretory-pathway (4/9),
Membrane (4/9),
Extracellular (1/9)
Cytosol (6/8), Secretorypathway (6/8), Membrane
(5/8), Nucleus (4/8),
Extracellular (3/8)

NUMBER OF
LOCALIZATIONS

AVERAGE
INTERACTION
SCORE
BEFORE
FILTERING

AVERAGE
INTERACTION
SCORE AFTER
FILTERING

56/71

0.075

0.665

48/62

0.057

0.463

41/47

0.137

0.918

36/41

0.033

0.457

24/27

0.02

0.273

23/26

0.096

0.833

16/17

0.037

0.632

14/15

0.067

0.999

10/12

0.077

0.92

8/10

0.094

0.936

7/9

0.104

0.939

6/8

0.037

0.299

-

Cytosol (5/8), Nucleus (5/8)

6/8

0.116

0.928

-

Cytosol (4/7), Nucleus (4/7)

7/7

0.139

0.973

-

-

Cytosol (1/7), Mitochondrion
(1/7), Nucleus (1/7)

3/7

0.141

0.988

Mitochondrion (1/7)

-

-

7/7

0.08

0.56

17

Mitochondrion (1/7)

-

-

7/7

0.08

0.56

18

Mitochondrion (1/7)

-

-

5/7

0.134

0.937

19

Membrane (1/7)

Mitochondrion
(0/7), Extracellular
(0/7)

-

Nucleus (5/7), Cytosol (3/7),
Secretory-pathway (2/7)

5/7

0.041

0.287

20

Mitochondrion (1/7)

Cytosol (5/7), Membrane
(4/7), Secretory-pathway
(4/7), Nucleus (3/7),
Extracellular (2/7)

5/7

0.099

0.691

Cytosol (4/7), Nucleus (4/7),
Extracellular (3/7),
Membrane (3/7), Secretorypathway (2/7)
Cytosol (4/7), Nucleus (4/7),
Extracellular (3/7),
Membrane (3/7), Secretorypathway (2/7)
Cytosol (4/7), Membrane
(3/7), Secretory-pathway
(3/7), Nucleus (2/7),
Extracellular (1/7)

32

Supplementary Table S6. The results of the Gene Ontology biological process enrichment
analysis of the two example proteins, crotonase and MPS1.

The table shows the results of the Gene Ontology (8) biological process term enrichment analysis
using BiNGO (17). Our two application examples are crotonase (see Figure 4 in the main text for more
details) and MPS1 (see Supplementary Figure S7 for more details) to demonstrate how ComPPI is
useful in the filtering of biologically unlikely interactions and prediction in the new protein properties
and functions. The upper part of the table shows the first 15 biological process terms in order of their
corrected significance from the analysis of the mitochondrial subset of the first-neighbours of
crotonase. Importantly, the most significant biological process is the ‘anti-apoptosis’ (highlighted in
yellow), while related terms are also highly represented in the list. Known functions of crotonase, such
as ‘positive regulation of lipopolysaccharide-mediated signalling pathway’ (highlighted in green) or
‘catabolic process’ are underrepresented in the list, which implicates the importance of a putative role
of crotonase in the inhibition of apoptosis. The bottom part of the table shows the first 15 biological
process terms from the results of the GO enrichment analysis of the nuclear subset of the firstneighbours of MPS1. The analysis showed that beside the known functions, such as ’cell cycle
process’ (highlighted in green) and related terms, biological processes in connection with the proposed
functions in nuclear assembly also occurred significantly, such as ‘cellular component organization’
(highlighted in yellow) and related terms. The two example proteins show the usefulness of ComPPI to
predict new biological functions of various proteins, and to understand their role in cellular functions
better.

33

GO BIOLOGICAL PROCESS ENRICHMENT ANALYSIS - CROTONASE
NUMBER

GO-ID

DESCRIPTION

CORRECTED
P-VALUE

CLUSTER
FREQUENCY

GENES

1

6916

anti-apoptosis

2.26E-03

4/9 44.4%

2

43066

negative regulation of apoptosis

6.17E-03

4/9 44.4%

P40337 | Q9Y4K3 | P38646 | P63104
P40337 | Q9Y4K3 | P38646 | P63104

3

43069

negative regulation of programmed cell death

6.17E-03

4/9 44.4%

P40337 | Q9Y4K3 | P38646 | P63104

4

60548

negative regulation of cell death

6.17E-03

4/9 44.4%

P40337 | Q9Y4K3 | P38646 | P63104

5

42981

regulation of apoptosis

6.17E-03

5/9 55.5%

P21980 | P40337 | Q9Y4K3 | P38646 | P63104

6

43067

regulation of programmed cell death

6.17E-03

5/9 55.5%

P21980 | P40337 | Q9Y4K3 | P38646 | P63104

7

10941

regulation of cell death

6.17E-03

5/9 55.5%

P21980 | P40337 | Q9Y4K3 | P38646 | P63104

8

48661

positive regulation of smooth muscle cell proliferation

9.22E-03

2/9 22.2%

P21980 | Q9Y4K3

9

48660

regulation of smooth muscle cell proliferation

1.90E-02

2/9 22.2%

P21980 | Q9Y4K3

10

2274

myeloid leukocyte activation

1.93E-02

2/9 22.2%

Q9Y4K3 | P63104

11

35148

tube formation

1.93E-02

2/9 22.2%

P21980 | Q9Y4K3

12

48771

1.93E-02

2/9 22.2%

P21980 | Q9Y4K3

13

31666

1.93E-02

1/9 11.1%

Q9Y4K3

14

2441

1.93E-02

1/9 11.1%

P63104

15

290

tissue remodeling
positive regulation of lipopolysaccharide-mediated
signalling pathway
histamine secretion involved in inflammatory response
deadenylation-dependent decapping of nucleartranscribed mRNA

1.93E-02

1/9 11.1%

Q96C86

GO BIOLOGICAL PROCESS ENRICHMENT ANALYSIS - MPS1
NUMBER

GO-ID

DESCRIPTION

CORRECTED
P-VALUE

CLUSTER
FREQUENCY

GENES

1

22402

cell cycle process

8.91E-09

11/19 57.8%

P04637 | P07437 | Q53HL2 | Q13042 | Q8NG31 | Q12834 | P30260 | P24941 | P05067 | Q9H4B7 | Q53GA5

2

7049

cell cycle

8.91E-09

12/19 63.1%

P04637 | P07437 | Q16659 | Q53HL2 | Q13042 | Q8NG31 | Q12834 | P30260 | P24941 | P05067 | Q9H4B7 | Q53GA5

3

22403

cell cycle phase

3.05E-07

9/19 47.3%

P07437 | Q53HL2 | Q13042 | Q8NG31 | Q12834 | P30260 | P24941 | P05067 | Q9H4B7

4

279

M phase

1.06E-06

8/19 42.1%

P07437 | Q53HL2 | Q13042 | Q8NG31 | Q12834 | P30260 | P24941 | Q9H4B7

5

280

nuclear division

1.06E-06

7/19 36.8%

P07437 | Q53HL2 | Q13042 | Q8NG31 | Q12834 | P30260 | P24941

6

7067

Mitosis

1.06E-06

7/19 36.8%

P07437 | Q53HL2 | Q13042 | Q8NG31 | Q12834 | P30260 | P24941

7

278

mitotic cell cycle

1.06E-06

8/19 42.1%

P07437 | Q53HL2 | Q13042 | Q8NG31 | Q12834 | P30260 | P24941 | P05067

8

87

M phase of mitotic cell cycle

1.06E-06

7/19 36.8%

P07437 | Q53HL2 | Q13042 | Q8NG31 | Q12834 | P30260 | P24941

9

48285

organelle fission

1.06E-06

7/19 36.8%

P07437 | Q53HL2 | Q13042 | Q8NG31 | Q12834 | P30260 | P24941

10

32270

positive regulation of cellular protein metabolic process

3.56E-06

7/19 36.8%

P07437 | Q53HL2 | Q13042 | Q8NG31 | Q12834 | P30260 | P24941

11

51247

positive regulation of protein metabolic process

4.77E-06

7/19 36.8%

P04637 | Q13042 | Q12834 | P30260 | P55072 | Q96IF9 | Q53GA5

12

34976

response to endoplasmic reticulum stress

6.74E-06

4/19 21.0%

P04637 | P55072 | Q96IF9 | Q53GA5

13

6984

ER-nucleus signaling pathway

7.31E-06

4/19 21.0%

14

16043

cellular component organization

7.31E-06

14/19 73.6%

15

6996

organelle organization

1.02E-05

11/19 57.8%

P04637 | P55072 | Q96IF9 | Q53GA5
P07437 | Q53HL2 | Q13042 | Q8NG31 | Q12834 | P05067 | P24941 | Q53GA5 | P04637 | P30260 | P61964 | Q96IF9 |
P55072 | Q9H4B7
P04637 | P07437 | Q53HL2 | Q13042 | Q8NG31 | Q12834 | P30260 | P24941 | P61964 | Q9H4B7 | Q53GA5

34

Supplementary References
1. Firth, S.M. and Baxter, R.C. (2002) Cellular actions of the insulin-like growth factor binding
proteins. Endocr. Rev., 23, 824–54.
2. Azar,W.J., Zivkovic,S., Werther,G.A. and Russo,V.C. (2014) IGFBP-2 nuclear translocation is
mediated by a functional NLS sequence and is essential for its pro-tumorigenic actions in cancer cells.
Oncogene, 33, 578–88.
3. So,A.I., Levitt,R.J., Eigl,B., Fazli,L., Muramaki,M., Leung,S., Cheang,M.C.U., Nielsen,T.O.,
Gleave,M. and Pollak,M. (2008) Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-2 is a novel therapeutic
target associated with breast cancer. Clin. Cancer Res., 14, 6944–54.
4. Semenza,G.L. (2009) Regulation of oxygen homeostasis by hypoxia-inducible factor 1.
Physiology (Bethesda)., 24, 97–106.
5. Chilov,D., Camenisch,G., Kvietikova,I., Ziegler,U., Gassmann,M. and Wenger,R.H. (1999)
Induction and nuclear translocation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1): heterodimerization with
ARNT is not necessary for nuclear accumulation of HIF-1alpha. J. Cell Sci., 112 ( Pt 8), 1203–12.
6. Chachami,G., Paraskeva,E., Mingot,J.-M., Braliou,G.G., Görlich,D. and Simos,G. (2009)
Transport of hypoxia-inducible factor HIF-1alpha into the nucleus involves importins 4 and 7. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun., 390, 235–40.
7. Yeo,E.-J., Chun,Y.-S. and Park,J.-W. (2004) New anticancer strategies targeting HIF-1. Biochem.
Pharmacol., 68, 1061–9.
8. Gene,T. and Consortium,O. (2000) Gene Ontology : tool for the unification of biology. Nat. Genet.,
25, 25–29.
9. Orchard,S., Ammari,M., Aranda,B., Breuza,L., Briganti,L., Broackes-Carter,F., Campbell,N.H.,
Chavali,G., Chen,C., del-Toro,N., et al. (2014) The MIntAct project--IntAct as a common curation
platform for 11 molecular interaction databases. Nucleic Acids Res., 42, D358–63.
10. Fisk,H.A., Mattison,C.P. and Winey,M. (2003) Human Mps1 protein kinase is required for
centrosome duplication and normal mitotic progression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 100, 14875–
80.
11. Musacchio,A. and Salmon,D. (2007) The spindle-assembly checkpoint in space and time. Nat.
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 8, 379-93.
12. Kwiatkowski,N., Jelluma,N., Filippakopoulos,P., Soundararajan,M., Manak,M.S., Kwon,M.,
Choi,H.G., Sim,T., Deveraux,Q.L., Rottmann,S. et al. (2010) Small-molecule kinase inhibitors provide
insight into Mps1 cell cycle function. Nat. Chem. Biol., 6, 359-68.
13. Liu,S., Chan,G.K.T., Hittle,J.C., Fujii,G., Lees,E. and Yen,T.J. (2003) Human MPS1 Kinase Is
Required for Mitotic Arrest Induced by the Loss of CENP-E from Kinetochores. Mol. Biol. Cell, 14,
1638–51.
14. Zhang,X., Yin,Q., Ling,Y., Zhang,Y., Ma,R., Ma,Q., Cao,C., Zhong H., Liu,X. and Xu,Q. (2011)
Two LXXLL motifs in the N terminus of Mps1 are required for Mps1 nuclear import during G2/M
transition and sustained spindle checkpoint responses. Cell Cycle, 10, 2742–50.
15. Jemaá,M., Galluzzi,L., Kepp,O., Senovilla,L., Brands,M., Boemer,U., Koppitz,M., Lienau,P.,
Prechtl,S., Schulze,V. et al. (2013) Characterization of novel MPS1 inhibitors with preclinical
anticancer activity. Cell Death Differ., 20, 1532-45.
16. Kagami,Y., Nihira,K., Wada,S., Ono,M., Honda,M. and Yoshida,K. (2014) Mps1 phosphorylation
of condensin II controls chromosome condensation at the onset of mitosis. J. Cell Biol., 205, 781–90.
17. Maere,S., Heymans,K. and Kuiper,M. (2005) BiNGO: a Cytoscape plugin to assess
overrepresentation of gene ontology categories in biological networks. Bioinformatics, 21, 3448–9.
18. Dechat,T., Pfleghaar,K., Sengupta,K., Shimi,T., Shumaker,D.K., Solimando,L. and
Goldman,R.D. (2008) Nuclear lamins: major factors in the structural organization and function of the
nucleus and chromatin. Genes Dev., 22, 832–53.
19. Gant,T.M., Harris,C.A. and Wilson,K.L. (1999) Roles of LAP2 proteins in nuclear assembly and
DNA replication: truncated LAP2ß proteins alter lamina assembly, envelope formation, nuclear size,
and DNA replication efficiency in Xenopus laevis extracts. J. Cell Biol., 144, 1083–96.
20. Haraguchi,T., Koujin,T., Segura-Totten,M., Lee,K.K., Matsuoka,Y., Yoneda,Y., Wilson,K.L. and
Hiraoka,Y. (2001) BAF is required for emerin assembly into the reforming nuclear envelope. J. Cell
Sci., 114, 4575–85.
21. Sabbattini,P., Canzonetta,C., Sjoberg,M., Nikic,S., Georgiou,A., Kemball-Cook,G., Auner,H.W.
and Dillon,N. (2007) A novel role for the Aurora B kinase in epigenetic marking of silent chromatin in
differentiated postmitotic cells. EMBO J., 26, 4657–69.
22. Balboula,A.Z. and Schindler,K. (2014) Selective disruption of aurora C kinase reveals distinct
functions from aurora B kinase during meiosis in mouse oocytes. PLoS Genet., 10, e1004194.
35

23. Wu,C. (1997) Chromatin remodeling and the control of gene expression. J. Biol. Chem., 272,
28171–4.
24. Meerang,M., Ritz,D., Paliwal,S., Garajova,Z., Bosshard,M., Mailand,N., Janscak,P.,
Hübscher,U., Meyer,H. and Ramadan,K. (2011) The ubiquitin-selective segregase VCP/p97
orchestrates the response to DNA double-strand breaks. Nat. Cell Biol., 13, 1376–82.
25. Güttinger,S., Laurell,E. and Kutay,U. (2009) Orchestrating nuclear envelope disassembly and
reassembly during mitosis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 10, 178–91.
26. Nilsson,J., Yekezare,M., Minshull,J. and Pines,J. (2008) The APC/C maintains the spindle
assembly checkpoint by targeting Cdc20 for destruction. Nat. Cell Biol., 10, 1411–20.
27. Ostapenko,D., Burton,J.L. and Solomon,M.J. (2012) Identification of anaphase promoting
complex substrates in S. cerevisiae. PLoS ONE, 7, e45895.
28. Consortium,T.U. (2014) Activities at the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt). Nucleic Acids
Res., 42, D191–8.

36

