Published online

Nucleic Acids Research, 0000, Vol. 00, No. 00 1–10
doi:10.1093/nar/gkn000

RNA structure generates natural cooperativity between
single-stranded RNA binding proteins targeting 5’ and 3’UTRs
Yi-Hsuan Lin 1 and Ralf Bundschuh 1,2,3,4

∗

of Physics, 2 Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, 3 Division of Hematology, and 4 Center for RNA
Biology, The Ohio State University, 191 W Woodruff Ave., Columbus, OH 43210-1107, USA

arXiv:1410.5319v1 [q-bio.BM] 20 Oct 2014

1 Department

ABSTRACT
In post-transcriptional regulation, an mRNA molecule is
bound by many proteins and/or miRNAs to modulate its
function. To enable combinatorial gene regulation, these
binding partners of an RNA must communicate with each
other, exhibiting cooperativity. Even in the absence of direct
physical interactions between the binding partners, such
cooperativity can be mediated through RNA secondary
structures, since they affect the accessibility of the binding
sites. Here we propose a quantitative measure of this
structure-mediated cooperativity that can be numerically
calculated for an arbitrary RNA sequence. Focusing on an
RNA with two binding sites, we derive a characteristic
difference of free energy differences, i.e. ∆∆G, as a measure
of the effect of the occupancy of one binding site on the
binding strength of another. We apply this measure to a
large number of human and C. elegans mRNAs, and find
that structure-mediated cooperativity is a generic feature.
Interestingly, this cooperativity not only affects binding sites
in close proximity along the sequence but also configurations
in which one binding site is located in the 5’UTR and the
other is located in the 3’UTR of the mRNA. Furthermore, we
find that this end-to-end cooperativity is determined by the
UTR sequences while the sequences of the coding regions
are irrelevant.
INTRODUCTION
Post-transcriptional regulation of messenger RNAs (mRNAs)
is an important component in cellular information processing.
At the molecular level, this post-transcriptional regulation
involves the binding of a multitude of proteins and other
factors such as microRNAs incorporated into riboprotein
complexes to a messenger RNA molecule (1, 2). These
proteins affect gene expression through regulation of mRNA
stability, localization, and translation. The importance of these
RNA protein interactions can be gauged from the fact that
there are close to 800 RNA binding proteins annotated in the
proteome of the human embryonic kidney (3) and 860 in HeLa
cells (4), and that a PubMed title search for the words “RNA”,
“protein”, and “binding” yields more than 2,500 articles.

∗ To

In order to obtain combinatorial gene regulation, binding
events of RNA binding proteins and other RNA binding
factors have to be interdependent, or in biochemical terms
cooperative. Since most protein and microRNA binding
sites are located in the untranslated regions (UTRs) at the
ends of a messenger RNA (5), it is an interesting question
how cooperativity between these distant regions of an RNA
molecule is achieved, especially in light of recent evidence
that the protein bridge between the 3’ and 5’UTRs in
eukaryotes mediated by proteins that simultaneously bind the
poly(A) tail and the cap may not be essential (6). Here, we
present a natural mechanism for such cooperativity that relies
on RNA secondary structure alone.
Qualitatively the mechanism for this cooperativity is as
follows: Many RNA binding proteins bind to single-stranded
regions of RNA (7, 8, 9). Therefore, a natural competition
arises between the formation of intramolecular base pairs
in the RNA and the binding of proteins to unpaired bases
(here and in the following we will restrict our language to
“RNA binding proteins” even though in the context of this
study any RNA binding factor that competes with the RNA
for base pairing, such as, e.g., a microRNA, can play the
role of what we call an “RNA binding protein”). We have
recently discovered that this competition between binding
to a single stranded RNA binding protein and formation of
intramolecular base pairs provides a possible mechanism for
cooperativity among proteins binding an RNA molecule (10).
A protein binding an RNA molecule will change the RNA’s
secondary structure by prohibiting the bound bases from
pairing, which in turn affects the base pairing at the binding
site of the second protein, and thus the ability of the second
protein to bind (see Fig. 1). In our previous work (10)
we have focused on establishing that this RNA secondary
structure mediated cooperativity is a long-range effect, and
used simplified models of RNA folding to understand this
behavior for random sequences. Here, we will show that this
cooperativity (i) occurs for natural sequences, (ii) is of a
biologically relevant order of magnitude of several kcal/mol,
(iii) not only occurs between protein binding sites that are
within 100nt or so along the RNA but also between the 5’UTR
and the 3’UTR, and (iv) is determined by the UTR sequences
with little effect from the coding regions.

whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 (614) 688 3978; Fax: +1 (614) 292 7557; Email: bundschuh@mps.ohio-state.edu

c The Author(s)

This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

2 Nucleic Acids Research, 0000, Vol. 00, No. 00

a)a)
1

⇒

a)

RNA Þ G(0) :

1

RNA(1) Þ G(1) :
N

N

RNA(2) Þ G(2) :
RNA(12) Þ G(12):

b)a)

a)

1

1

⇒
N

N

Figure 1. An example of structure-mediated cooperativity, where open boxes
indicate unoccupied protein binding sites and filled boxes indicate occupied
protein binding sites. G is the free energy of the RNA-protein complex in each
step, G0 is the free energy of the RNA secondary structure alone, ∆Gs is the
free energy associated with breaking the base pairs in the stem containing the
two protein binding sites, c1 , c2 , KD,1 , and KD,2 are the concentrations
and dissociation constants of the first and second protein, repectively, R is
the gas constant, and T is the temperature in Kelvin. (a) To have the first
protein bind to bases in a stem of the structure in the absence of the second
protein, the stem has to be broken, resulting in a free energy difference of
∆G0→1 = ∆Gs −RT ln(c1 /KD,1 ). (b) Once the second protein is bound
to the opposing bases in the stem, the first protein can directly bind to its
binding site without the loss of free energy by breaking additional base pairs,
yielding ∆G2→12 = −RT ln(c1 /KD,1 ) < ∆G0→1 . Thus, in this case the
two proteins exhibit positive cooperativity.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
RNA secondary structure prediction
A single-stranded RNA folds into different configurations
by pairing its nucleotides and forming stable Watson-Crick
(i.e. A–U or G–C) or wobble (i.e., G–U) base pairs. Stacks
of these base pairs form stiff helices connected by flexible
linkers of unpaired bases. In the case of structural RNAs
these elements fold into a three-dimensional structure required
for the biological function of the molecule, called the
tertiary structure. However, given the generic propensity of
nucleotides to base pair, also messenger RNAs, which are
not primarily designed to fold into a specific structure, will
form base pairs. Since here we are interested in messenger
RNAs, we will focus on these secondary structures only. For
computational convenience we follow the usual approach of
the field and exclude the formation of pseudoknots because
such structures contribute small amounts of free energy if
they are short and become kinetically suppressed if they are
long (11). More specifically, we use the Vienna package (12)
to calculate the free energies of secondary structure folding,
which implements the state of the art nearest neighbor free
energy model of RNA secondary structure formation (13).
RNA-protein binding
To discuss RNA-protein binding events, we consider only the
simplest effects of the binding of the protein on the RNA
secondary structure (10, 14): (i) A bound protein prevents all
nucleotides in its footprint from base pairing and (ii) binding
of a protein to the RNA results in a free energy gain of
RT ln(c/KD ), where c is the concentration of the protein in
solution, KD is the dissociation constant of the protein from
the specific site in the RNA, which contains all the details of

Figure 2. The four possible RNA-protein complexes to consider. Lines are
RNA backbones and dots are bases. Transparent and black blocks represent
the unoccupied and occupied protein binding sites, respectively. Only the
bases which are not in the occupied binding regions participate in base pairing.

the interaction between the protein and the RNA, R is the
gas constant and T is the temperature in Kelvin (15). More
sophisticated effects of RNA-protein binding, for example the
increased geometrical distance of the bases adjacent to the
protein binding site upon binding of the protein or any other
modifications to the binding propensities of nucleotides not
within the footprint of the protein, are not considered in our
minimal model and will be subject of future research.
We will further constrain ourselves to the case that
there are only two proteins, P1 and P2 , binding one
binding site each on a given RNA molecule, which is the
simplest system to investigate protein-protein cooperativity
in (10). Consequently, there are four possible RNA-protein
complexes, distinguished by whether the first and/or the
second protein binding site is occupied or not, which we label
as RN A, RN A(1) , RN A(2) , and RN A(12) as illustrated
in Fig. 2. For each complex, different sets of base pairs
can participate in base pairing interactions. We calculate the
free energies G(0) , G(1) , G(2) , and G(12) of the secondary
structures for each of the four complexes using the constraint
folding capabilities of the Vienna package to exclude the
nucleotides “hidden” in the footprints of bound proteins
from base pairing. To obtain the free energies of the entire
complexes the protein binding free energy RT ln(c1 /KD,1 )
has to be subtracted from G(1) and G(12) and the protein
binding free energy RT ln(c2 /KD,2 ) of the second protein has
to be subtracted from G(2) and G(12) .

Quantitating protein-protein cooperativity
With the two proteins P1 and P2 , all RNA-protein binding
reactions can be expressed as

∆G

0→1
RN A+P1 +P2 ←−−−
−→ RN A(1) +P2

x



 ∆G1→12 ,


y

x




∆G0→2 



y

RN A(2) +P1 ←−−−−→
∆G2→12

RN A(12)

Nucleic Acids Research, 0000, Vol. 00, No. 00 3

l

where the free energy differences ∆G of the four reactions are
given by
∆G0→1 = G(1) −G(0) −RT ln(c1 /KD,1 ),
(2)

∆G0→2 = G

(0)

−G

−RT ln(c2 /KD,2 ),

(1a)

(1c)

∆G2→12 = G(12) −G(2) −RT ln(c1 /KD,1 ).

(1d)

The cooperativity between the two binding sites can be
quantified by comparing the binding free energies ∆G of
the reactions on opposite sides of this diagram, e.g., the
difference in binding free energy ∆G0→1 for the binding of
protein P1 in the absence of protein P2 and the binding free
energy ∆G2→12 associated with binding of protein P1 in the
presence of protein P2 (or vice versa with the two proteins
interchanged which leads to the same result). This yields the
cooperativity free energy

= G(1) +G(2) −G(12) −G(0)

Dout=n1+n2

(1b)

∆G1→12 = G(12) −G(1) −RT ln(c2 /KD,2 ),

∆∆G ≡ ∆G0→1 −∆G2→12 = ∆G0→2 −∆G1→12

n1

n2
l
Figure 3. Definition of the outside distance, Dout , as the sum of the distances
from each of the two protein binding sites to their corresponding ends in units
of nt. Black dots represent bases and the two blocks represent the protein
binding sites with footprint length l (in this figure l = 4nt). In our numerical
calculation we restrict ourselves to the symmetric case n1 = n2 , and use a
footprint size of l =6nt.

be l =6nt in agreement with typical footprint sizes of RNA
binding proteins.
Sequences

(2)

which becomes independent of the protein concentrations c1
and c2 . Therefore, for an arbitrary RNA sequence, once the
two protein binding sites are assigned, the Vienna package can
be used to calculate the structural free energies G(0) , G(1) ,
G(2) , and G(12) , from which the free energy difference ∆∆G
quantifying the cooperativity can be deduced via Eq. (2). For
a positive cooperativity, a protein already bound helps the
other protein bind, leading to ∆G2→12 < ∆G0→1 and thus
a positive ∆∆G; for a negative cooperativity, the situation is
reversed and ∆∆G is negative.
Locations of protein binding sites
We are especially interested in the cooperativity between the
proteins bound on the 5’ and 3’UTRs close to the 5’ and 3’
ends of the mRNAs, respectively. Therefore, we assign the
two protein binding sites of each mRNA in their 5’ and 3’
ends, and vary their distances from the ends of the RNAs
(note that in our minimal model the binding site of each
protein is specified explicitly, i.e., that we assume perfect
sequence specificity for the sequence at whatever binding site
we choose without actually specifying that sequence). The
relative location of the two binding sites is quantified by the
outside distance, Dout , which is defined in Fig. 3 as the
sum Dout = n1 +n2 of the distances n1 and n2 of the two
binding sites from their respective sequence ends. In order
to avoid the very significant computational cost of varying
the two distances n1 and n2 independently, we consider only
the situation that the two binding sites are symmetric, n1 =
n2 , when we calculate the ∆∆G(Dout ) of an ensemble of
mRNAs or of several extremely long sequences; we do not
expect any qualitative differences for asymmetric situations.
In our studies involving microRNA binding sites described
below, we choose the known microRNA binding site in the
3’UTR and vary the location of the putative protein binding
site in the 5’UTR. The footprint of the proteins is set to

We select human mRNA sequences in NCBI’s RefSeq
database (16) to study cooperativity between 5’ and 3’UTRs.
As a comparison to gauge the influence of the length of
the UTRs, we also investigate C. elegans mRNAs from the
WormBase database (17), in which the UTRs are much shorter
than those in human mRNAs.
Some of the sequences are deposited in these databases
including their poly(A) tails. Since these tails, as
homopolymers, contribute very little to the RNA secondary
structure, and in order to treat all mRNAs consistently no
matter if they were submitted to the databases with or without
poly(A) tails, we discard all poly(A) tails. Specifically, we
remove any runs of three or more consecutive adenines at the
3’ ends of the sequences in the database. We are aware that in
eliminating the poly(A) tails, we lose the ability of applying
our results to the important class of poly(A) binding proteins
(PABP) (18, 19, 20); however, since the poly(A) tails should
not form secondary structures, PABPs are not expected to
be subject to structure-mediated cooperativity, and thus are
irrelevant in this study.
Since RNA secondary structure prediction scales as the
third power of sequence length, computational resources
constrain us to focus on the shorter mRNAs in the database.
Dictated by computational feasibility, we thus choose the
range from 500 to 1500 bases (counted after dropping
the poly(A) tails). For human sequences, we select those
sequences in which both 5’ and 3’UTRs are longer than 110
bases to ensure that all our binding sites are always in the
UTRs even for the greatest outside distance, max(Dout ) =
200nt, yielding a total of 2282 sequences. For C. elegans
sequences, we select the sequences with short UTRs by
constraining the UTR lengths between 30 and 150 bases,
yielding a total of 1277 sequences.
Since we want to identify which, if any, regions of the
human mRNAs might have evolved to generate cooperativity,
we also generate several sets of artificial RNA sequences
based on our set of human sequences: (a) We shuffle each of
the 2282 selected human sequences, generating an ensemble
of random sequences with equal dinucleotide frequencies (21).

4 Nucleic Acids Research, 0000, Vol. 00, No. 00

(b) We shuffle the UTRs of each of the 2282 human sequences
to generate an ensemble of random sequences with equal
dinucleotide frequencies in the UTRs but with unchanged
coding sequences (CDSs). (c) We select sequences that have
UTR lengths in the range from 110nt to 400nt and replace their
CDSs by the CDS of the single sequence NM004242 (300nt),
rendering an ensemble of totally 1377 artificial sequences with
a fixed CDS.
In order to show that our results are not limited to short
mRNA sequences, we also selected four individual mRNA
sequences with more than 2000 bases, namely PTP4A1,
MARCKS, MYC, and PPP1R15B for verification purposes
(it is computationally feasibly to study a few individual long
mRNAs, but averaging over the entirety or even just a large
number of these is not possible).
Human microRNA binding sites
Above, we describe symmetric protein binding sites, which
are designed to have n1 = n2 in Dout = n1 +n2 . However, in
addition to these “assigned” binding sites, we also investigate
“natural” microRNA binding sites on 3’UTRs (22), and
specifically their cooperativity with proteins binding on the
5’UTR.
We fetch microRNA binding sites from microRNA.org (23)
using a strict mirSVR score cutoff of −1 (24). Again, we
select only the mRNA sequences with total lengths from 500nt
to 1500nt and UTR lengths above 110nt for computational
reasons. We limit the distance between the microRNA binding
site and the 3’ end of the mRNA to be less than 100 bases,
i.e. n2 ≤ 100, because we want to focus on the cooperativity
between microRNAs bound on the end and proteins bound
at the beginning of the same mRNA sequence. The abovementioned conditions yield 1173 microRNA-mRNA binding
pairs, in which some of the mRNA sequences correspond to
more than one microRNA binding site. We investigate each
such microRNA-mRNA pair independently, i.e. we consider
only one specific microRNA interacting with its bound
mRNA at a time. The cooperativity is calculated between
the microRNA and a protein binding site around the end of
the 5’UTR. We set the protein footprint to be l = 6nt, and
investigate all possible protein binding sites from exactly at
the end (n1 = 0nt) to 100 bases from the end of 5’UTR (n1 =
100nt). For each microRNA-mRNA pair we find the 5’UTR
protein binding site that has the greatest ∆∆G with respect to
the microRNA, recording it as the strongest cooperativity of
the microRNA-mRNA pair.
As a comparison, multiple random ensembles of
microRNA-mRNA binding pairs are generated. In each
random ensemble the microRNA binding sites, which are
located by their n2 on their “naturally” bound mRNA, are
randomly assigned to a different mRNA. The strongest
cooperativities of the reassigned microRNA-mRNA pairs are
recorded as a reference to compare the cooperativities of the
natural microRNA-mRNA pairs to.

starting sequences. We calculate the maximum over all
|∆∆G| for all possible pairs of protein binding sites.
Considering the massive computational resources required for
a search through all possible protein binding site pairs (on the
order of N 3 ×N 2 ∼ N 5 in which N is the length of sequence),
we compromise on merely searching protein binding sites in
the region of 5nt ≤ n1 ,n2 ≤ 25nt, as we are more interested
in the cooperativitiy between the ends of the two UTRs. In
each evolutionary step, we randomly choose and mutate a
nucleotide of the sequence, and recalculate the maximum
of |∆∆G| for all protein binding pairs. If the maximum is
greater than that of the previous sequence, we keep the new
sequence; otherwise we continue with the previous sequence.
This evolutionary step is repeated 1,000 times.
RESULTS
Distance dependence of structure-mediated cooperativity
We quantify RNA secondary structure mediated protein
binding cooperativity by the cooperativity free energy ∆∆G,
which is defined as the difference between the free energies of
binding of the first protein in the presence and absence of the
second protein (see Materials and Methods). If it is positive,
the presence of the second protein promotes binding of the
first while if it is negative, the presence of the second protein
prevents binding of the first. In order to demonstrate that RNA
secondary structure mediated protein binding cooperativity
is a generic effect providing cooperativity between proteins
binding at the two ends of an RNA molecule, we select 2282
human mRNA sequences (see Materials and Methods). We
choose one protein binding site to be close to the 5’ end of
each molecule and one close to the 3’ end and systematically
vary their distance from their respective ends such that the sum
Dout of the two distances from the ends ranges from 0nt to
200nt (see Fig. 3). We calculate the cooperativity free energy
∆∆G for each “outside” distance Dout and each of the 2282
sequences.
Fig. 4 shows the mean and standard deviation of the
cooperativity free energy ∆∆G over all 2282 sequences as
a function of the outside distance Dout of the two protein
binding sites. The mean cooperativity free energy remains
within about 0.1kcal/mol of zero, more or less independent
of the outside distance between the protein binding sites.
That in principle leaves two possibilities, namely that either
RNA secondary structure mediated cooperativity is a very
small effect or that it is a significant effect but roughly equal
numbers of sequences show positive as negative cooperativity.
The standard deviation allows us to differentiate between these
two scenarios: the fact that it starts out above 1kcal/mol when
the two binding sites are very close to their respective ends
and then falls to about 0.5kcal/mol for outside distances of
30nt and stays in this range for binding sites up to 100nt away
from their respective ends (yielding a total outside distance of
200nt) implies that many sequences must have cooperativity
free energies with absolute values of this order of magnitude.

Artificial evolution of highly cooperative sequences
We use an evolutionary algorithm, in order to explore how
high structure-mediate cooperativities can become. We choose
five natural sequences, namely NM 006308, NM 022645,
NM 001104548, NM 001244390, and NM 001272086, as

Structure-mediated cooperativity is significant for large
numbers of mRNA molecules
In order to classify cooperativity free energies as significant
or not, it is convenient to compare them to the thermal energy

Nucleic Acids Research, 0000, Vol. 00, No. 00 5

1.5
mean
standard deviation

∆∆G(kcal/mol)

2RT
1
RT
0.5

0

-0.5

08

150

D

out

200

(nt)

Figure 4. The mean (circles) and standard deviation (diamonds) of the
cooperativity free energy ∆∆G of 2282 human sequences, as a function
of the outside distance Dout between the two protein binding sites. The
mean of the cooperativity free energy ∆∆G is close to zero for all outside
distances, while its standard deviation is on the order of or greater than the
thermal energy scale of RT =0.6kcal/mol. The dashed vertical lines label
two different outside distances Dout for which the whole distribution of
the cooperativity free energies are compared in Fig. 5. The maximum of the
standard deviation of the cooperativity free energy occurs at Dout =8nt.

1500

Dout = 8

4

10

D
N(∆∆G) ((kcal/mol)−1)

out

= 150

2

10

1000
0

10
−5

0

5

500

0
−5

0
∆∆G(kcal/mol)

5

Figure 5. The number of mRNA molecules with respect to given
cooperativity free energies ∆∆G (in bin sizes of 0.2kcal/mol) at outside
distances between the protein binding sites of Dout =8 (red solid line)
and Dout =150 (green dashed line). The inset shows the same data on
a logarithmic scale. The two distributions are both centered at 0. The
distribution for Dout =8 (when the protein binding sites are close to their
respective ends of the molecule) extends much wider than that for Dout =150
when the protein binding sites are further away from the ends of the
molecule. Vertical black dashed and dash-dotted lines label |∆∆G| = RT
and |∆∆G| = 2RT , respectively.

of RT , which is approximately 0.6kcal/mol at temperatures
of 37◦ C. Free energy differences below this magnitude will
not have a measurable effect on protein binding in the thermal
environment of a cell. Free energy differences larger than
RT do result in significant protein binding cooperativity. The
horizontal dashed lines in Fig. 4 indicate cooperativity free
energy levels of RT and 2RT and show that the standard
deviation of the cooperativity free energy is on the order
of RT in the distance range of 30nt . Dout . 150nt. Thus
a good fraction of molecules must have cooperativity free
energies larger than RT even at these outside distances. This
is illustrated in Fig. 5 for two specific outside distances,
namely Dout = 8nt where both proteins are very close to their
respective ends and the standard deviation of the cooperativity
free energy has its maximum, and Dout = 150nt, where the
standard deviation of the cooperativity free energy starts to fall
below RT . The figure illustrates how many sequences have a
given cooperativity free energy in bin sizes of 0.2kcal/mol. As
suggested by the small mean, the distributions of cooperativity
free energies are symmetric with equal numbers of molecules
showing positive as negative cooperativity. It can also be seen
that the distribution at Dout = 8nt is much wider than the
distribution at Dout = 150nt as expected from their standard
deviations shown in Fig. 4. The inset of Fig. 5 shows the same
distributions as the main figure but on a logarithmic scale that
emphasizes the long tails of the distribution indicating some
sequences with very large cooperativity free energies.
An additional way to quantify the significance of the
cooperativity free energies is to count the number of molecules
out of the 2282 tested that have a cooperativity free energy
above a certain threshold for each outside distance Dout .
Fig. 6 shows this data for thresholds of RT and 2RT . The
data shows that when the proteins bind very close to their
respective ends of the RNA molecule, about half of the totally
2282 investigated sequences have |∆∆G| > RT and a quarter
have |∆∆G| > 2RT (at Dout =6nt), implying that a significant
cooperativity between two protein binding sites, of which one
is at the 5’ end of a molecule and the other is at the 3’ end of
a molecule, is a generic property among messenger RNAs. In
addition, even at an outside distance of 200nt (each protein
binds 100nt from its respective end of the RNA) still 10%
of the 2282 messenger RNAs studied show a cooperativity
free energy of at least RT and more than a hundred show a
cooperativity of at least 2RT .
Cooperativities in human mRNAs and random RNA
sequences have different statistical characteristics
In our previous work we verified that structure mediated
cooperativity is a generic property of all RNA molecules,
stating that cooperativity exists in an ensemble of random
RNA sequences (10). In this study we investigate the
cooperativity in human, and thus evolved, mRNAs. Thus,
we are curious about what the similarities and differences
between the cooperativities for a “random” and a “natural”
sequence ensemble are.
To compare with the human mRNA sequences, we thus
randomly permute nucleotides in each of the 2282 selected
human sequences, and generate two ensembles of 2282
random sequences (see Materials and Methods): (a) random
sequences generated by shuffling the entire sequence of each

6 Nucleic Acids Research, 0000, Vol. 00, No. 00

2

1200

∆∆G(kcal/mol)

1000
Number of Sequences

human
fully shuffled
UTR shuffled
C. elegans

|∆∆G/RT|>1
|∆∆G/RT|>2

800
600
400

1.5
2RT
1
RT
0.5

200
0

50

100
Dout (nt)

150

200

Figure 6. The number of mRNA sequences with biochemically relevant
protein binding cooperativity among the 2282 investigated human mRNA
sequences. The two data sets correspond to |∆∆G|/kB T > 1 (circles) and
|∆∆G|/kB T > 2 (diamonds). The data shows that at any given distance
Dout a significant fraction of molecules has a significant cooperativity free
energy.

human mRNA such that the dinucleotide frequencies are
identical to those of the original human mRNAs, and (b)
random sequences generated by shuffling only the 5’ and
3’UTR sequences of each human mRNA while leaving the
CDS unaffected. We investigate cooperativity in these two
random sequence ensembles, and compare their statistical
properties with those of the natural human sequences.
The standard deviations of ∆∆G(Dout ) of the two random
ensembles and the human mRNA ensemble are shown in
Fig. 7. We notice that all these three ensembles comprise
many sequences with biologically relevant cooperativities, i.e.
∆∆G is on the order of or greater than 0.6kcal/mol. However,
the standard deviation of the human mRNA ensemble has a
large peak at small Dout , and then sharply decreases to merely
around RT at Dout ≥ 50nt. Instead, the standard deviation of
the completely shuffled random sequences smoothly decays
in the entire investigated region, 0nt ≤ Dout ≤ 200nt. The
standard deviation of the UTR-shuffled sequences is in
between those of the human mRNA and fully shuffled
sequence ensembles.
The fraction of sequences that have |∆∆G| > 2RT in the
human mRNA and the two random sequence ensembles are
shown in Fig. 8. Similar to the standard deviations, for the two
random sequence ensembles, the fractions of sequences with
strong cooperativities decrease smoothly as Dout increases,
whereas for human mRNAs the fraction decreases sharply
once Dout becomes greater than that for the maximum at
Dout = 8nt. Taken together, a human mRNA is likely to
have strong cooperativity between the ends of the 5’ and
3’UTR, while this cooperativity decreases rapidly as the two
UTR binding sites are farther from their respective ends. On
the other hand, random sequences perform power-law like,
smoothly decaying cooperativity with respect to Dout . We
thus conclude that human RNAs are different from random
RNAs in terms of their cooperativity properties. While one
might have expected stronger cooperativity in the evolved

0

50

100

150

200

Dout (nt)
Figure 7. The standard deviations of the cooperativity free energy ∆∆G for
different mRNA ensembles including 2282 sequences each, as functions of the
distance Dout between the protein binding sites. Statistics of four sequence
ensembles are shown: natural human mRNAs (circles), dinucleotide-shuffled
human sequences (diamonds), sequences with randomized UTRs (crosses),
and natural C. elegans mRNAs (squares). All four sequence ensembles
have standard deviations on the order of or greater than the thermal energy
scale of RT =0.6kcal/mol, implying that a biologically relevant ∆∆G is a
general property for mRNA sequence ensembles. However, different sequence
ensembles show different statistical characteristics.

35

fraction of sequences (%)

0
0

human
fully shuffled
UTR shuffled
C. elegans

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

0

50

100

D

out

150

200

(nt)

Figure 8. The fractions of sequences that have |∆∆G(Dout )| > 2RT in
different sequence ensembles: natural human mRNAs (circles), dinucleotideshuffled human sequences (diamonds), sequences with randomized UTRs
(crosses), and natural C. elegans mRNAs (squares). All four ensembles show
maxima of the fraction at small Dout . However, their distance dependences
are different.

human sequences than in their randomly shuffled counterparts,
we would like to point out that we, as discussed above, for
computational reasons only look at symmetrically located
binding sites of the two proteins. These will in general
not correspond to the true protein binding sites on those
natural mRNAs and it is conceivable that a possible design
for cooperativity at true binding sites in fact leads to the
suppression of cooperativity at the symmetrically located
positions we interrogate.

Nucleic Acids Research, 0000, Vol. 00, No. 00 7

1.5

3

PTP4A1, 5081bp
MARCKS, 4289bp
MYC, 2364bp
PPP1R15B, 5273bp

human
CDS replaced

2

1

∆∆G(kcal/mol)

∆∆G(kcal/mol)

2RT

RT
0.5

2RT
1
RT
0
−RT
−1
−2RT

0

0

50

100

150

200

Dout (nt)

−2
0

50

100
Dout (nt)

150

200

Figure 9. The standard deviations of the cooperativity free energy ∆∆G of
2282 human mRNAs and 1377 CDS-replaced sequences. The two standard
deviations are very similar to each other, implying that the cooperativity
depends on UTRs instead of CDSs.

Figure 10. The cooperativity free energy of four randomly selected mRNA
molecules longer than 2000nt as a function of outside distance ∆∆G(Dout ).
Horizontal lines label the scales of ±RT and ±2RT . For all four molecule
∆∆G exceeds these energy scales and thus develops significant cooperativity
at specific values of the outside distance Dout .

Cooperativity is driven by the UTRs and not by the
coding sequences

RNA structure mediated cooperativity between the
sequence ends persists in long mRNA molecules

Since we have shown in the previous section that replacing the
UTRs with shuffled sequences yields similar cooperativities
as shuffling the entire sequence, we here ask the inverse
question and retain the UTRs while replacing the CDSs of
the ensemble of human mRNAs by one fixed CDS (see
Materials and Methods). Fig. 9 shows the comparison of the
standard deviations of ∆∆G(Dout ) of human mRNAs and
the CDS-replaced sequences. The two ensembles of sequences
show very similar profiles. This similarity suggests that the
cooperativity between the 5’ and 3’UTR binding sites is
determined by the two UTR sequences, while the coding
region has little effect.

While computational complexity does not allow us to include
mRNA molecules longer than 1500nt in our systematic study
above, we selected four individual mRNA molecules with
more than 2000nt to determine if our findings of significant
cooperativity between 5’ and 3’ ends of an mRNA hold for
longer molecules as well. Fig. 10 shows the cooperativity
free energy of these four molecules as a function of outside
distance Dout . It can be seen that all four chosen molecules
have some outside distances Dout at which |∆∆G| > 2RT
and even though for two of them (MYC and PPP1R15B) the
binding sites with such large cooperativity free energy are very
close to the ends, all molecules also have cooperativity free
energies in excess of 1RT at some outside distance between
50nt and 150nt.

Cooperativities in C. elegans mRNAs are weaker than
those in human mRNAs
Compared to human mRNA sequences, C. elegans mRNAs
comprise much shorter UTRs (16, 17). As we have confirmed
in the last section that the cooperativity is driven by the
UTRs, it is natural to investigate the cooperativites of an
ensemble of sequences that have short UTRs. Thus, we
choose an ensemble of 1277 C. elegans mRNAs of which
both UTRs are in the range from 30 to 150 bases and the
total sequence lengths are between 500 and 1500 bases.
Their standard deviation of ∆∆G(Dout ) and the number
of sequences having significant ∆∆G(Dout ) are plotted
in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively. The two figures show two
consistent consequences. First, the cooperativities in C.
elegans mRNAs are also biologically relevant, i.e. |∆∆G| &
RT . Second, although cooperativities in C. elegans mRNAs
are biologically relevant, they are significantly weaker than
the cooperativities in human sequences. The latter result
is additional evidence for the strong relationship between
cooperativity and UTR sequences.

Human microRNA binding sites show significant negative
cooperativities
A large number of microRNAs bind to the 3’UTRs of mRNA
sequences to regulate their abundance. At the same time,
proteins are bound to the 5’UTRs, e.g., see (25, 26). Thus,
in addition to the symmetric binding sites with n1 = n2 ,
studied so far, we also investigate the cooperativites between
these microRNAs binding at their experimentally verified
sites in the 3’UTR and putative 5’UTR binding proteins.
We select 1173 microRNA-mRNA binding pairs from the
microRNA.org database (see Materials and Methods). For
each microRNA binding site in a 3’UTR, we search through
putative protein binding sites in the first 100 bases in
the 5’UTR of the corresponding mRNA, and record the
cooperativity free energy ∆∆G of the binding site with
the greastest absolute value of the cooperativity free energy
∆∆G, termed ∆∆Gmax . We note that although the position
of the putative protein binding site in the 5’UTR is selected
by maximizing the absolute value of the cooperativity free

8 Nucleic Acids Research, 0000, Vol. 00, No. 00

20
30RT

Natural sites
Random range
Random 4σ

80

|∆∆G max |(kcal/mol)

-1

N(∆∆G max ) ((kcal/mol) )

100

60
40
20
0
-10

-3.8

0

5

10

∆∆G max (kcal/mol)
Figure 11. The number of microRNA-mRNA binding pairs, for which
the strongest cooperativity with respect to a binding site in the 5’UTR
corresponds to a given value of ∆∆Gmax , in bins of 0.2kcal/mol. While
the number distribution of human binding pairs does not show significant
differences compared to randomly shuffled binding pairs for most values
of ∆∆Gmax , a peak at ∆∆Gmax ≈ −3.8kcal/mol suggest that there are a
group of human sequences with strongly negative cooperativities between the
3’UTR-bound microRNA and putative 5’UTR-bound proteins.

15
20RT
10
10RT
5

0

NM 001104548
NM 001244390
NM 001272086
NM 006308
NM 022645

0

200

400

600

800

1000

Evolutionary step
Figure 12. Cooperativities along artificial evolutionary trajectories starting
from five human sequences seeking to maximize the cooperativity free energy.
Compared to the cooperativities in natural human sequences, which are on the
order of RT , the artificial sequences generated by mutations support much
stronger cooperativities of |∆∆G| > 10RT .

Cooperativities of artifically evolved RNA sequences can
be large
energy, the chosen cooperativity free energy still can be either
positive or negative. As a comparison, we randomly shuffle
the positions of the microRNA binding sites, matching them
with different mRNAs. The ∆∆Gmax calculated from these
randomly shuffled microRNA-mRNA binding pairs help us
evaluate the significance of the characteristics discovered in
the natural microRNA-mRNA pairs.
Fig. 11 shows the distribution of the ∆∆Gmax in the 1173
microRNA-mRNA binding pairs in bin sizes of 0.2kcal/mol,
with the grey regions representing the distribution of 10
ensembles of randomly shuffled binding pairs. The dark grey
region for each cooperativity free energy bin designates the
range of frequencies observed among the 10 ensembles while
the light grey region indicates the regime of four standard
deviations. The figure illustrates that for most cooperativity
free energies, the ensemble of natural binding pairs does not
show significant differences from the ensembles of randomly
shuffled binding pairs. However, in the region of negative
∆∆Gmax , the natural binding pairs exhibit a characteristic
difference from random fluctuations, namely a peak at
∆∆Gmax ≈ −3.8kcal/mol≈ −6RT labeled in Fig. 11. The
number of microRNAs with cooperativities of this magnitude
is greater than its expected frequency based on the 10 random
sequence ensembles by more than four standard deviations.
We conclude that this peak is statistically significant,
suggesting that a group of microRNAs result in strongly
negative cooperativites with respect to proteins bound to the
5’UTRs. Considering the role of microRNAs in silencing and
suppression of gene regulation (22), the negative cooperativity
we discover in the statistics of human microRNA-mRNA
binding pairs is reasonable and, furthermore, implies that a
microRNA can participate in combinatorial regulation with
proteins binding far from its binding site.

In order to find out how strong cooperativities between the
3’UTR and the 5’UTR can possibly become, we do not
restrict ourselves to natural sequences but rather search for
the maximum of the cooperativity free energy ∆∆G among
a huge number of possible sequences using an evolutionary
algorithm (see Materials and Methods). In Fig. 12 we show
evolution trajectories starting from five human sequences over
1000 mutation steps. At the end of the artificial evolution
trajectories all five human mRNAs mutate to artificial
sequences comprising very strong cooperativities. Three
sequences NM 001104548, NM 006308, and NM 022645
eventually mutate to sequences with |∆∆Gmax | ≈ 20RT ,
and NM 001244390 and NM 001272086 have even higher
final cooperativities of |∆∆Gmax | ≈ 30RT . This result
shows that appropriately designed RNA molecules can
support cooperativities much stronger than typically found
in natural mRNA sequences. However, considering that most
biochemical reactions occur at energy scales of a few RT ,
such large ∆∆G are actually unrealistic and inappropriate
for biological functions as the strong interactions they would
confer would not be reversible thus rendering regulation
impossible.
DISCUSSION
In this study we have introduced a quantitative measure of
RNA secondary structure based protein binding cooperativity
and we have demonstrated that significant cooperativity
between protein binding sites at the two ends of an RNA
molecule is a generic feature of RNA secondary structure
formation. We have come to this conclusion by systematically
studying the ensembles of human mRNAs, C. elegans
mRNAs, and random sequences generated from human
mRNAs, in which the sequence lengths are between 500nt

Nucleic Acids Research, 0000, Vol. 00, No. 00 9

and 1500nt, and verified the effect in selected longer human
mRNAs.
The cooperativity free energy ∆∆G rises up to a
biologically relevant value (i.e. |∆∆G| > RT ≈ 0.6kcal/mol)
in more than 1000 among the 2282 human mRNAs we
investigated. Our statistical investigation of these sequences
shows that this cooperativity gets stronger as the two
binding sites get closer to their respective ends, suggesting
a significant “end-to-end” cooperativity between two proteins
or microRNAs that bind on the opposing ends of an mRNA
molecule. We interpret this observed cooperativity to imply
that the two binding partners, albeit far from each other when
measured in terms of nucleotides along the mRNA sequence,
can actually be close to each other in physical and secondary
structure space due to the intricate secondary structures of
the mRNA molecule. In consequence, the binding of the two
partners becomes interdependent, and this effect allows for
combinatorical post-transcriptional regulation.
We compared the cooperativity free energies ∆∆G(Dout )
of human mRNAs and two ensembles of the random
sequences generated from the human mRNAs. We discovered
that all three sequence ensembles support biologically relevant
cooperativity, |∆∆G| > RT and have maximal cooperativities
when the binding sites are relatively close to the ends of the
UTRs. However, in human mRNAs the cooperativity ∆∆G
decreases rapidly as the distance Dout increases; on the other
hand, the cooperativity ∆∆G(Dout ) of random sequences
decays smoothly, as shown in Fig. 7. We view the difference
as an evidence that human mRNAs have distinguishable
cooperativity properties compared to random sequences and
note that the fact that human sequences appear to show a
weaker cooperativity than their random counterparts can be
a consequence of us only looking at symmetrically located
putative binding sites that likely do not coincide with the true
pairs of binding sites in human UTRs. Consistently with this,
when we investigated experimentally annotated microRNA
binding sites, we did find a group of microRNA binding
sites with a strong cooperativity free energy around ∆∆G =
−3.8kcal/mol≈ −6RT that is statistically overrepresented
compared to randomly permuted sites.
An intriguing phenomenon about RNA secondary structure
induced cooperativity is its symmetry in terms of the sign
of the cooperativity. The symmetry of the distribution of
cooperativity free energies shown in Fig. 5 implies that the
number of mRNAs with positive cooperativity is roughly
equal to the number of those with negative cooperativity.
Whether this symmetry is a generic property of RNA or if
it is specific to the ensembles of mRNAs studied here, is an
interesting topic for future investigations.
Another interesting fact we find about the cooperativity
between the two ends of an RNA is that it appears
exclusively determined by the 5’ and 3’UTR sequences.
Our investigation of C. elegans mRNAs shows a positive
relationship between UTR length and cooperativity strength.
Moreover, an ensemble of sequences generated by substituting
a fixed CDS for the CDSs of human mRNAs shows very
similar cooperativities to the ensemble of original human
mRNAs. These two results support the picture that the
5’ and 3’UTRs “communicate” with each other with little
interference from the CDS.

In our study we first chose the protein binding sites
to be symmetrically arranged, i.e., at equal distances from
their respective ends of the mRNA molecule. Based on the
properties of RNA secondary structure, we would expect that
statistically asymmetric configurations of the protein binding
site will behave the same as the symmetric configurations with
the outside distance Dout being the only relevant parameter.
However, when studying the cooperativity free energy of a
specific molecule, being able to vary the positions of both
binding sites independently should dramatically increase the
search space and thus enable even higher cooperativity free
energies. Unfortunately, the computational cost of varying
the two positions independently is prohibitive since each
combination of binding sites requires a new folding of the
entire molecule.
However, we were still able to investigate asymmetric
configurations in some limited cases. In our study of
microRNAs, the 3’UTR binding sites are fixed, and thus we
were able to tune the 5’UTR binding sites and search through
a range of different n1 with respect to the asymmetric, fixed
n2 . Also, when we looked for the maxima of cooperativity
in artificially evolved RNA sequences, we constrained the
calculation of ∆∆G in a small range of asymmetric n1
and n2 , as a compromise given the limitations imposed by
computational cost. In this case we found very significant
cooperativity free energies up to |∆∆Gmax | ≈ 30RT .
An important aspect for future investigations is the
inclusion of sequence specificity. For the purpose of this
work, we assumed perfect sequence specificity and allowed
the protein (or microRNA) to only bind at one predefined location along the mRNA. With techniques like
RNAcompete (8, 9) systematically measuring the affinities
of many important RNA binding proteins to all possible
binding sites, it should be possible to allow sequence
dependent binding of two proteins to be incorporated into
RNA secondary structure prediction and we will pursue this
avenue in order to identify mRNAs and pairs of proteins
that actually employ this mechanism of post-transcriptional
regulation and could be verified experimentally. Lastly, while
our study entirely focused on thermodynamical quantities,
studying the kinetics of the interplay of RNA structure and
protein binding will be important as well.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Nikolaus Rajewsky and Michael Poirier for fruitful
discussions initiating this work and the anonymous reviewers
for suggesting interesting additional directions incorporated
into this work.
FUNDING
National Science Foundation under grants No. DMR01105458 and DMR-1410172.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Burd, C.G. and Dreyfuss, G. (1994) Conserved structures and diversity of
functions of RNA-binding proteins. Science 265, 615–621.

10 Nucleic Acids Research, 0000, Vol. 00, No. 00

2. Glisovic,T., Bachorik, J.L., Yong, J., and Dreyfuss, G. (2008) RNA-binding
proteins and post-transcriptional gene regulation. FEBS Lett., 582, 1977–
1986.
3. Baltz, A.G., Munschauer, M., Schwanhäusser, B, Vasile, A., Murakawa,
Y., Schueler, M., Youngs, N., Penfold-Brown, D., Drew, K., Milek, M.,
et al. The mRNA-Bound Proteome and Its Global Occupancy Profile on
Protein-Coding Transcripts Mol. Cell, 46, 674–690.
4. Castello, A., Fischer, B., Eichelbaum, K., Horos, R., Beckmann, B.M.,
Strein, C., Davey, N. E., Humphreys, D.T., Preiss, T., Steinmetz, L.M.,
Krijgsveld, J., and Hentze, M.W. (2012) Insights into RNA biology from
an atlas of mammalian mRNA-binding proteins Cell, 149, 1393–1406.
5. Mignone, F., Gissi, C., Liuni, S., and Pesole, G. (2002) Untranslated
regions of mRNAs. Genome Biol., 3, REVIEWS0004.
6. Park, E.-H., Walker, S.E., Lee, J.M., Rothenburg, S., Lorsch, J.R., and
Hinnebusch, A.G. (2011) Multiple elements in the eIF4G1 N-terminus
promote assembly of eIF4G1·PABP mRNPs in vivo. EMBO J., 30, 302–
316.
7. Antson, A.A. (2000) Single stranded RNA binding proteins. Curr. Opin.
Struc. Biol., 10, 87–94.
8. Ray, D., Kazan, H., Chan, E.T., Castillo, L.P., Chaudhry, S., Talukder, S.,
Blencowe, B.J., Morris, Q., and Hughes, T.R. (2009) Rapid and systematic
analysis of the RNA recognition specificities of RNA-binding proteins.
Nat. Biotechnol., 27, 667–670.
9. Ray, D., Kazan, H., Cook, K.B., Weirauch, M.T., Najafabadi, H.S., Li,
X., Gueroussov, S., Albu, M., Zheng, H., Yang, A., et al. (2013) A
compendium of RNA-binding motifs for decoding gene regulation. Nature
499, 172–177.
10. Lin, Y.-H. and Bundschuh, R. (2013) Interplay between single-stranded
binding proteins on RNA secondary structure. Phys. Rev. E 88, 052707.
11. Higgs, P.G. (2000) RNA secondary structure: physical and computational
aspects. Q. Rev. Biophys. 33, 199–253.
12. Hofacker, I.L., Fontana, W., Stadler, P.F., Bonhoeffer, L.S., Tacker, M.
and Schuster, P. (1994) Fast Folding and Comparison of RNA Secondary
Structures. Monatsh. Chem., 125, 167–188.
13. Mathews, D.H., Sabina, J., Zuker, M., and Turner, D.H. (1999) Expanded
sequence dependence of thermodynamic parameters improves prediction
of RNA secondary structure. J. Mol. Biol., 288, 911–940.
14. Forties, R.A. and Bundschuh, R. (2010) Modeling the interplay of
single-stranded binding proteins and nucleic acid secondary structure.
Bioinformatics, 26, 61–67.
15. Schroeder, D.V. (2000) An Introduction to Thermal Physics. Addison
Wesley Longman, San Francisco.
16. Pruitt, K.D., Brown, G.R., Hiatt, S.M., Thibaud-Nissen, F., Astashyn,
A., Ermolaeva, O., Farrell, C.M., Hart, J., Landrum, M.J., McGarvey,
K.M., Murphy, et al. (2014) RefSeq: an update on mammalian reference
sequences. Nucleic Acids Res., 42, D756–D763.
17. Yook, K., Harris, T.W., Bieri, T., Cabunoc, A., Chan, J., Chen, W.J., Davis,
P., de la Cruz, N., Duong, A., Fang, R., et al. (2012) WormBase 2012: more
genomes, more data, new website. Nucleic Acids Res., 40, D735–D741.
18. Görlach, M., Burd, C.G., and Dreyfuss G. (1994) The mRNA poly(A)binding protein: localization, abundance, and RNA-binding specificity.
Exp. Cell. Res., 211, 400–407.
19. Kahvejian, A., Roy, G., and Sonenberg, N. (2001) The mRNA Closed-loop
Model: The Function of PABP and PABP-interacting Proteins in mRNA
Translation. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol., 66, 293–300.
20. Kahvejian, A., Svitkin, Y.V., Sukarieh, R., M’Boutchou, M.-N., and
Sonenberg, N. (2005) Mammalian Poly(A)-Binding Protein is a Eukaryotic
Translation Initiation Factor, which Acts via Multiple Mechanisms. Genes
& Dev., 19, 104–113.
21. Altschul, S.F. and Erickson, B.W. (1985) Significance of nucleotide
sequence alignments: a method for random sequence permutation that
preserves dinucleotide and codon usage. Mol. Biol. Evol., 2, 526–538.
22. Bartel, D. (2004) MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, and
function. Cell, 116 281–297.
23. Betel, D., Wilson, M., Gabow, A., Marks, D.S. and Sander, C. (2008) The
microRNA.org resource: targets and expression. Nucleic Acids Res., 36,
D149–D153.
24. Betel, D., Koppal, A., Agius, P., Sanderm C., Leslie, C. (2010) The mirSVR
regression method for predicting likelihood of target mRNA downregulation from sequence and structure features in microRNA/mRNA
predicted target sites. Genome Biology, 11, R90.
25. Duncan, K., Grskovic, M., Strein, C., Beckmann, K., Niggeweg, R., Abaza,
I., Gebauer, F., Wilm, M., and Hentze, M.W. (2006) Sex-lethal imparts
a sex-specific function to UNR by recruiting it to the msl-2 mRNA 39

UTR: Translational repression for dosage compensation. Genes Dev., 20,
368–379.
26. Jungkamp, A.C., Stoeckius, M., Mecenas, D., Grun, D., Mastrobuoni,
G., Kempa, S., and Rajewsky, N. (2011) In vivo and transcriptome-wide
identification of RNA binding protein target sites. Mol. Cell, 44, 828–840.

