1

Modeling the Heart as a Communication System

arXiv:1410.2169v2 [q-bio.QM] 31 Oct 2014

Hiroshi Ashikaga1∗ José Aguilar-Rodrı́guez2,3 , Shai Gorsky4 , Elizabeth Lusczek5 , Flávia Maria Darcie
Marquitti6 , Brian Thompson7 , Degang Wu8 , Joshua Garland9
1 Division of Cardiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD,
USA
2 Institute of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of Zurich,
Switzerland
3 Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland
4 Department of Economics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
5 Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
6 Departmento de Ecologia, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil
7 Network Science Division, US Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, USA
8 Department of Physics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear
Water Bay, Hong Kong, HKSAR, China
9 Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA
*E-mail: hashika1@jhmi.edu

Summary
Electrical communication between cardiomyocytes can be perturbed during arrhythmia, but these perturbations are not captured by conventional electrocardiographic metrics. We developed a theoretical
framework to quantify electrical communication using information theory metrics in 2-dimensional cell
lattice models of cardiac excitation propagation. The time series generated by each cell was coarsegrained to 1 when excited or 0 when resting. The Shannon entropy for each cell was calculated from the
time series during four clinically important heart rhythms: normal heartbeat, anatomical reentry, spiral
reentry, and multiple reentry. We also used mutual information to perform spatial profiling of communication during these cardiac arrhythmias. We found that information sharing between cells was spatially
heterogeneous. In addition, cardiac arrhythmia significantly impacted information sharing within the
heart. Entropy localized the path of the drifting core of spiral reentry, which could be an optimal target
of therapeutic ablation. We conclude that information theory metrics can quantitatively assess electrical
communication among cardiomyocytes. The traditional concept of the heart as a functional syncytium
sharing electrical information cannot predict altered entropy and information sharing during complex arrhythmia. Information theory metrics may find clinical application in the identification of rhythm-specific
treatments which are currently unmet by traditional electrocardiographic techniques.

Key Index Words
Information Theory; Cardiac Electrophysiology; Cardiac Arrhythmia; Mathematical Modeling

2

Introduction
The human heart consists of 5 billion autonomous cardiomyocytes [1] with simple rules of operation
and minimal central control. The behaviors of individual cardiomyocytes are orchestrated by electrical
conduction between adjacent cells connected by specialized cell-to-cell junctions called intercalated discs
[2]. The intercalated discs contain gap junctions with large nonselective connexin channels that allow ions
and other small molecules to diffuse freely in the cytosol of adjacent cells and reduce internal electrical
resistance [3]. By providing low-resistance connections between cardiomyocytes, gap junction channels
allow electrical waves to propagate rapidly throughout the heart [4]. However, this task can be perturbed
during cardiac arrhythmia (abnormal heart rhythm). Normally functioning cardiomyocytes can not only
interrupt the electrical information flow at a wavebreak [5], they can also generate a completely different
output by creating a reentry circuit where the wave rotates around the wavebreak. Arrhythmia can
result from a wavebreak in an intersection between a wavefront and a wavetail [6], which leads to loss of
information about the input.
Conventional electrocardiographic metrics can measure the sequence of electrical excitation [7–9],
but cannot quantify how arrhythmia impacts the communication between individual cardiomyocytes. In
contrast, information theory metrics such as mutual information can quantify the sharing of information
in the presence of arrhythmia. Information theory has been used to evaluate biological communication
in computational neuroscience [10], transcriptional regulation [11, 12], bacterial quorum sensing [13],
chemotaxis [14], biochemical signaling networks [15], and evolutionary biology [16]. We propose a novel
application of information theory to analyze the cardiac electrical communication system (Figure 1A).
We propose that electrical wave propagation is the mechanism by which information is shared between cardiomyocytes in the whole heart. Under this paradigm, heart rhythm disorders result from
abnormal production and transmission of information that can be quantified by information theory measures. To this end, we developed a framework to quantify cardiac electrical communication during action
potential propagation in normal and abnormal heart rhythms. Three major mechanisms of clinically
important arrhythmias that could lead to sudden death were considered: anatomical reentry (reentry
around an anatomically defined circuit [17]), spiral reentry (functional reentry without an anatomically
defined circuit [18]), and multiple reentry (multiple functional reentry circuits in the presence of ongoing
wavebreak [19]).

Materials and Methods
Models of Action Potential Propagation
To develop the information theory framework, we employed two commonly used mathematical models of
cardiac action potential propagation. The first model was a monodomain reaction diffusion (RD) model
that was originally derived by FitzHugh [20] and Nagumo [21] as a simplification of the biophysically
based Hodgkin-Huxley equations describing current carrying properties of nerve membranes [22] which
was later modified by Rogers and McCulloch to represent cardiac action potential [23]. This model
reproduces several physiological properties known to be important in arrhythmogenesis including slowed
conduction velocity (CV ) and unidirectional block due to wavefront curvature [23]. This model was used
widely in previous studies [24–30].
∂v
∂t
∂r
∂t

=

0.26v(v − 0.13)(1 − v) − 0.1vr + Iex + Gx

=

0.013(v − r)

∂2v
∂2v
+
G
y
∂x2
∂y 2

(1)
(2)

3
Here, v is the excitation variable which can be identified with transmembrane potential, r is the recovery
variable, Iex is the external current [5], and Gx and Gy are the conductance in x and y directions on the
lattice, respectively. In this study the lattice was assumed to be isotropic (i.e., Gx = Gy ). The model
equations were solved using a finite difference method for spatial derivatives and explicit Euler integration
for time derivatives assuming Neumann boundary conditions.
Cellular automata (CA) models have been used to study cardiac action potential propagation in
several previous studies [31–40]. The model we used employed realistic restitution properties and the
curvature phenomenon [41]. Each cell can adopt one of the following three physiologically meaningful
states: resting, refractory1 and refractory2 . Cells in the resting state are relaxed and can be excited
while cells in both refractory states are excited. Cells in refractory1 can excite neighboring cells, while
cells in refractory2 cannot. The depolarization (or excitation) of a cell is the transition from the resting
state into the refractory1 state and occurs according to a probabilistic update rule P exc based on two
influences: (1) the intrinsic cell excitability (E) that increases with the time of a cell at rest, and (2) the
amount of excitation in the neighborhood of a cell (Q):
Pjexc = EQ = E

X Ai
d2ij

(3)

i6=j

where i is a cell adjacent to j, Ai is a binary excitation state with a value of 0 for the resting state and
a value of 1 for either of the two refractory states, and dij is the distance between the midpoints of cells
i and j. E was estimated using the restitution curve of the CV , which depends on the duration of the
previous diastolic interval (DI). The transitions from refractory1 to refractory2 (partial repolarization)
and from refractory2 to resting (total repolarization) are deterministic. The total time spent in the two
refractory states matches the total action potential duration (AP D). The period in the refractory1 state
is equal to 10% of the AP D. The AP D was estimated based on the restitution curve of the AP D, which
is also a function of the duration of the preceding DI. In addition to AP D and CV restitution properties,
Equation 3 also reproduces CV slowing in areas with a pronounced wavefront curvature because of the
decreased probability of excitation. The action potential was reproduced according to the Luo-Rudy
model [42], which associates the time for which each cell has been in its current state with its voltage
level.
For both models, the cardiac tissue was simulated as a 2-dimensional (2-D) 128 × 128 isotropic lattice
of cells (Figure 1B). In each cell, the time series of cardiac excitation was computed for 10 seconds
with a discrete sampling rate of 500/sec (temporal resolution ∆t=2 ms, Figure 1C). The duration and
the sampling rate of the time series were determined to reflect realistic measurements in human clinical
electrophysiology studies [43].

Cardiac Simulation
We simulated four different heart rhythms in both the RD and CA models: normal heartbeat, anatomical
reentry, spiral reentry, and multiple reentry. The latter two are considered to be important mechanisms
of cardiac fibrillation, including atrial fibrillation (AF) and ventricular fibrillation (VF) [18, 19]. Cardiac
simulation was performed using MATLAB R2014a (Mathworks, Inc.).
Normal heartbeat was simulated as regular point stimulations (60 beats/min) originating from the
top middle region of the lattice. This pattern of stimulation caused a regular train of curved excitation
wavefronts traveling from top to bottom along the vertical axis in both the RD (Video S1) and CA models
(Video S2).
Anatomical reentry is characterized by an electrical wavefront that travels along a preformed anatomical obstacle, most commonly a scar resulting from healed myocardial infarction, and re-excites previously
excited tissue. We simulated a cardiac impulse which can rotate around the obstacle, leading to repetitive, rapid excitation of the heart. Anatomical reentry was reproduced in the RD (Video S3) and the

4
CA models (Video S4) by simulating a non-excitable circular region in the center of the lattice occupying
20% of the total surface area.
For spiral reentry [18], we simulated a 2-D wave of excitation emitted by an organizing source (or
‘rotor’) of functional reentry whose front is an involute spiral with increasing convex curvature toward
the rotation center [44]. The spiral reentry was generated by a cross-field stimulation protocol [5] in both
the RD (Video S5) and the CA models (Video S6).
Multiple reentry is characterized by multiple independent circuits of functional reentry occurring
simultaneously and propagating randomly throughout the cardiac tissue [45]. Wavefronts continuously
undergo wavefront-wavetail interactions resulting in wavebreak and generation of new wavefronts [46].
Multiple reentry was reproduced in the RD (Video S7) and the CA models (Video S8) by a train of
random point stimulations in the substrate where the APD is shortened by 40%.

Information Measures
For each cell, the time series of cardiac excitation was coarse-grained to one when excited (during the
APD at 90% repolarization, or APD90 ) or zero when resting (Figure 1C). We treated each cell on the
lattice as a time-series process X where at any observation time t the process X is either excited or
resting, in which case we define Xt = 1 or Xt = 0, respectively.
Using this framework, we can compute the Shannon entropy H of each time-series process X:
X
H(X) = −
p(x) log2 p(x)
(4)
x

where p(x) denotes the probability density function of the time series generated by X. This quantifies
the average uncertainty of whether a single cell is excited or resting over each cell’s time history [47].
Mutual information I(X; Y ) is a measure of the reduction in uncertainty of the time-series process X
due to the information gained from knowing the time-series process Y ; hence, this quantity is commonly
viewed as the information shared between X and Y [47]. Therefore, by computing the mutual information,
we can receive insight into which cells share information and how much. Formally, the mutual information
between the time-series processes, in this case cells, X and Y is:
I(X; Y )

=

X
x,y

p(x, y) log2

p(x, y)
p(x)p(y)

= H(X) + H(Y ) − H(X, Y )

(5)
(6)

where p(x, y) and H(X, Y ) denote the joint probability density function and the joint entropy of X and
Y , respectively (Figure 1A).
To understand the spatial profiles of information sharing between cardiomyocytes, mutual information
was computed between each of five representative cells (green circles in (Figure 1D) and all other cells in
the 2-D lattice taken individually. These representative cells were defined to be in the left-upper quadrant
(32,32), the right-upper quadrant (32,96), the center (64,64), the left-lower quadrant (96,32), and
the right-lower quadrant (96,96). These points were chosen to avoid artifacts generated by the boundary
conditions and point stimulation in the RD model as discussed in the Results section. Custom programs
in Python were used to compute information measures.

Results
Normal Heartbeat
In the RD model, electrical wavefronts regularly swept the lattice from top to bottom (Video S1, Figure
2A, top row). The entropy was relatively lower at the lattice borders and higher at the site of stimu-

5
lation, but these were artifacts of the boundary conditions and point stimulation, respectively (Figure
2B, top row). Otherwise, entropy was homogeneous across the lattice [0.68 (mean)± 0.03 (SD) bits].
Mutual information showed a spatially heterogeneous information sharing between cells (Figure 2C, top
row) despite the assumed isotropic structure and homogeneous electrical properties of the lattice. For
example, Figure 2C3 (top row) shows that the cell in the center of the lattice shares a high amount of
information with the cells on the same electrical wavefront (yellow band) generated by the heartbeats. It
also shows little information sharing with the cells preceding and following the wavefront (light blue bands
surrounding the yellow band). This is clearly shown in the profile of mutual information (Figure 2D, top
row) along the vertical broken line in Figure 2C3 (top row). Mutual information (red line) reached its
peak (0.69 bits) at the center (profile position 64), where mutual information is equal to entropy because
the mutual information of an entity with itself is equal to entropy (Equation 6). Mutual information
fell off sharply from the center and reached the minimum (0 bits) on both sides (profile position 41 and
86) before slightly rising to approximately 0.06 bits on both ends. These findings indicate that the cells
share a high amount of information when they are in phase with the cardiac excitation and share little
information when they are out of phase. We formed an analytical framework which corroborates these
numerical results (Appendix S1).
In the CA model (Video S2, Figure 2A, bottom row), the electrical wavefront was more irregular
and unstable than that of the RD model. Entropy was homogeneous across the lattice, but was lower
(0.52 ± 0.00 bits) than that of the RD model (Figure 2B, bottom row). This difference results from the
fact that the CA model had a longer resting state (Video S2), making it more biased towards the resting
state than the RD model (Video S1). There was no qualitative difference in information sharing between
the RD model (Figure 2, top row) and the CA model (Figure 2, bottom row). However, information
sharing was lower in the CA model because the CA model is inherently probabilistic and less reproducible
than the RD model. The profile of mutual information (Figure2D) along the vertical broken line in Figure
2C3 also shows a qualitatively similar but lower mutual information in the CA model (Figure 2D) relative
to the RD model (Figure 2D).

Anatomical Reentry
In both the RD (Video S3) and the CA models (Video S4), the entropy of the cells within the circular
non-excitable region was zero because these cells were always in the resting state (Figure 3A, B). The
entropy was roughly homogeneous in other regions of the lattice. The average entropy was 0.32 ± 0.17
bits in the RD model and 0.69 ± 0.33 bits in the CA model (Figure 3B). The difference resulted from
the longer wavelength in the CA model due to the more convex curvature than the RD model.
Overall, both models showed a similar spatial pattern of mutual information (Figure 3C). Information sharing between cells was spatially heterogeneous but showed rotational symmetry about the
non-excitable region in the center. For example, Figure 3C1 shows that the cell in the left upper quadrant of the lattice shares a high amount of information with the cells on the same electrical wavefront (the
orange band in the RD model and the yellow band in the CA model). Information sharing in the cells
on the three other quadrants (Figure 3C2, 4 and 5) was rotationally symmetric with that of Figure 3C1.
Importantly, there is no information sharing between the cell within the circular non-excitable region and
any other cells in the lattice (Figure 3C3). This is logical from both the standpoints of electrophysiology
and information theory. Of note, similar to normal heartbeat (Figure 2C), both models also showed
little information sharing with the cells that preceded and followed the region of a high amount of shared
information (light blue bands before and after the yellow band). These findings indicate that, similar
to normal heartbeat, the cells share a high amount of information when they are in phase with cardiac
excitation, and share little information when they are out of phase.

6

Spiral Reentry
In the RD model (Video S5, Figure 4A, top row), a single rotor with a resultant spiral reentry was
simulated in the lattice. The entropy of each individual cell in this simulation shows an important
finding with potential clinical significance. The left lower quadrant and both upper quadrants of the
lattice exhibited homogeneous entropy (0.74 ± 0.04 bits), except for the borders of the lattice which is
an artifact of boundary conditions (Figure 4B, top row). The red region in the right lower quadrant
represents the higher entropy near the spiral tip (rotor) caused by the conduction velocity (CV ) slowing
near the rotor due to a pronounced wavefront curvature (Figure 4B, top row). This slowing of CV
effectively caused longer cardiac excitations, making the cells in this region more biased towards the
excited state than the rest of the cells in the lattice not directly affected by the rotor, boosting the
entropy in this region. Within the red region is an L-shaped, light green, beadlike structure representing
the lower entropy in the path of the drifting core of the spiral reentry around which the rotor revolved.
This result suggests that the entropy of individual cells may be used to aid in localizing the core of
spiral reentry for therapeutic purposes. Of note, the L-shaped path of the drifting core in this model was
artificially determined by the boundary condition of the model.
While the entropy of individual cells provided very important findings, the average entropy over all
cells was less informative. In fact, the average entropy between normal heartbeat and spiral reentry in
the RD model was very similar (0.68 ± 0.03 vs. 0.74 ± 0.04 bits, respectively). This suggests that the
spatial profiles of entropy are more useful in highlighting the difference in dynamics than the aggregate
information over the entire tissue, as averaging effectively filters out the important features of the entropy
landscape.
Mutual information was far more spatially heterogeneous than anticipated from the electrical wave
propagation. For example, Figure 4C3 (top row) shows that the high level of information sharing in
the central region of the lattice quickly faded as distance between cells increased. This reflects the fact
that the cells lying along the same electrical wavefront changed over time due to the drifting core. This
resulted in the smaller region of high information sharing in the spiral reentry than in normal heartbeat.
This finding indicates that mutual information can sensitively detect regional heterogeneity of cardiac
excitation in spiral reentry, which is not apparent from electrical wave propagation. Of note, information
sharing in the right lower quadrant was limited to a focal region without a spiral tail (Figure 4C5, top
row). This is because the cell in the right lower quadrant (green circle) happened to lie on the path of
the drifting core, which coincided with a void of cardiac excitation.
In the CA model (Video S6, Figure 4A, bottom row), the electrical wavefront was inherently more
irregular than that of the RD model. The entropy was roughly homogeneous across the lattice and close
to 1 (0.97 ± 0.00 bits) (Figure 4B, bottom row). The higher entropy of the CA model compared with
the RD model was, as in the anatomical reentry, caused by the longer wavelength in the CA model due
to the more convex curvature than the RD model (Figure 4A, bottom row). Unlike the RD model, the
entropy in the CA model did not show the path of the drifting core, indicating that the drift trajectory
was much more random compared to that of the RD model with respect to the time frame (10 sec) of
data acquisition. Information sharing between cells was spatially heterogeneous (Figure 4C, D) because
of the regional heterogeneity of cardiac excitation in spiral reentry. Overall, the CA model showed lower
information sharing than the RD model due to the probabilistic nature of the model.

Multiple Reentry
In both the RD (Video S7) and the CA models (Video S8), the entropy was homogeneous across the
cell lattice (Figure 5A). The average entropy was 0.88 ± 0.03 bits in the RD model and 0.97 ± 0.00
bits in the CA model (Figure 5B). This indicates that excited and resting states are almost equally
distributed throughout the time series of all the cells, yielding a high uncertainty and homogeneous
entropy. The spatial profiles of information sharing for both the RD and the CA models were similar to

7
that of spiral reentry (Figure 5C), except the fact that the underlying structure was much less organized
due to the random nature of multiple reentry. Information sharing was low except for a small region in
the immediate neighborhood of the cell in which mutual information was measured. Outside this small
region information sharing steeply fell off to near zero (Figure 5D). The near-zero mutual information
indicates that the cells almost completely lost synchrony during multiple reentry; that is, individual
cardiomyocytes got excited independently from each other and did not share information with cells
beyond their immediate neighborhood.

Discussion
Summary of the Findings
By treating the heart as an electrical communication system, we demonstrated quantitatively that information sharing between cardiomyocytes on an isotropic lattice structure is spatially heterogeneous.
This finding was unexpected from the traditional concept of the heart as a functional syncytium sharing
electrical information via gap junctions, where one might mistakenly assume that information sharing
would be homogeneous along the electrical wavefront. We also found that entropy can be significantly
different between heart rhythms with electrically similar spatial patterns (Figure 2B,4B and3B). These
findings indicate that metrics from information theory can quantitatively assess the communication processes within the heart which are not obvious from conventional electrocardiographic metrics such as
sequences of electrical excitation. In addition, our results show that cardiac arrhythmia significantly
impacts electrical communication within the heart.

Mutual Information to Quantify Communication Within the Heart
Analysis of dynamical multivariate data sets over the dimensions of time and physical space is commonly
encountered in the investgation of complex systems [48]. The study of cardiac arrhythmia, particularly
cardiac fibrillation, is no exception. For example, a number of measures to quantify spatial complexity of
VF have been proposed, including the correlation length [49], the multiplicity index [50], and KarhunenLoève decomposition [51]. The main focus of interest in these studies was to quantify the determinism
and the predictability of the time series over physical space.
Our study is different from these previous studies in two aspects. First, our focus of interest was to
quantify communication within the heart. Of central importance to the understanding of complex systems
is connectivity, or the presence of dynamical interactions between spatially distinct locations within the
system. Knowledge about connectivity in a system, whether anatomical or functional, further facilitates
the fundamental understanding of the system since it addresses an important aspect of the functional
interdependency of between each component of the system. Our results indicate that information theory
metrics can quantitatively assess electrical communication processes among cardiomyocytes during normal
heartbeat and complex arrhythmias beyond electrocardiographic measures, conferring validity to the
paradigm of the heart as a communication system. Second, we used mutual information to perform spatial
profiling of different cardiac arrhythmias. Correlations within multivariate time series can be described by
measures such as linear and nonlinear correlation functions. However, mutual information has attracted
considerable attention recently since it promises a very general quantification of statistical dependence
[52]. In addition, previous studies measured the spatial profile of mutual information during VF [53],
which could include both spiral reentry and multiple reentry, because it is challenging to distinguish
one from the other in experimental settings. Therefore, the spatial profile of spiral reentry and multiple
reentry was not clearly delineated. Our result showed that the spatial profile and the underlying structure
of mutual information during each arrhythmia are clearly different (Figure 4 and 5). This suggests that
information theory metrics may be able to help distinguish one rhythm from another by quantifying

8
communication within the heart.
The underlying mechanism of perturbation of information transfer during arrhythmia remains unclear.
Information sharing during VF seems to be directly affected by the anisotropy of myofiber orientation and
cell-to-cell coupling [53]. However, the spatial profile of membrane potential during VF has no consistent
relationship with that of intracellular calcium dynamics [54]. This may suggest a contribution of nonvoltage-gated intracellular calcium release in perturbation of information transfer by increasing the local
complex interactions between calcium dynamics and membrane potential. Clearly, further studies will be
needed to investigate the mechanistic basis of the paradigm of the heart as a communication system.

Clinical Implications
Recently, targeted elimination of the rotor (phase singularity) of spiral reentry has been shown to result
in sustained termination of AF [55]. As a result, spatial localization of the rotor has attracted substantial
attention in clinical cardiac electrophysiology. Entropy has been quantified to identify the location of the
rotor of spiral reentry from the bipolar electrograms by creating the probability density function based
on the amplitude of the signal [56]. However, the accuracy of this metric was not clear, because it has
consistent correlation with complex fractionated electrograms [57], which was found to bear no spatial
relevance to spiral reentry [58]. Therefore, the knowledge of the spatial profile of entropy for spiral reentry
was lacking.
Our result in the RD model clearly showed that the region of rotor drift has high entropy (red region,
right lower quadrant in Figure 4B, top row), which is consistent with the previous studies [56]. Moreover,
what was most striking was the fact that entropy can localize the path of the drifting core of spiral reentry
(L-shaped, light green, beadlike structure, right lower quadrant in Figure 4B, top row), because of the
low entropy of the spiral core. This makes electrophysiological sense because the cardiomyocytes within
the spiral core are almost constantly depolarized [59], making the probability density biased towards one.
Therefore, our result showed a critically important fact that entropy can spatially localize the core (low
entropy) within a larger region of the drifting rotor (high entropy). However, because a similar structure
of the spatial profile could not be identified in the CA model (Figure 4B, bottom row), localization of
the drifting core may require a spatially stable spiral reentry with adequately slow drift. Although these
preliminary findings need to be confirmed in experimental models of cardiac fibrillation, they illustrate
the potential clinical utility of information theory applied to cardiac electrophysiology.

Limitations
There are two limitations that should be considered before our results can be translated to human patients.
First, the cardiac tissue was assumed to be a 2-D, isotropic, and homogeneous lattice, whereas real cardiac
tissue is 3-D, anisotropic, and heterogeneous due to the intricately woven myofiber structure [60] and
regional heterogeneity [61]. These tissue properties may contribute critically to the generation of cardiac
arrhythmia [62]. However, the main focus of this work was to prove the concept that quantitative analysis
of electrical communication during existing cardiac arrhythmia could yield clinically relevant results. We
used two widely accepted models of action potential propagation in cardiac tissue to reproduce a variety
of heart rhythms that captured important features of clinically representative arrhythmias. Therefore,
we believe that these model assumptions were acceptable within the scope of this work. Second, our
computation of information theory metrics did not incorporate conduction delay of electrical current to
travel from one cell to another, since the time series of the entire lattice was acquired simultaneously.
This is because the conduction delay within the small 2-D lattice would be negligibly small relative to the
acquisition period of 10 seconds. However, this assumption may have underestimated the true amount of
information sharing between heart cells because the standard definition of mutual information does not
include shared information that is delayed in time. This leaves open the potential for even more clinically
useful results by considering generalizations of the metric that explicitly account for this conduction delay.

9

Conclusions
Information theory metrics can quantitatively assess electrical communication processes among cardiomyocytes during normal heartbeat and complex arrhythmias beyond electrocardiographic measures. Further,
entropy may have a clinical application in the localization and elimination of spiral reentry cores. These
results suggest that the heart as a communication system is more complex than the traditional concept of
functional syncytium sharing electrical information via gap junctions. We believe that this new paradigm
provides a new set of tools for the systems-approach to the heart as a complex system [63].

Acknowledgments
This work was conducted as a research project during the Complex Systems Summer School at the Santa
Fe Institute (SFI), NM, USA. The authors thank all the staff at SFI, particularly Sander Bais, Juniper
Lovato, and John-Paul Gonzales. The authors also thank Felipe Alonso Atienza, Ferney Beltrán-Molina
Jesús Requena Carrión and Peter Hammer for generously providing the source code for the models
described in the paper. The authors also thank Simon DeDeo and Nix Barnett for valuable input.

References
1. Kapoor N, Liang W, Marbán E, Cho HC. Direct conversion of quiescent cardiomyocytes to pacemaker cells by expression of Tbx18. Nat Biotechnol. 2013 Jan;31(1):54–62.
2. Hall JE. Guyton and Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology. 12th ed. Saunders; 2010.
3. Fishman GI, Spray DC, Leinwand LA. Molecular characterization and functional expression of the
human cardiac gap junction channel. J Cell Biol. 1990 Aug;111(2):589–98.
4. Katz MD. Physiology of the Heart. 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; 2010.
5. Pertsov AM, Davidenko JM, Salomonsz R, Baxter WT, Jalife J. Spiral waves of excitation underlie
reentrant activity in isolated cardiac muscle. Circ Res. 1993 Mar;72(3):631–50.
6. Weiss JN, Qu Z, Chen PS, Lin SF, Karagueuzian HS, Hayashi H, et al. The dynamics of cardiac
fibrillation. Circulation. 2005 Aug;112(8):1232–40.
7. Ashikaga H, Sasano T, Dong J, Zviman MM, Evers R, Hopenfeld B, et al. Magnetic resonance-based
anatomical analysis of scar-related ventricular tachycardia: implications for catheter ablation. Circ
Res. 2007;101(9):939–47.
8. Stevenson WG, Wilber DJ, Natale A, Jackman WM, Marchlinski FE, Talbert T, et al. Irrigated radiofrequency catheter ablation guided by electroanatomic mapping for recurrent ventricular tachycardia after myocardial infarction: the multicenter thermocool ventricular tachycardia ablation
trial. Circulation. 2008;118(25):2773–82.
9. Wang Y, Cuculich PS, Zhang J, Desouza KA, Vijayakumar R, Chen J, et al. Noninvasive electroanatomic mapping of human ventricular arrhythmias with electrocardiographic imaging. Sci
Transl Med. 2011;3(98):98ra84.
10. de Ruyter van Steveninck RR, Lewen GD, Strong SP, Koberle R, Bialek W. Reproducibility and
variability in neural spike trains. Science. 1997 Mar;275(5307):1805–8.
11. Ziv E, Nemenman I, Wiggins CH. Optimal signal processing in small stochastic biochemical
networks. PLoS One. 2007;2(10):e1077.

10
12. Tkacik G, Callan CG Jr, Bialek W. Information flow and optimization in transcriptional regulation.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug;105(34):12265–70.
13. Mehta P, Goyal S, Long T, Bassler BL, Wingreen NS. Information processing and signal integration
in bacterial quorum sensing. Mol Syst Biol. 2009;5:325.
14. Fuller D, Chen W, Adler M, Groisman A, Levine H, Rappel WJ, et al. External and internal
constraints on eukaryotic chemotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May;107(21):9656–9.
15. Cheong R, Rhee A, Wang CJ, Nemenman I, Levchenko A. Information transduction capacity of
noisy biochemical signaling networks. Science. 2011 Oct;334(6054):354–8.
16. Adami C. The use of information theory in evolutionary biology. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012
May;1256:49–65.
17. Stevenson WG, Khan H, Sager P, Saxon LA, Middlekauff HR, Natterson PD, et al. Identification of
reentry circuit sites during catheter mapping and radiofrequency ablation of ventricular tachycardia
late after myocardial infarction. Circulation. 1993;88(4 Pt 1):1647–70.
18. Gray RA, Pertsov AM, Jalife J. Spatial and temporal organization during cardiac fibrillation.
Nature. 1998 Mar;392(6671):75–8.
19. Moe GK, Rheinboldt WC, Abildskov JA. A computer model of atrial fibrillation. Am Heart J.
1964 Feb;67:200–20.
20. Fitzhugh R. Impulses and Physiological States in Theoretical Models of Nerve Membrane. Biophys
J. 1961 Jul;1(6):445–66.
21. Nagumo J, Animoto S, Yoshizawa S. An active pulse transmission line simulating nerve axon. Proc
Inst Radio Engineers. 1962;50:2061–70.
22. Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF. A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to
conduction and excitation in nerve. J Physiol. 1952;117:500–44.
23. Rogers JM, McCulloch AD. A collocation–Galerkin finite element model of cardiac action potential
propagation. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 1994 Aug;41(8):743–57.
24. Plank G, Zhou L, Greenstein JL, Cortassa S, Winslow RL, O’Rourke B, et al. From mitochondrial
ion channels to arrhythmias in the heart: computational techniques to bridge the spatio-temporal
scales. Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci. 2008 Sep;366(1879):3381–409.
25. Campbell SG, Howard E, Aguado-Sierra J, Coppola BA, Omens JH, Mulligan LJ, et al. Effect
of transmurally heterogeneous myocyte excitation-contraction coupling on canine left ventricular
electromechanics. Exp Physiol. 2009 May;94(5):541–52.
26. Bourgeois EB, Fast VG, Collins RL, Gladden JD, Rogers JM. Change in conduction velocity due
to fiber curvature in cultured neonatal rat ventricular myocytes. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2009
Mar;56(3):855–61.
27. Plank G, Burton RA, Hales P, Bishop M, Mansoori T, Bernabeu MO, et al. Generation of histoanatomically representative models of the individual heart: tools and application. Philos Transact
A Math Phys Eng Sci. 2009;367(1896):2257–92.
28. Chamakuri N, Kunisch K, Plank G. On boundary stimulation and optimal boundary control of
the bidomain equations. Math Biosci. 2013 Oct;245(2):206–15.

11
29. Le TB, Sotiropoulos F. Fluid-structure interaction of an aortic heart valve prosthesis driven by an
animated anatomic left ventricle. J Comput Phys. 2013 Jul;244:41–62.
30. Sovilj S, Magjarević R, Lovell NH, Dokos S. A simplified 3D model of whole heart electrical activity
and 12-lead ECG generation. Comput Math Methods Med. 2013;2013:134208.
31. Alonso-Atienza F, Rojo-Alvarez JL, D Alvarez, Moscoso M, Garcia-Alberola A. Reconstruction of transmembrane currents using Support Vector machines and its application to endocardial
mapping: A model study. In: Computers in Cardiology; 2007. p. 121–124.
32. Barquero-Perez O, Rojo-Alvarez JL, Requena-Carrión J, Alonso-Atienza F, Everss E, GoyaEsteban R, et al. Cardiac arrhythmia spectral analysis of electrogram signals using Fourier Organization Analysis. In: Computers in Cardiology; 2009. p. 333–336.
33. Beltran-Molina F, Munoz-Gomez A, Rodriguez A, Vinagre JJ, Requena-Carrion J. Effects of lead
spatial resolution on the spectrum of cardiac signals: A simulation study. In: Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society, EMBC, 2011 Annual International Conference of the IEEE; 2011.
p. 3800–3803.
34. Beltran-Molina F, Requena-Carrion J, Vaisanen J. Analysis of the effects of lead configuration on
cardiac spectrum. In: Computing in Cardiology; 2012. p. 833–836.
35. Requena-Carrión J, Vaisanen J, Alonso-Atienza F, Rojo-Álvarez JL, Hyttinen J, Garcia-Alberola
A. Comparison of the scope of true and integrated bipolar leads in implantable cardioverter
defibrillators. In: Computers in Cardiology; 2007. p. 233–236.
36. Requena-Carrión J, Beltrán-Molina FA, Marques A, G. Relating the spectrum of cardiac signals
to the spatiotemporal dynamics of cardiac sources. Biomedical Signal Processing and Control.
2013;8(6):935–944.
37. Requena-Carrión J, Väisänen J, Alonso-Atienza F, Garcı́a-Alberola A, Ramos-López FJ, RojoAlvarez JL. Sensitivity and spatial resolution of transvenous leads in implantable cardioverter
defibrillator. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2009 Dec;56(12):2773–81.
38. Vaisanen J, Requena Carrion J, Hyttinen J. Effects of activation origin in the subcutaneous ECG
with horizontal and vertical bipolar lead orientation. In: Computers in Cardiology; 2008. p. 357–
360.
39. Vaisanen J, Requena-Carrión J, Alonso-Atienza F, Rojo-Alvarez JL, Hyttinen J. Analysing effects
of implant dimensions on electrocardiograph: A modeling approach. In: Computers in Cardiology;
2007. p. 41–44.
40. Väisänen J, Requena-Carrión J, Alonso-Atienza F, Rojo-Alvarez JL, Malmivuo J, Hyttinen J.
Contribution of the left anterior myocardium to the body surface potentials in case of apical
ectopic beat. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2007;2007:931–4.
41. Alonso Atienza F, Requena Carrión J, Garcı́a Alberola A, Rojo Álvarez JL, Sánchez Muñoz JJ,
Martı́nez Sánchez J, et al. A probabilistic model of cardiac electrical activity based on a cellular
automata system. Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl Ed). 2005 Jan;58(1):41–7.
42. Luo CH, Rudy Y. A model of the ventricular cardiac action potential. Depolarization, repolarization, and their interaction. Circ Res. 1991 Jun;68(6):1501–26.
43. Fogoros RN. Electrophysiologic Testing. 5th ed. Wiley-Blackwell; 2012.

12
44. 7. In: Jalife J, Delmar M, Anumonwo J, Berenfeld O, Kalifa J, editors. Rotors, spirals, and scroll
waves in the heart. In: Basic Cardiac Electrophysiology for the Clinician. 2nd ed. Wiley-Blackwell,
Oxford, UK; 2009. .
45. Calkins H, Kuck KH, Cappato R, Brugada J, Camm AJ, Chen SA, et al. 2012 HRS/EHRA/ECAS
expert consensus statement on catheter and surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm.
2012 Apr;9(4):632–696.e21.
46. Schotten U, Verheule S, Kirchhof P, Goette A. Pathophysiological mechanisms of atrial fibrillation:
a translational appraisal. Physiol Rev. 2011 Jan;91(1):265–325.
47. Cover TM, Thomas JA. Elements of Information Theory. 2nd ed. Wiley-Interscience; 2006.
48. Galka A, Ozaki T, Bayard JB, Yamashita O. Whitening as a tool for estimating mutual information
in spatiotemporal data sets. J Stat Phys. 2006;124:1275–315.
49. Bayly PV, Johnson EE, Wolf PD, Greenside HS, Smith WM, Ideker RE. A quantitative measurement of spatial order in ventricular fibrillation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 1993 Oct;4(5):533–46.
50. Rogers JM, Usui M, KenKnight BH, Ideker RE, Smith WM. Recurrent wavefront morphologies:
a method for quantifying the complexity of epicardial activation patterns. Ann Biomed Eng.
1997;25(5):761–8.
51. Bayly PV, KenKnight BH, Rogers JM, Johnson EE, Ideker RE, Smith WM. Spatial organization,
predictability, and determinism in ventricular fibrillation. Chaos. 1998 Mar;8(1):103–115.
52. Li W. Mutual information functions versus correlation functions. J Stat Phys. 1990;60:823–37.
53. Choi BR, Liu T, Lavasani M, Salama G. Fiber orientation and cell-cell coupling influence ventricular
fibrillation dynamics. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2003 Aug;14(8):851–60.
54. Omichi C, Lamp ST, Lin SF, Yang J, Baher A, Zhou S, et al. Intracellular Ca dynamics in
ventricular fibrillation. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2004 May;286(5):H1836–44.
55. Narayan SM, Krummen DE, Shivkumar K, Clopton P, Rappel WJ, Miller JM. Treatment of atrial
fibrillation by the ablation of localized sources: CONFIRM (Conventional Ablation for Atrial
Fibrillation With or Without Focal Impulse and Rotor Modulation) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2012;60(7):628–36.
56. Ganesan AN, Kuklik P, Lau DH, Brooks AG, Baumert M, Lim WW, et al. Bipolar electrogram
shannon entropy at sites of rotational activation: implications for ablation of atrial fibrillation.
Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2013 Feb;6(1):48–57.
57. Ng J, Borodyanskiy AI, Chang ET, Villuendas R, Dibs S, Kadish AH, et al. Measuring the
complexity of atrial fibrillation electrograms. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2010 Jun;21(6):649–55.
58. Narayan SM, Shivkumar K, Krummen DE, Miller JM, Rappel WJ. Panoramic electrophysiological
mapping but not electrogram morphology identifies stable sources for human atrial fibrillation:
stable atrial fibrillation rotors and focal sources relate poorly to fractionated electrograms. Circ
Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2013 Feb;6(1):58–67.
59. Qu Z, Kil J, Xie F, Garfinkel A, Weiss JN. Scroll wave dynamics in a three-dimensional cardiac
tissue model: roles of restitution, thickness, and fiber rotation. Biophys J. 2000;78(6):2761–75.
60. Streeter J D D, Spotnitz HM, Patel DP, Ross J J, Sonnenblick EH. Fiber orientation in the canine
left ventricle during diastole and systole. Circ Res. 1969;24(3):339–47.

13
61. Antzelevitch C, Fish J. Electrical heterogeneity within the ventricular wall. Basic Res Cardiol.
2001;96(6):517–27.
62. Qu Z, Xie F, Garfinkel A, Weiss JN. Origins of spiral wave meander and breakup in a twodimensional cardiac tissue model. Ann Biomed Eng. 2000 Jul;28(7):755–71.
63. McCulloch AD, Paternostro G. Cardiac systems biology. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 Jun;1047:283–95.
64. Shannon CE. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst Tech J. 1948;27(379-423):623–
656.

14

Figure Captions

Figure 1. Conceptual Overview of the Methods. A. The Heart as a Communication System.
The heart can be considered as a communication system where cardiomyocytes act as an information
source/transmitter and a receiver/destination with channels being intercalated discs/intervening
cardiomyocytes. H(X) and H(Y ) are the entropies of time series X and Y respectively; H(X, Y ) is the
joint entropy of X and Y ; H(X|Y ) is the conditional entropy of X given Y ; H(Y |X) is conditional
entropy of Y given X; I(X; Y ) is the mutual information of X and Y . Figure modifed from [64].B. 2-D
Lattice Model of Cardiac Tissue. For both the reaction diffusion and the cellular automata models, the
cardiac tissue was simulated as a 128 x 128 cell lattice, which was assumed to be isotropic. C.
Coarse-Graining of the Time Series. In each cell, the time series of cardiac excitation was computed for
10 seconds during four different heart rhythms (normal heartbeat, spiral reentry, anatomical reentry,
and multiple reentry) at a sampling rate of 500/sec. The time series was coarse-grained to 1 when
excited (during action potential duration at 90% repolarization APD90 ) or 0 when resting. D. Mutual
Information. To understand the spatial characteristics of information sharing among cardiomyocytes,
mutual information was computed between five representative cells (green circles) and all the other cells
in the 2-D lattice. These representative cells included cells in the left-upper quadrant (32,32), the
right-upper quadrant (32,96), the center (64,64), the left-lower quadrant (96,32) and the right-lower
quadrant (96,96).

15

Figure 2. Normal Heartbeat. The top row represents the deterministic reaction diffusion (RD)
model and the bottom row represents the probabilistic cellular automata (CA) model. A. Snapshot of
Electrical Wave Propagation shows a representative snapshot of an electrical wave from Videos S1 (top)
and S2 (bottom). B. Entropy of Each Cell in the Cardiac Tissue shows a heat map of the entropy in
bits over the cell lattice. C. Mutual Information Between Two Cells in the Cardiac Tissue shows a heat
map of mutual information in bits over the cell lattice. Mutual information was computed between a
specific cell (green circle) and all the other cells in the same cardiac tissue. D. Profiles of Entropy and
Mutual Information show profiles of entropy (blue line) and mutual information (red line) through the
cell lattice along the vertical broken line shown in 2B and 2C3. Center, respectively.

Figure 3. Anatomical Reentry. The black circular region in A and B represents a non-excitable
tissue that serves as an anatomical obstacle around which cardiac excitation rotates perpetually. The
top row represents the deterministic reaction-diffusion (RD) model and the bottom row represents the
probabilistic cellular automata (CA) model. A. Snapshot of Electrical Wave Propagation shows a
representative snapshot of an electrical wave from Videos S5 (top) and S6 (bottom). B. Entropy of
Each Cell in the Cardiac Tissue shows a heat map of the entropy in bits over the cell lattice. C. Mutual
Information Between Two Cells in the Cardiac Tissue shows a heat map of mutual information in bits
over the cell lattice. Mutual information was computed between a specific cell (green circle) and all the
other cells in the same cardiac tissue. D. Profiles of Entropy and Mutual Information shows the profile
of entropy (blue line) through the cell lattice along the vertical broken line shown in 4B. The profile of
mutual information (red line) in 4D is from 4C1. Left Upper Quadrant.

16

Figure 4. Spiral Reentry. The top row represents the deterministic reaction diffusion (RD) model
and the bottom row represents the probabilistic cellular automata (CA) model. A. Snapshot of
Electrical Wave Propagation shows a representative snapshot of an electrical wave from Videos S3 (top)
and S4 (bottom). B. Entropy of Each Cell in the Cardiac Tissue shows a heat map of the entropy in
bits over the cell lattice. C. Mutual Information Between Two Cells in the Cardiac Tissue shows a heat
map of mutual information in bits over the cell lattice. Mutual information was computed between a
specific cell (green circle) and all the other cells in the same cardiac tissue. D. Profiles of Entropy and
Mutual Information show profiles of entropy (blue line) and mutual information (red line) through the
cell lattice along the vertical broken line shown in 3B and 3C3. Center, respectively.

Figure 5. Multiple Reentry. The top row represents the deterministic reaction diffusion (RD)
model and the bottom row represents the probabilistic cellular automata (CA) model. A. Snapshot of
Electrical Wave Propagation shows a representative snapshot of an electrical wave from Videos S7 (top)
and S8 (bottom). B. Entropy of Each Cell in the Cardiac Tissue shows a heat map of the entropy in
bits over the cell lattice. C. Mutual Information Between Two Cells in the Cardiac Tissue shows a heat
map of mutual information in bits over the cell lattice. Mutual information was computed between a
specific cell (green circle) and all the other cells in the same cardiac tissue. D. Profiles of Entropy and
Mutual Information show profiles of entropy (blue line) and mutual information (red line) through the
cell lattice along the vertical broken line shown in 5B and 5C3. Center, respectively.

17

Electronic Supplementary Materials
Video S1.
Video S2.
Video S3.
Video S4.
Video S5.
Video S6.
Video S7.
Video S8.
Appendix

Normal Heartbeat (Reaction Diffusion Model).
Normal Heartbeat (Cellular Automata Model).
Anatomical Reentry (Reaction Diffusion Model).
Anatomical Reentry (Cellular Automata Model).
Spiral Reentry (Reaction Diffusion Model).
Spiral Reentry (Cellular Automata Model).
Multiple Reentry (Reaction Diffusion Model).
Multiple Reentry (Cellular Automata Model).
S1. Sensitivity Analysis of Mutual Information in Cardiac Tissue.

Short Title For Page Headings
The Heart as a Communication System

1

Electronic Supplementary Material for
Modeling the Heart as a Communication System
Hiroshi Ashikaga*, José Aguilar-Rodrı́guez, Shai Gorsky, Elizabeth Lusczek, Flávia Maria Darcie
Marquitti, Brian Thompson, Degang Wu, Joshua Garland

arXiv:1410.2169v2 [q-bio.QM] 31 Oct 2014

*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: hashika1@jhmi.edu

2

Appendix S1. Sensitivity Analysis of Mutual Information in
Cardiac Tissue
In this section, we build an analytical model to determine the sensitivity of mutual information to
each parameter of the cardiac tissue using a simple model of unidirectional plane wave propagation. The
analytical result should help the reader understand the numerical results in the paper.

Basic Cardiac Electrtophysiology
The cardiac tissue is simulated as a 2-dimensional (2-D), isotropic lattice of an arbtrary size (FigureS1),
where a vertical plane wave of excitation emerges from the left edge of the tissue at a constant inter-beat
interval (basic cycle length, BCL), and travels toward the right edge with conduction velocity CV .

Figure S1. A 2-D Isotropic Excitable Tissue of an Arbitrary Size. A vertical plane wave of excitationn (in
yellow) emerges from the left edge of the tissue, travels toward the right edge with conduction velocity CV . λ is the
wavelength of the excitation wave. ∆x is the horizontal distance between two arbitrary points X and Y on the cardiac
tissue.

We define the BCL in terms of the diastolic interval DI and the action potential duration AP D
(FigureS2A):
BCL = DIi+1 + AP Di

(1)

where i is the beat number. In this analysis, we assume that AP D is determined only by the immediately
preceding DI (AP D restitution) [1]:
AP Di = f (DIi )

(2)

Other factors could influence AP D in more complex models [2].
When BCL is constant and the slope of the restitution curve at the fixed point denoted by the
asterisk (*) is less than one, that is, df /dDI < 1, AP D and DI converge to constant values (FigureS2B).
Therefore, the solution to the restitution function at a steady state is
AP D = f (DI)

(3)

Similar to AP D, CV in cardiac tissue is a function of the preceding DI and tends to decrease monotonically as DI decreases [3].
CVi = g(DIi )

(4)

3

Figure S2. Action Potential Duration (APD) Restitution. A. Basic cycle length (BCL). BCL is the inter-beat
interval. AP D is the action potential duration and DI is the diastolic interval, where BCL = DIi+1 + AP Di . i denotes
the beat number. In our study the time series at each point in the cardiac tissue was coarse-grained to 1 during AP D (=
excited) or 0 during DI (= resting). B. APD restitution curve. AP D is a function of the immediately preceding DI
(AP Di = f (DIi )). The dashed line represents BCL = DIi+1 + AP Di . The asterisk (*) denotes the stable fixed point
when BCL is constant and the slope of the restitution curve at the fixed point is less than one.

CV is highest for fully recovered tissue, and there is a minimum DI for propagation at a finite CV . AP D
and CV are related by the wavelength of the excitation wave λ:
λ = AP D × CV

(5)

Mutual Information in Cardiac Tissue
At time t = 0, the point X in Figure S1 is resting. The point X becomes excited when the plane wave
of excitation reaches the point X. Therefore, the electrophysiological behaviors of point X over time can
be described using a square wave (Figure S3). The point X remains excited while the plane wave travels
from left to right at the conduction velocity CV . From Equation 5, the duration of excitement is
λ
= AP D
CV
When ∆x ≥ λ, the joint probability distribution p(x, y) at the points X and Y is
p(X = 1, Y = 0) = p(X = 0, Y = 1) =

AP D
AP D
1
1
=
=
=
DI
DI
BCL
AP D + DI
1 + AP D
1 + f (DI)

p(X = 1, Y = 1) = 0
p(X = 0, Y = 0) = 1 −

2
2AP D
=1−
DI
BCL
1 + f (DI)

The marginal probabilities p(x) and p(y) at the points X and Y are
p(X = 1) = p(Y = 1) =

AP D
1
=
DI
BCL
1 + f (DI)

p(X = 0) = p(Y = 0) = 1 −

AP D
1
=1−
DI
BCL
1 + f (DI)

(6)

4

Figure S3. Electrophysiological Behaviors of Two Arbitrary Points X and Y in Figure S1. This figure
illustarates the case where ∆x ≥ λ, but a similar analysis can be conducted in the case of ∆x < λ. The values 0 and 1
represent the ’resting’ and ’excited’ states, respectively. At t = 0, the point X is resting. When the plane wave of
excitation reaches the point X at the conduction velocity CV it becomes excited, remains excited for the duration of
AP D (action potential duration), then becomes resting again. The point Y , which is located ∆x distal to the point X
with respect to the wave propagation, becomes excited ∆x/CV after the point X becomes excited. The duration of
excitation at the point Y is also AP D. This time sequence repeats itself at the rate of BCL (basic cycle length).

Mutual information I(X; Y ) is defined as [4]
X
p(x, y)
I(X; Y ) =
p(x, y) log2
p(x)p(y)
x,y

(7)

If we define a new variable l such that
AP D
λ
1
l=
=
=
DI
BCL
CV × BCL
1 + f (DI)

(8)

then the joint probability distribution p(x, y) and the marginal probabilities p(x) and p(y) are
p(X = 1, Y = 0) = p(X = 0, Y = 1) = l
p(X = 1, Y = 1) = 0
p(X = 0, Y = 0) = 1 − 2l
p(X = 1) = p(Y = 1) = l
p(X = 0) = p(Y = 0) = 1 − l
Note that l is dependent only on DI. From Equation 7, mutual information I(X; Y ) is
p(X = 0, Y = 1)
p(X = 1, Y = 0)
+ p(X = 0, Y = 1) log2
p(X = 1)p(Y = 0)
p(X = 0)p(Y = 1)
p(X = 1, Y = 1)
p(X = 0, Y = 0)
+ p(X = 1, Y = 1) log2
+ p(X = 0, Y = 0) log2
p(X = 1)p(Y = 1)
p(X = 0)p(Y = 0)
l
l
1 − 2l
=l log2
+ l log2
+ 0 + (1 − 2l) log2
l(1 − l)
l(1 − l)
(1 − l)2
= − 2(1 − l) log2 (1 − l) + (1 − 2l) log2 (1 − 2l)
(9)

I(X; Y ) =p(X = 1, Y = 0) log2

5
We define a new variable d such that
d=

∆x
CV

BCL

=

∆x
∆x
=
CV × BCL
g(DI) [f (DI) + DI]

(10)

Note d is dependent only on DI and ∆x. When ∆x < λ, the joint probability distribution p(x, y)
and the marginal probabilities p(x) and p(y) are
p(X = 1, Y = 0) = p(X = 0, Y = 1) =

∆x
CV

BCL

=d

∆x
AP D − CV
=l−d
BCL
∆x
AP D + CV
p(X = 0, Y = 0) = 1 −
=1−l−d
BCL
p(X = 1) = p(Y = 1) = l

p(X = 1, Y = 1) =

p(X = 0) = p(Y = 0) = 1 − l
Therefore, mutual information I(X; Y ) is
p(X = 1, Y = 0)
p(X = 0, Y = 1)
+ p(X = 0, Y = 1) log2
p(X = 1)p(Y = 0)
p(X = 0)p(Y = 1)
p(X = 0, Y = 0)
p(X = 1, Y = 1)
+ p(X = 0, Y = 0) log2
+ p(X = 1, Y = 1) log2
p(X = 1)p(Y = 1)
p(X = 0)p(Y = 0)
d
d
l−d
1−l−d
=d log2
+ d log2
+ (l − d) log2 2 + (1 − l − d) log2
l(1 − l)
l(1 − l)
l
(1 − l)2
=2d log2 d − 2l log2 l − 2(1 − l) log2 (1 − l) + (l − d) log2 (l − d) + (1 − l − d) log2 (1 − l − d)
(11)

I(X; Y ) =p(X = 1, Y = 0) log2

To summarize,

2(l − 1) log(1 − l) + (1 − 2l) log(1 − 2l)
I(X; Y ) =
2d log2 d − 2l log2 l − 2(1 − l) log2 (1 − l) + (l − d) log(l − d) + (1 − l − d) log(1 − l − d)

d≥l
d<l

From Equation 9 and 11, as DI increases, both l and d decrease. Accordingly, the mutual information
between two arbitrary points at a distance d becomes smaller (Figure S4). This sensitivity of mutual
information to DI accounts for the lower average information sharing in the normal heartbeats in the
cellular automata model compared to the reaction diffusion model in Figure 6 in the main paper. Figure
S4 also illustrates the phenomenon of little information sharing when the two points are out of phase
that is shown in the normal heartbeats in Figure 2 in the main paper.

References
1. Nolasco JB, Dahlen RW. A graphic method for the study of alternation in cardiac action potentials.
J Appl Physiol. 1968 Aug;25(2):191–6.
2. Berger RD. Electrical restitution hysteresis: good memory or delayed response? Circ Res. 2004
Mar;94(5):567–9.
3. Gray RA. 34. In: Zipes DP, Jalife J, editors. Theory of rotors and arrhythmias. In Cardiac
Electrophysiology: From Cell to Bedside. 6th ed. Saunders; 2014. p. 191–223.
4. Cover TM, Thomas JA. Elements of Information Theory. 2nd ed. Wiley-Interscience; 2006.

6

1.0

I(X;Y)

0.8

l  0.1
l  0.2

0.6

l  0.3
l  0.4

0.4

l  0.5
0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

d

Figure S4. Mutual Information Between Two Arbitrary Points as a Function of d and l.

