The Western Africa Ebola virus disease epidemic exhibits both global exponential and local
polynomial growth rates

Gerardo Chowell1,2,3, Cécile Viboud2, James M. Hyman4, Lone Simonsen2,5

1

School of Public Health, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA

2

Division of International Epidemiology and Population Studies, Fogarty International Center,

National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
3

School of Human Evolution and Social Change, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA

4

Department of Mathematics, Tulane University, New Orleans, USA

5

Department of Global Health, School of Public Health and Health Services, George Washington

University, Washington DC, USA

Abstract
Background:
While many infectious disease epidemics are initially characterized by an exponential growth in
time, we show that district-level Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreaks in West Africa follow slower
polynomial-based growth kinetics over several generations of the disease.
Methods:
We analyzed epidemic growth patterns at three different spatial scales (regional, national, and
subnational) of the Ebola virus disease epidemic in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia by compiling
publicly available weekly time series of reported EVD case numbers from the patient database
available from the World Health Organization website for the period 05-Jan to 17-Dec 2014.
Results:
We found significant differences in the growth patterns of EVD cases at the scale of the country,
district, and other subnational administrative divisions. The national cumulative curves of EVD
cases in Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia show periods of approximate exponential growth. In
contrast, local epidemics are asynchronous and exhibit slow growth patterns during 3 or more EVD
generations, which can be better approximated by a polynomial than an exponential.
Conclusions:
The slower than expected growth pattern of local EVD outbreaks could result from a variety of
factors, including behavior changes, success of control interventions, or intrinsic features of the
disease such as a high level of clustering. Quantifying the contribution of each of these factors could
help refine estimates of final epidemic size and the relative impact of different mitigation efforts in
current and future EVD outbreaks.

Introduction

A strain of Zaire Ebola virus emerged in West Africa in approximately December 2013 and, as of
December 2014, has continued to spread extensively through Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia,
with limited transmission chains occurring in neighboring countries (Mali, Nigeria, and Senegal),
and sporadic importations elsewhere. A total of 19497 Ebola virus disease (EVD) cases, with 7588
deaths, have been reported to the World Health Organization as of December 24, 2014 [1]. Halting
the spread continues to be a challenging task as the virus is moving through high population density
areas. Although the causative strain is closely related to a strain associated with past EVD outbreaks
in Central and East Africa [2], the ongoing epidemic in West Africa was largely facilitated by
delays in the implementation of control interventions and a lack of public health infrastructure.

Although past EVD outbreaks have been limited in geographic scope to rural areas and have been
contained within just a few disease generations [3], the current epidemic has greater geographic
scope, duration, morbidity, and mortality impact than ever before. Although unfortunate, the
prolonged epidemic in West Africa offers a unique window to study the modes of spatial diffusion
of EVD through a wide geographic region. A better understanding of the transmission dynamics of
the ongoing EVD epidemic could improve our ability to forecast the final size and geographic scope
of the epidemic and guide future mitigation efforts.

The cumulative number of EVD cases in West Africa grew exponentially during the early stages of
the epidemic when the whole region or individual countries are considered (Guinea, Sierra Leone,
and Liberia) [4-13]. Here we study spatially disaggregated data and show that local outbreaks are

asynchronous and that they follow a slower growth pattern that can be best approximated by
polynomial rather than exponential functions. These results contrast with the early growth of many
infectious diseases, such as influenza, which is well approximated by exponential growth [14,15].
We then discuss potential mechanisms that could explain the slower than expected growth dynamics
of EVD spread, including the natural history of the disease, spatial heterogeneity of the infected
population, behavior changes, and control interventions.

Data and Methods
To investigate the EVD growth dynamics on a local scale, we analyzed subnational EVD case time
series in the three most affected countries namely Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia. We compiled
publicly available weekly time series of reported EVD case numbers by administrative division
(county or district) from the patient database available from the World Health Organization website
for the period 05-Jan to 17-Dec 2014 [16]. Because some divisions have experienced more than one
outbreak as evidenced by periods of non-zero case incidence separated by at least 21 consecutive
days (maximum incubation period of EVD) with no new EVD reports, we focused our analysis on
the time period covering the largest outbreak of EVD in each district. To avoid the effect of
demographic noise in smaller outbreaks, we only considered locales that have reported at least 100
cases over the study period.

For each administrative division, we assessed whether cumulative EVD case counts could be
approximated by exponential or polynomial growth during at least 3 consecutive disease
generations of EVD (i.e., about 6 weeks where the mean generation time of EVD is ~15 days [12]).
For this purpose, we first plotted local epidemic curves on semi-logarithmic scale. In semilogarithmic scale, exponential growth is evident if a straight line fits well several consecutive
disease generations of the epidemic curve, whereas a strong curvature in semi-logarithmic scale
would be indicative of sub-exponential growth as illustrated in Figure 1. For instance, a straight line
fitted to the square-root transformed epidemic curve would be indicative of quadratic polynomial
growth.
To fit polynomial growth models, we borrowed from an approach used to characterize the early
spread of the HIV/AIDS epidemic [17] and fit m-th degree polynomials through least-squares
regression to the cumulative incidence over 3 or more disease generations, Ci (t) = ci0 + ci1t m . Here
Ci (t) is the cumulative incidence in i-th local district or (localized region) at time t, in days, since

the start of the epidemic and ci0 ,ci1 are constants that depend specific district. Separate models are
fitted to data from each district.
In the polynomial model, the relative growth rate, dC(t) / dt ∝ m / t , decreases inversely with time
while the doubling time Td = t (ln 2)/m increases proportionally with time. This differs from the
constant doubling time of epidemics characterized by exponential growth such as unmitigated
outbreaks of influenza and measles [14].

Results
The timing of EVD outbreak across the districts in Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia is shown in
Figure 2. On average a new district was EVD-infected every ~ 13days (SD=14.05) in Guinea, ~10.2
days (SD=11.3) in Sierra Leone, and 13 days in Liberia (SD=15.5).
We found significant differences in the growth patterns of EVD cases at the scale of the country,
district, and other subnational administrative divisions. For West Africa as a whole, the cumulative
number of EVD cases initially grew exponentially, a pattern that was driven by exponential growth
dynamics in Guinea where the epidemic began in December 2013 (Figure 3). The aggregate data
for West Africa from early June to about mid-September 2014 can be characterized by a second
exponential growth phase, albeit with a lower intrinsic growth rate than the first (Figure 3). At the
national level, Liberia experienced a small wave of infections during late March to early June 2014,
a pattern that was followed by exponential growth until about mid-September 2014. For Sierra
Leone, exponential growth describes well the epidemic data from mid-July to late October 2014.
In contrast, analysis of subnational data reveals asynchronous transmission throughout the region.
Further, local epidemics display slower, sub-exponential, growth patterns, as semi-logarithmic plots
display a strong curvature during 3 or more EVD generations that can be better fitted using a
quadratic polynomial rather than a straight line (Figures 4-6). Specifically, linear or quadratic
growth fits well subnational EVD epidemics in Guinea (Figure 7), Sierra Leone (Figure 8), and
Liberia (Figure 9) while local epidemic curves quickly depart from the expected linear trend in
semi-logarithmic scale for exponentially growing epidemics. The sub-exponential growth pattern

also includes the Guinean district of Gueckedou, the initial foci of the Ebola outbreak, where EVD
transmission chains progressed unchecked for at least 3 months (Figure 7).

Discussion
We have shown that the cumulative number of EVD cases in a number of administrative areas of
Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia is best approximated by polynomial rather than exponential
growth over several generations of EVD. This pattern is also true of the initial diffusion of the West
African EVD epidemic, particularly in Gueckedou district, Guinea, where a super-spreading event
linked to burial rituals facilitated onward transmission in December 2013. Transmission progressed
unchecked for several generations in Gueckedou, as the World Health Organization did not receive
notification of the outbreak until March 23rd, 2014 [18]. In contrast, when data are aggregated
nationally, or across the broader West Africa region, total case counts show periods of approximate
exponential growth, in part due to an increasing number of areas affected by EVD.

Our findings raise questions on the mechanisms responsible for the slower than exponential growth
rate of local Ebola outbreaks in West Africa. A review of the literature indicates that two main
mechanisms could explain the approximately polynomial growth patterns: 1) the intrinsic
epidemiology of the disease relating to the heterogeneities in the contact network that may “waste”
infectious contacts (such as biased mixing of the population [17] or significant levels of clustering
[19]), and 2) a gradually increasing impact of population behavior changes and control interventions
that may decrease contacts between susceptible and infected and therefore the effective

reproduction number [19-21]. Because the polynomial growth pattern characterizes even the early
stages of the epidemic in the initial foci of infection in Guinea, these effects are important to
consider at every stage of the epidemic.
It is well known that the characteristics of the underlying network of contacts, which a disease
spreads through, play an important role on the transmission dynamics [14,22-33]. Many
transmission models assuming random mixing of the population (e.g., each pair of individuals in the
population has the same probability of contact) predict exponential growth, until the number of
susceptible individuals in the population is significantly depleted and saturation effects blunt
transmission [14,34]. At the other end of the spectrum of population mixing patterns are spatial
networks where each individual has only contacts with their nearest neighbors (such as close family
members), which leads to high levels of clustering [35,36] and polynomial growth.
Simulations have shown that high-levels of network clustering may be responsible for the
polynomial growth of disease spread [19] because the contacts of recently infected individuals are
likely to be already infected by other infectious individuals [19,37]. The spatial dissemination of
the disease can be captured by a square spatial lattice covering a region, where each spatial location
(node) has 4 local contacts in four directions: north, south, east and west. As expected, disease
spreads in this network as a moving wave through space and the cumulative number of new cases
grows as the square of time, which is the same rate of growth that we have detected in our
subnational analyses of the Ebola epidemic in West Africa.

Hence, we hypothesize that the polynomial growth of EVD in West Africa could be explained by
constrained transmission dynamics in a localized spatial structure of contacts shaped by the
epidemiology of EVD [38]. In particular, if infections are mostly limited to people who live close to
the infected population then a polynomial growth rate is to be expected. This is consistent with the
assumption that infected people in the later, more severe, stages of the disease tend to be confined at
home or in hospital where infectious contacts are mostly limited to local caregivers (health care
workers, family members).
However, transmission is also possible during “super spreading events” involving unsafe funeral
rituals where multiple mourners touch the deceased. This phenomenon likely amplified EBV
transmission during the early stages of West African epidemic and was responsible for the longdistance dissemination of the disease to distant villages and other countries [2]. Also, the number of
long-distance transmission events, which correspond to sporadic sparks of infection, must be
relatively uncommon so that the local growth rate does not become exponential, but sufficient for
regional and national epidemics to follow approximately exponential growth.
The “Small World” network model of Watts and Strogatz in 1998 [23] can be used to analyze the
impact of very short distances between individual nodes, while at the same time preserving
significant levels of clustering by only introducing a small number of long-distance connections in a
one-dimensional lattice. However, even in this setting, an epidemic can spread exponentially fast in
the network even in the presence of a very small fraction of long-distance links compared to the
number of nearest-neighbor (local) links.

The slower than exponential growth of the Ebola epidemic could also be explained by an increasing
effect of population behavior changes and control interventions taking hold in the population over
time in such a way that the effective reproduction number quickly decreases and approaches the
epidemic threshold at 1.0 [5,20,21]. However, even in the district of Gueckedou, Guinea associated
with the epicenter of the epidemic, the rate of spread exhibited sub-exponential growth before the
start of interventions as indicated by the strong curvature in the plot in logarithmic scale shown in
Figure 4.

Our study is prone to a number of limitations. Most importantly, we rely on case counts provided by
WHO, and are unable to account for reporting delays and back filling. It is unlikely however that
the slow growth pattern observed in 22 administrative divisions throughout West Africa is
exclusively the consequence of reporting delays. Further, we only provide here a descriptive
analysis of EBV growth patterns and do not fit our data to mechanistic transmission models. Further
research should concentrate on fitting EBV transmission models under different scenarios of
behavior changes, interventions, and contact clustering, to the available data, to identify the most
likely factors at play.

Polynomial growth has also been observed in other epidemics such as HIV/AIDS, which is spread
largely through close contact via bodily fluids. The HIV/AIDS epidemic is characterized by a
transmission network that deeply violate the underlying assumptions for a basic SIR model [17]. It
is well documented that the cumulative number of HIV/AIDS cases in the United States in the
1980s grew as a cubic polynomial in time rather than exponentially as was initially expected by
most modelers [17], and a similar mechanism could play a plausible role in the spread of EVD.

[17].

As in previous international health crises such as the SARS epidemic and the 2009 influenza
pandemic, mathematical models are proving instrumental to forecast the expected total number of
infections and deaths at the end of the outbreak (e.g., [6,12,13,39-43]). Previous statistical
predictions based on the overall cumulative EVD cases for all Western Africa have assumed
exponential growth [4-13]. Random mixing transmission model forecasts with exponential case
growth greatly overestimate the final epidemic size [6,8,12,13,39]. More accurate statistical
forecasts should consider the possibility of slowly growing local outbreaks that are asynchronous in
time. Faster spread may be impeded by network heterogeneity (the most plausible mechanism in
the early stage of the uncontrolled outbreak), helped in recent weeks by increased mitigation efforts
and behavior changes of the susceptible population. These mechanisms may cause the exponential
growth period to quickly end, as observed in the recent Liberian case counts [44-46]. Consequently,
crude EVD epidemic forecasts assuming exponential growth should be limited to predict case
burden within the immediate 2-4 generations of the disease (i.e., 1-2 months).

Our observations demonstrate how analyzing the EVD epidemic data on a local scale can reveal
differences between this epidemic and more typical epidemics (such as influenza) that initially grow
exponentially. These observations, together with further research on the mechanisms behind the
approximately polynomial growth of local EVD outbreaks, can help develop more accurate
transmission models for EVD that may be better equipped to make useful predictions.

Competing interests
The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

Financial disclosure
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or
preparation of the manuscript

Funding information
CV and GC acknowledge the financial support from the Division of International Epidemiology and
Population Studies, The Fogarty International Center, United States National Institutes of Health,
funded in part by the Office of Pandemics and Emerging Threats at the United States Department of
Health and Human Services. GC also acknowledges support from grants NSF grant 1414374 as part
of the joint NSF-NIH-USDA Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases programme, United
Kingdom Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council grant BB/M008894/1, NSF-IIS
Grant#1518939 "RAPID: Understanding the Evolution Patterns of the Ebola Outbreak in WestAfrica and Supporting Real-Time Decision Making and Hypothesis Testing through Large Scale
Simulations". We would like to acknowledge the Lundbeck Foundation and the Research And
Policy for Infectious Disease Dynamics program (RAPIDD) of the United States Department of
Homeland Security for sponsorship of LS. JMH acknowledges partial support from NIH/NIGMS/
Modeling Infectious Disease Agent Study (MIDAS) grant U01-GM097658-01 and the NSF/DEB
RAPID award B53035G1.

Figures
Figure 1:
Epidemic curves in semi-logarithmic scale illustrate the exponential growth and sub-exponential
growth patterns. In semi-logarithmic scale, exponential growth is evident if a straight line fits well
several consecutive disease generations of the epidemic curve whereas a strong curvature in the
epidemic curve would be indicative of sub-exponential growth.

Figure 2:
Timing of EVD outbreak onset across districts of Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia. On average a
new district was EVD-infected every ~ 13days (SD=14.05) in Guinea, ~10.2 days (SD=11.3) in
Sierra Leone, and 13 days in Liberia (SD=15.5).

Figure 3:
The cumulative number of EVD cases (in log scale) in Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia and the
aggregate curve for all of West Africa. The cumulative number of EVD cases initially grew
exponentially based on aggregate data for West Africa as a whole, a pattern that was driven by
exponential growth dynamics in Guinea where the epidemic began in December 2013. The
aggregate data for West Africa from early June to about mid-September 2014 can also be
characterized by a second exponential growth phase, albeit with a lower intrinsic growth rate than
the first. At the national level, Liberia experienced a small wave of infections during late March to
early June 2014, a pattern that was followed by exponential growth until about mid-September
2014. For the aggregate data for Sierra Leone, exponential growth describes well the epidemic data
from mid-July to late October 2014.

Figure 4:
The cumulative number of EVD cases on a semi-logarithmic plot by district and in all of Guinea.
The aggregated epidemic curve for Guinea initially followed an exponential growth pattern as
indicated by the initial linear trend in the log-transformed epidemic curve and highlighted by the
black solid line. The district level curves are largely characterized by sub-exponential growth,
shown by the strong curvature in the curves, which can be well fitted using a polynomial curve. The
vertical dashed lines indicate the timing of notification of the outbreak to the World Health
Organization.

Figure 5:
The cumulative number of EVD cases on a semi-logarithmic plot by district and in all of Sierra
Leone. The district level curves are largely characterized by sub-exponential growth, shown by the
strong curvature in the curves, which can be well fitted using a polynomial curve.

Figure 6:
The cumulative number of EVD cases on a semi-logarithmic plot by district and in all of Liberia.
The district level curves are largely characterized by sub-exponential growth, shown by the strong
curvature in the curves, which can be well fitted using a polynomial curve.

Figure 7:
Cumulative number of EVD cases in districts of Guinea reporting over 100 cases. Three different
transformations of the epidemic data are shown: 1) raw data (no transformation, left y-scale), 2) logtransformation (right y-scale), and 3) square-root transformation (right y-scale). Epidemic curves
show slower, sub-exponential, growth patterns, as semi-logarithmic plots display a strong curvature
during 3 or more EVD generations that can be better fitted by linear or quadratic growth. Local
epidemic curves quickly depart from the expected linear trend in log-transformed data. The dashed
line, shown as a reference, was fitted to the first 4 weeks of the log-transformed data.

Figure 8:
Cumulative number of EVD cases in districts of Sierra Leone reporting over 100 cases. Three
different transformations of the epidemic data are shown: 1) raw data (no transformation, left yscale), 2) log-transformation (right y-scale), and 3) square-root transformation (right y-scale).
Epidemic curves show slower, sub-exponential, growth patterns, as semi-logarithmic plots display a
strong curvature during 3 or more EVD generations that can be better fitted by linear or quadratic
growth. Local epidemic curves quickly depart from the expected linear trend in log-transformed
data. The dashed line, shown as a reference, was fitted to the first 4 weeks of the log-transformed
data.

Figure 9:
Cumulative number of EVD cases in districts of Liberia reporting over 100 cases. Three different
transformations of the epidemic data are shown: 1) raw data (no transformation, left y-scale), 2) logtransformation (right y-scale), and 3) square-root transformation (right y-scale). Epidemic curves
show slower, sub-exponential, growth patterns, as semi-logarithmic plots display a strong curvature
during 3 or more EVD generations that can be better fitted by linear or quadratic growth. Local
epidemic curves quickly depart from the expected linear trend in log-transformed data. The dashed
line, shown as a reference, was fitted to the first 4 weeks of the log-transformed data.

References

1. (2014) Ebola virus disease update - West Africa, 21 November 2014.
2. Gire SK, Goba A, et a (2014) Genomic surveillance elucidates Ebola virus origin and
transmission during the 2014 outbreak. Science 345: 1369-1372.
3. Del Rio C, Mehta AK, Lyon Iii GM, Guarner J (2014) Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever in 2014:
The Tale of an Evolving Epidemic. Ann Intern Med.
4. Althaus CL (2014) Estimating the reproduction number of Zaire ebolavirus (EBOV) during
the 2014 outbreak in West Africa. PLOS Currents Outbreaks Edition 1 doi:
101371/currentsoutbreaks91afb5e0f279e7f29e7056095255b288.
5. Fisman D, Khoo E, Tuite A (2014) Early Epidemic Dynamics of the West African 2014
Ebola Outbreak: Estimates Derived with a Simple Two-Parameter Model. PLOS
Currents Outbreaks.
6. Nishiura H, Chowell G (2014) Early transmission dynamics of Ebola virus disease (EVD),
West Africa, March to August 2014. Euro Surveill 19.
7. Chowell G, Nishiura H (2014) Transmission dynamics and control of Ebola virus disease
(EVD): a review. BMC Med 12: 196.
8. Lewnard JA, Ndeffo Mbah ML, Alfaro-Murillo JA, Altice FL, Bawo L, et al. (2014)
Dynamics and control of Ebola virus transmission in Montserrado, Liberia: a
mathematical modelling analysis. The Lancet Infectious Diseases.
9. Pandey A, Atkins KE, Medlock J, Wenzel N, Townsend JP, et al. (2014) Strategies for
containing Ebola in West Africa. Science 346: 991-995.
10. Rivers CM, Lofgren ET, Marathe M, Eubank S, Lewis BL (2014) Modeling the Impact of
Interventions on an Epidemic of Ebola in Sierra Leone and Liberia. arXiv preprint
arXiv:14094607.
11. Towers S, Patterson-Lomba O, Castillo-Chavez C (2014) Temporal Variations in the
Effective Reproduction Number of the 2014 West Africa Ebola Outbreak. PLOS
Currents Outbreaks.
12. Team WHOER (2014) Ebola Virus Disease in West Africa - The First 9 Months of the
Epidemic and Forward Projections. N Engl J Med 371: 1481-1495.
13. Meltzer MI, Atkins CY, Santibanez S, Knust B, Petersen BW, et al. (2014) Estimating the
future number of cases in the ebola epidemic --- liberia and sierra leone, 2014--2015.
MMWR Surveill Summ 63: 1-14.
14. Anderson RM, May RM (1991) Infectious diseases of humans. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
15. Diekmann O, Heesterbeek J (2000) Mathematical epidemiology of infectious diseases:
model building, analysis and interpretation: Wiley.
16. (2014) World Health Organization. Ebola data and statistics. Available from:
http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.ebola-sitrep.ebola-country?lang=en (accessed on
December 17 2014).
17. Colgate SA, Stanley EA, Hyman JM, Layne SP, Qualls C (1989) Risk behavior-based
model of the cubic growth of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in the United
States. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 86: 4793-4797.

18. Baize S, Pannetier D, Oestereich L, Rieger T, Koivogui L, et al. (2014) Emergence of Zaire
Ebola Virus Disease in Guinea - Preliminary Report. N Engl J Med 371: 1418-1425.
19. Szendroi B, Csányi G (2004) Polynomial epidemics and clustering in contact networks.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B: Biological Sciences 271: S364S366.
20. Fasina F, Shittu A, Lazarus D, Tomori O, Simonsen L, et al. (2014) Transmission
dynamics and control of Ebola virus disease outbreak in Nigeria, July to September
2014. Euro Surveill 19.
21. Maganga GD, Kapetshi J, Berthet N, Kebela Ilunga B, Kabange F, et al. (2014) Ebola
virus disease in the Democratic Republic of Congo. N Engl J Med 371: 2083-2091.
22. Pastor-Satorras R, Vespignani A (2001) Epidemic spreading in scale-free networks. Phys
Rev Lett 86: 3200-3203.
23. Watts DJ, Strogatz SH (1998) Collective dynamics of 'small-world' networks. Nature 393:
440-442.
24. Newman ME (2002) Spread of epidemic disease on networks. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft
Matter Phys 66: 016128.
25. Danon L, Ford AP, House T, Jewell CP, Keeling MJ, et al. (2011) Networks and the
epidemiology of infectious disease. Interdiscip Perspect Infect Dis 2011: 284909.
26. Cauchemez S, Bhattarai A, Marchbanks TL, Fagan RP, Ostroff S, et al. (2011) Role of
social networks in shaping disease transmission during a community outbreak of 2009
H1N1 pandemic influenza. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108: 2825-2830.
27. Del Valle SY, Hyman JM, H.W. H, Eubank SG (2007) Mixing Patterns Between Age
Groups in Social Networks. Social Networks 29: 539-554.
28. Eubank S, Guclu H, Kumar VS, Marathe MV, Srinivasan A, et al. (2004) Modelling
disease outbreaks in realistic urban social networks. Nature 429: 180-184.
29. Liljeros F, Edling CR, Nunes Amaral LA (2003) Sexual networks: implications for the
transmission of sexually transmitted infections. Microbes Infect 5: 189-196.
30. May RM, Lloyd AL (2001) Infection dynamics on scale-free networks. Phys Rev E Stat
Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 64: 066112.
31. Blower S, Go MH (2011) The importance of including dynamic social networks when
modeling epidemics of airborne infections: does increasing complexity increase
accuracy? BMC Med 9: 88.
32. Bansal S, Grenfell BT, Meyers LA (2007) When individual behaviour matters:
homogeneous and network models in epidemiology. Journal of the Royal Society
Interface 4: 879-891.
33. Read JM, Keeling MJ (2003) Disease evolution on networks: the role of contact structure.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B: Biological Sciences 270: 699-708.
34. Hethcote HW (2000) The mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM review 42: 599-653.
35. Wasserman S (1994) Social network analysis: Methods and applications: Cambridge
university press.
36. Kiskowski M (2014) Three-Scale Network Model for the Early Growth Dynamics of 2014
West Africa Ebola Epidemic. . PLOS Currents Outbreaks.
37. Brouwers L, Liljeros F The Functional Form of an Epidemic in a Real-World Contact
Network.
38. Nishiura H, Chowell G (2014) Theoretical perspectives on the infectiousness of Ebola virus
disease. . Theoretical Biology and Medical Modelling Submitted.

39. Gomes MF, Piontti AP, Rossi L, Chao D, Longini I, et al. (2014) Assessing the
International Spreading Risk Associated with the 2014 West African Ebola Outbreak.
PLOS Currents Outbreaks.
40. Chowell G, Simonsen L, Viboud C, Kuang Y (2014) Is West Africa Approaching a
Catastrophic Phase or is the 2014 Ebola Epidemic Slowing Down? Different Models
Yield Different Answers for Liberia. . PLOS Currents Outbreaks Edition 1 doi:
101371/currentsoutbreaksb4690859d91684da963dc40e00f3da81.
41. Drake JM, Kaul RB, Alexander L, O'Regan SM, Kramer AM, et al. (2014) Ebola cases
and health system demand in Liberia. arXiv preprint arXiv:14108564.
42. Poletto C, Gomes M, Pastore YPA, Rossi L, Bioglio L, et al. (2014) Assessing the impact of
travel restrictions on international spread of the 2014 West African Ebola epidemic.
Euro Surveill 19.
43. Shaman J YW, Kandula S. (2014) Inference and Forecast of the Current West African
Ebola Outbreak in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia. . PLOS Currents Outbreaks.
44. Nyenswah TG, Westercamp M, Kamali AA, Qin J, Zielinski-Gutierrez E, et al. (2014)
Evidence for declining numbers of ebola cases - montserrado county, liberia, juneoctober 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 63: 1072-1076.
45. Sharma A, Heijenberg N, Peter C, Bolongei J, Reeder B, et al. (2014) Evidence for a
decrease in transmission of ebola virus - lofa county, liberia, june 8-november 1, 2014.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 63: 1067-1071.
46. Nyenswah T, Fahnbulleh M, Massaquoi M, Nagbe T, Bawo L, et al. (2014) Ebola epidemic
- liberia, march-october 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 63: 1082-1086.

