How turbulence regulates biodiversity in systems with cyclic competition
Daniel Grošelj,1 Frank Jenko,1, 2 and Erwin Frey3

arXiv:1411.4245v2 [q-bio.PE] 9 Mar 2015

2

1
Max-Planck-Institut für Plasmaphysik, Boltzmannstraße 2, D-85748 Garching, Germany
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095-1547, USA
3
Arnold Sommerfeld Center for Theoretical Physics and Center for NanoScience,
Department of Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,
Theresienstraße 37, D-80333 München, Germany
(Dated: March 10, 2015)

Cyclic, nonhierarchical interactions among biological species represent a general mechanism by
which ecosystems are able to maintain high levels of biodiversity. However, species coexistence
is often possible only in spatially extended systems with a limited range of dispersal, whereas in
well-mixed environments models for cyclic competition often lead to a loss of biodiversity. Here
we consider the dispersal of biological species in a fluid environment, where mixing is achieved by
a combination of advection and diffusion. In particular, we perform a detailed numerical analysis
of a model composed of turbulent advection, diffusive transport, and cyclic interactions among
biological species in two spatial dimensions and discuss the circumstances under which biodiversity
is maintained when external environmental conditions, such as resource supply, are uniform in space.
Cyclic interactions are represented by a model with three competitors, resembling the children’s
game of rock-paper-scissors, whereas the flow field is obtained from a direct numerical simulation
of two-dimensional turbulence with hyperviscosity. It is shown that the space-averaged dynamics
undergoes bifurcations as the relative strengths of advection and diffusion compared to biological
interactions are varied.
PACS numbers: 47.54.Fj, 87.23.Cc, 47.27.wj, 05.45.Xt

I.

INTRODUCTION

Several studies have shown that biodiversity in spatially extended population models can sometimes be
maintained even if only a single species is able to survive in the well-mixed system [1–8]. This is typically
the case if the interactions among individuals are sufficiently local and the system does not display a clear
competition hierarchy as in the case of cyclic interactions. Cyclic competitions have been frequently investigated in discrete lattice models with nearest-neighbor
interactions, where the dispersal of individuals is local
[1, 2, 4, 7, 9–17]. To demonstrate the approach to the
well-mixed limit in these models one can either increase
the effective range of interactions towards the total domain size [2, 4] or explicitly consider individuals’ mobility by allowing random exchange events among adjacent
sites, which leads to diffusive transport in the continuum
limit [7, 12, 13, 16]. However, a significant part of life
on Earth is represented by microorganisms dwelling in
moving fluid environments, such as the Earth’s oceans,
where the dominant mechanism of transport is typically
attributed to fluid turbulence [18–20]. The latter mechanism of microorganisms’ transport was a source of inspiration for the work presented herein since, despite the
fact that cyclic interactions are used as a paradigm to
explain biodiversity, to our knowledge, only one previous
study has considered spatial games with cyclic dominance
in a fluid environment with mixing [6], and none was devoted to the study of cyclic competitions in a turbulent
flow so far. One of the most intriguing examples of biological communities without a clear competition hierarchy

inhabiting turbulent aquatic environments is represented
by marine phytoplankton species that typically compete
for a limited number of natural resources [21, 22]. Apart
from marine ecosystems there also seems to be a growing
interest for biodiversity in the atmosphere, although it
remains an open question as to whether organisms found
in the atmosphere can be regarded as an active ecosystem
or not [23–25].
Fluid motion can have a profound effect on the time
evolution of passively advected biological populations or
chemical substances [3, 26–29]. In particular, stirring
by a fluid flow can lead to transitions between different
dynamical regimes of reactive systems, mathematically
described by the so-called reaction-diffusion-advection
(RDA) equations [30–33]. From an ecological point of
view, these transitions correspond to changes in relative
species abundance and are therefore of crucial importance for studies of biodiversity in moving fluid environments. Here we demonstrate that, upon changing the
relative strengths of advection and diffusion compared
to biological interactions, a spatially extended population model with cyclic dominance experiences dramatic
changes in its spatiotemporal dynamics. Distinct dynamical regimes of the system are manifested by a rich variety
of phenomena such as rotating spiral waves, the emergence of periodic oscillations in relative species abundance, and transitions into absorbing states where only
one species survives.
To shed some light on cyclic competitions in turbulent flows we adopt a minimal biological model with
three competitors dominating each other in an analogous
fashion as in the children’s game of rock-paper-scissors,
where rock crushes scissors, scissors cut paper, and paper

2
covers rock. Known examples where cyclic dominance
has been identified in interactions between three competitors include the mating strategies of lizards in the
inner Coast Range of California [34], competitions between mutant strains of yeast [35], and bacterial strains
of toxin-producing Escherichia coli [5, 36, 37]. In the
spatially extended population model, the biological reactions are supplemented with diffusion terms and advection by a two-dimensional (2D) turbulent flow. Diffusion
can be used either to represent random Brownian motion of the advected species or as a parametrization for
turbulent transport below the model’s resolution, i.e. at
the scales where three-dimensional fluid motions become
important [18, 38]. Diffusion, however small it may be,
plays in fact a crucial role in the population dynamics
of passively advected species because it enables particles in nearby fluid elements to come in contact and interact [29, 39]. In cases where particle inertial effects
or microorganism motility are considered important, the
species may additionally come in contact due to an effective compressibility of the flow field [40–42]. In this
study, however, these effects are neglected and the tracer
velocity field is assumed to be incompressible.
It has been previously shown that cyclic interactions
in combination with diffusion lead to self-organization of
the three competitors into rotating spiral waves [7, 12].
Turbulent advection in 2D flows is, on the other hand,
known to produce sharp, patchy distributions of biological tracers [38, 43–45]. Advective and diffusive transport
in systems with cyclic competition are therefore drawn
towards a complex interplay of diverse factors, exhibiting
elements of competition as well as of cooperation. On one
hand, these two processes work together to enhance the
overall mixing rate, while, on the other hand, they represent two opposing mechanisms, favoring either sharp
gradients in the subpopulation densities or smooth density profiles propagating in the form of traveling waves.
Various relative strengths of turbulence compared to diffusion can be also viewed—in a more loose sense—as different compromises between the random Brownian and
collective motions of individuals. Our model might therefore provide some general insight into situations where
the motions of individuals are adequately described by
a single, spatially correlated velocity field in the continuum limit. Apart from plankton species in the ocean,
an interesting example belonging to this general class of
biological systems is represented by swimming bacteria
in dense suspensions [46] where the velocity correlation
length was shown to depend mainly on the bacterial concentration [47]. We also note that the applications of this
study concerning pattern formation in fluid flows are not
limited to biological systems since qualitatively similar
patterns to the ones observed in our model can also be
reproduced with the celebrated Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction [48–50].
In the ocean, advection is recognized as the dominant source of transport, and the biological interactions
among planktonic organisms typically occur on similar

time scales as horizontal mixing [38, 43]. Nevertheless, in
order to obtain a thorough understanding of the various
physical processes involved, and due to possible applications of our work outside the field of marine ecology, we
perform a comprehensive numerical analysis of our model
over a wide range of relative advection as well as diffusion
strengths compared to the biological interactions. All the
available simulation results are then used to construct a
rough nonequilibrium phase diagram of the spatiotemporal dynamics.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows.
In Sec. II we present a set of rate equations describing
cyclic interspecies interactions and give details regarding our 2D turbulence simulation, before discussing the
full set of RDA equations used to model the dynamics of
the spatially extended system. In Sec. III we perform a
detailed analysis of the numerical results. The complex
spatiotemporal patterns are first inspected through snapshots of the solutions and by means of space-time autocorrelation functions. Afterwards, adopting a recently introduced method developed in the context of interacting
particle systems [51], we show that the most pronounced
qualitative changes in the system’s spatiotemporal dynamics correspond to bifurcations of the space-averaged
dynamics. The main conclusions are given in Sec. IV.
II.
A.

MODEL

Rate equations

We study a biological population comprised of three
species A, B, and C that cyclically dominate each other.
In addition, the individuals from each subpopulation
are able to reproduce if an empty spot ∅ is available.
The complete model composed of selection and reproduction processes is described by the following reaction
scheme [12, 17]:
µ

AB −→ A∅,

σ

A∅ −→ AA,

BC −→ B∅,

σ

B∅ −→ BB,

σ

µ

CA −→ C∅,

µ

(1)

C∅ −→ CC,

where σ and µ are the selection and reproduction rates,
respectively. If the size of each subpopulation is macroscopically large, such that the relative fluctuations arising
from stochastic effects are small, the system’s time evolution may be treated as deterministic, and the discrete
distributions of individuals belonging to each species can
be replaced by the mean densities a, b, and c of subpopulations A, B, and C, respectively. In the well-mixed
limit, the mean population densities are governed by the
following set of rate equations:
∂t a = µa(1 − ρ) − σac,
∂t b = µb(1 − ρ) − σba,
∂t c = µc(1 − ρ) − σcb,

(2)

3
where ρ = a+b+c represents the total population density.
Equation (2) is a special case of a three-species population model first studied by May and Leonard [52]. For the
above system, May and Leonard reported four nontrivial
fixed points [52]: three single-species equilibrium points,
(1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), (0, 0, 1), and an unstable reactive fixed
µ
point, 3µ+σ
(1, 1, 1), where all three subpopulations coexist. The single-species fixed points correspond to absorbing states that can never be left by the system’s dynamics
once they are reached. Solutions of Eq. (2) starting in
the vicinity of the coexistence point form so-called heteroclinic orbits [52, 53]: the trajectories (a(t), b(t), c(t))
spiral outwards from the coexistence point and come ever
closer to the single-species equilibrium points but never
converge to any of them. However, the time spent in the
vicinity of the single-species fixed points increases proportionally with time. In consequence, one of the species
will sooner or later dominate the other two over times
which are much longer than any biological time scale of
interest, even though there can be no winner in the strict
limit t → ∞. It should also be noted that any inclusion of
(demographic) noise in the deterministic model (2) will
inevitably lead to the complete extinction of all but one
species in a finite time [54]. Reichenbach et al. [12] have
investigated system (2) further and showed that all solutions of Eq. (2) decay onto a 2D invariant manifold (a
subspace left invariant by the system’s time evolution),
which contains all four nontrivial fixed points. The invariant manifold together with an example of a phase
space trajectory starting in the vicinity of the reactive
fixed point is shown in Fig. 1.

B.

Turbulence model

The turbulent velocity field is obtained from solutions
of the incompressible, 2D Navier-Stokes equations with
hyperviscosity and large-scale, random forcing. Real
flows in nature are always, at least to some extent, three
dimensional. However, the particular type of flow was
primarily chosen to fit the needs of a model for the stirring of microorganisms by large-scale geophysical flows.
These flows are strongly anisotropic due to geometrical constraints (large horizontal scale compared to the
fluid’s depth) and body forces acting on the fluid (Coriolis force, density stratification) and may be treated as
2D in the first approximation [55, 56]. Fluid turbulence
constrained to two spatial dimensions is characterized by
many unique features such as an inverse cascade of kinetic energy to large scales, a cascade of enstrophy to
small scales, and strong, long-lived vortices comparable
to the size of the energy injection scale [57–59]. With the
random forcing being concentrated at large scales, the
flow field obtained from our simulations is smooth and
limited to the direct 2D turbulence enstrophy cascade.
Given the typical forcing scales in the ocean (∼ 50 km)
[3], large-scale forcing constraints the simulation domain
size within the ocean mesoscale range, where horizontal
advection is aptly described by the (standard) 2D NavierStokes equations [38]. We also note that similar modeling
approaches have been used in many previous studies of
population dynamics over large horizontal scales in the
ocean [3, 28, 38, 43–45].
In two dimensions the Navier-Stokes equations are
most conveniently solved by integrating the vorticity
equation [59]
∂t ω + v · ∇ω = D + ξ,

c
1

b
1
a

1

FIG. 1. (Color online) Evolution of subpopulation densities
(a, b, c) on the invariant manifold for equal selection and reproduction rates (µ = σ). The red (gray) curve shows a
trajectory starting in the vicinity of the reactive fixed point.

(3)

where v = (vx , vy ) is the 2D velocity field, ω = ∂x vy
− ∂y vx is the (scalar) vorticity, D represents dissipation
terms, and ξ is the external forcing. For the dissipation,
we use a sum of hyperviscosity and linear friction given
by D = ν ∆3 ω − αω. The viscous term of the NavierStokes equations is frequently replaced by higher powers
of the Laplacian in turbulence simulations because it is
possible to achieve higher effective Reynolds numbers at
a given spatial resolution in this way [60, 61]. The second
source of dissipation—the linear drag term—provides a
large-scale energy sink, necessary to reach a statistically
steady state in 2D turbulence simulations due to the flow
of energy to large scales [58, 59].
Equation (3) is solved with a pseudospectral method
on a doubly periodic square domain at resolution 7682 using the exponential time differencing fourth-order RungeKutta scheme [62] for the time integration. The random
forcing is applied in spectral space by adapting a general forcing scheme for three-dimensional turbulence, introduced by Alvelius [63], to the 2D case. The forcing
power spectrum is restricted to a narrow range of wave
numbers with a peak at kf = 2π/`f , where lf is a characteristic forcing length scale. Following the approach of

4

C.

The spatially extended population model

In the spatially extended model, we combine the differential equations for species competition (2) and the
turbulence model (3) into a set of RDA equations for the
subpopulation densities a(r, t), b(r, t), c(r, t) :
∂t a + v · ∇a = µa(1 − ρ) − σac + D∆a,
∂t b + v · ∇b = µb(1 − ρ) − σba + D∆b,
∂t c + v · ∇c = µc(1 − ρ) − σcb + D∆c,

(4)

where D is the diffusion constant and the flow field v(r, t)
is determined at each time instant from Eq. (3).
The corresponding discretized version of system (4) as
well as the continuous model have been extensively studied by Reichenbach et al. [7, 12, 65] for the case with no
fluid flow. The authors of Refs. [7, 12, 65] have shown
that mobile individuals exhibiting cyclic dominance are
able to coexist up to some critical value of species mobility (characterized by an effective diffusion constant
in the continuum limit). Within the coexistence phase
the fields a(r, t), b(r, t), and c(r, t) self-organize—in two
dimensions—into rotating spiral waves. As the species
mobility increases,
the spirals’ wavelength grows propor√
tionally to D until the patterns outgrow the system
size. The state in which spirals are absent corresponds
to the well-mixed system (2) where only one subpopulation survives. Taking into account the main features of
the reaction-diffusion part of Eq. (4), the natural time

(a)

1
40

0.8

20

y/L

0.6

0
0.4

-20

0.2

-40

0
0
(b)

0.2

0.4
0.6
x/L

1.2

0.8

1

100
E(k)

1
0.8
f (r)

Ref. [63], the time and length units of the simulation are
fixed by the choice `f ≡ 1 and P ≡ 1, where P is the
average external power input.
In the chosen units, the simulation domain edge length,
hyperviscosity, and drag coefficient were set to L = 5,
ν = 3 × 10−13 , and α = 0.13, respectively. Starting from
an initial zero vorticity, Eq. (3) was integrated until a
statistically steady state, characterized by a steady value
of the total kinetic energy, was reached. The generated
vorticity profile (Fig. 2(a)) was then used as the initial
condition for vorticity in the simulations of cyclic competitions in a turbulent flow (see Sec. II C). To confirm that
our numerical solution is consistent with well-known results from the literature, we computed the kinetic energy
spectrum E(k) and the longitudinal velocity correlation
function f (r) = hvi (r0 , t)vi (r0 + rêi , t)i/hvi2 i (Fig. 2(b)),
where the brackets h· · ·i denote a space-time average, the
index i represents the x or y direction, and êi is the unit
vector. We found f (r) to be a non-negative, monotonically decreasing function with a correlation length (the
length `c at which f (`c ) = exp(−1)) close to the forcing
length scale. The estimated turbulence energy spectrum
has a slope close to −3 on the logarithmic graph, in the
wave number range between the energy injection scale
and hyperviscous dissipation scale. These results are in
good agreement with theoretical predictions [57, 58] and
other numerical simulations [60, 64].

10−2

k−3

−4

10

forcing

10−6

0.6

10−8
1

0.4

10
kL/2π

100

0.2
0
0

0.1

0.2

r/L

0.3

0.4

0.5

FIG. 2. (Color online) Results of the 2D turbulence simulation. (a) Snapshot of the vorticity field in a statistically
steady turbulent state. (b) Longitudinal velocity correlation
function. The inset shows the turbulence energy spectrum.

and length scale of the spatially extended model appear
to be the spirals’ rotation period T0 (µ, σ) and the linear
size of the simulation domain L. We shall make use of
these units in the following analysis of our numerical results. It is also worth emphasizing that T0 is uniquely
determined by µ and σ alone [12], even though rotating
spirals can only emerge in the presence of diffusion.
For a given type of 2D flow and for a fixed ratio σ/µ,
the solutions of Eq. (4) are characterized by two dimensionless parameters, which can be constructed by assigning a characteristic time scale to each of the three physical phenomena (reactions, diffusion, and advection) and
comparing these scales to each other. Here we choose to
analyze our results in terms of the parameters
Da = τf /τr

and

Kd = τd /τr ,

(5)

where τr , τd , and τf are a characteristic reaction, diffusion, and flow time scale, respectively. The ratio Da is
known in literature as the Damköhler number [29]. We
adopt a common definition for the flow time scale given
by τf = `f /u, where u is the root-mean-square velocity of the flow [29, 44]. For τr , we use the definition
τr = T0 because this appears to be the slowest reaction

5
time scale of Eq. (4), and it is reasonable to expect that
the reactions will balance turbulent advection only when
the slowest reaction time scale is able to keep up with
the flow. We estimated the spirals’ rotation period from
simulation runs performed with v(r, t) = 0 and found
T0 ≈ 61.5/µ for µ = σ, which is in good agreement with
Reichenbach et al. [12]. The diffusion time scale τd is
defined by the ratio L2 /D in order to make Kd independent of any parameters of the flow. Hence, Kd gives the
inverse of the diffusion constant in units of L2 /T0 .
Equation (4) is solved on a doubly periodic square
domain using a second-order operator splitting (Strang
splitting) approach [66] which treats separately the reaction and advection-diffusion part of Eq. (4). The
advection-diffusion terms are integrated with a hybrid
method, introduced by Spiegelman and Katz [67], which
combines the semi-Lagrangian scheme for advection with
the Crank-Nicolson algorithm for the diffusion equation.
In the semi-Lagrangian method, we use a second-order
midpoint iteration technique for finding the departure
point of each fluid parcel at previous time step [68],
together with bicubic interpolation for approximating
the values of the advected fields at departure points.
The bicubic interpolation is constructed from a series of
one-dimensional cubic spline interpolations with fourthorder central difference estimates of the derivatives at
the interpolating nodes. To reduce spurious oscillations,
which typically arise from standard high-order interpolations near sharp gradients of the concentration fields,
a monotonicity-preserving modification of the derivatives is used for each one-dimensional cubic interpolation
[69]. The reaction terms are integrated independently of
the advection-diffusion part with a second-order RungeKutta scheme. In order to make our numerical method
consistent with the externally supplied time-dependent
flow field v(r, t), the same spatial resolution as in the 2D
turbulence simulation (7682 grid points) is used to solve
Eq. (4).
In all simulations, we use initial conditions of the form
(a∗ + δξa , b∗ + δξb , c∗ + δξc ),

(6)

µ
where (a∗ , b∗ , c∗ ) = 3µ+σ
(1, 1, 1) is the reactive fixed
point of Eq. (2), {ξs } are randomly distributed numbers
between −1 and 1, and δ is the amplitude of fluctuations
around the reactive fixed point. The random numbers
are generated independently for each point on the computational grid so that no spatial correlations are present
in the initial conditions. We also avoid using the same
flow time evolution for all simulation runs by initializing the random turbulence forcing term differently for
each run. It is important to note that various initial
conditions and flow realizations should be considered for
studies of ecosystem stability because any particular solution of Eq. (4) might show stability properties that—on
a given time scale—significantly differ from the statistical
average over many realizations.

III.

RESULTS

To investigate the characteristics of our spatially extended population model we performed over 250 simulation runs for the system (4). In most cases, the equations were integrated over a time T ≈ 23τr . In order to
determine the circumstances under which the spatial degrees of freedom facilitate a significant improvement of
ecosystem stability, it is sufficient to consider time scales
which are only about an order of magnitude larger than
τr , since the heteroclinic orbits of the well-mixed system
(2) typically require less than τr to reach the boundaries
of the phase space. In the following, we refer to the time
scales which are only about an order, or perhaps a few
orders, of magnitude larger than τr as to the biological
or ecological time scales of interest. Moreover, the term
“long-time regime” should be in the following understood
only in the context of such time scales.
In our simulations, the amplitude of fluctuations
around the reactive fixed point in the initial conditions
was set to δ = 2.5 × 10−3 , and we have always used equal
selection and reproduction rates (µ = σ). Reichenbach
et al. [12] have shown that different choices of the ratio
σ/µ do not qualitatively change the system’s dynamics in
the limit Da → ∞. It seems reasonable to expect this to
be true in general for all Damköhler numbers, although
we have not explicitly considered various choices of σ/µ
in our simulations. Different values of Da for fixed Kd
were in the simulations achieved by rescaling the entire
right-hand side of Eq. (4) while keeping the parameters
of the flow unchanged. The same effect could have been
alternatively achieved by varying the magnitude of the
flow field while keeping the parameters of the reactiondiffusion part fixed.
Different aspects of the solutions are presented in two
subsections. In Sec. III A we describe the spatiotemporal
dynamics for those choices of Da and Kd that give rise to
a heterogeneous spatial structure (i.e. the system is able
to maintain a state of biodiversity). In the following, we
call the latter range of values for Da and Kd the species
coexistence region. A more formal definition of this term
is given later in Sec. III B, where we discuss the transitions between different dynamical regimes and present a
rough nonequilibrium phase diagram of the spatiotemporal dynamics.

A.

System’s spatiotemporal evolution

The spatial structure of solutions can be qualitatively
explored through snapshots of the subpopulation densities a(r, t), b(r, t), and c(r, t). Figure 3 shows a selection of long-time snapshots of the solutions. In the longtime regime, the three species occupy separate parts of
the (periodic) domain, forming various types of patterns
which give qualitative insight into the underlying character of spatial transport. In the top row of Fig. 3, we
show solutions obtained in the absence of fluid flow in or-

6
Kd = 5.4 × 103

Kd = 1.8 × 103

Da = 0.92

Da = 2.4

Da → ∞ (v = 0)

Kd = 1.6 × 104

Da = 0.29

der to draw a clear picture of the differences between the
full set of RDA equations and the reaction-diffusion dynamics with v(r, t) = 0. The patterns resulting from the
interplay between reactions, diffusion, and turbulent advection are in general much different from those induced
by diffusive transport alone because the chosen flow field
is correlated on the largest scale resolved by the simulations. For moderately large Damköhler numbers (Fig. 3,
second row), one can observe a collection of irregular spiral shapes which are rendered unstable by the stretching
and folding of material lines in 2D turbulence (see also
Supplemental Material [70], Movie 1). In other words,
these spirals have a finite lifetime. However, new spirals are spontaneously formed at a similar rate as the
old ones are being destroyed. For Damköhler numbers
around Da ≈ 1 (Fig. 3, third row), the reaction-diffusion
dynamics and turbulent advection are found to be in
an approximate dynamic balance (Supplemental Material [70], Movie 2). This statement will be clarified later
when we examine the time autocorrelation functions. As
the Damköhler number is decreased even further (Fig. 3,
bottom row), fluid mixing significantly increases the effective range of species’ interactions, leading to collective
oscillations in relative species abundance on the largest
scales (Supplemental Material [70], Movie 3). This phenomenon will be discussed in more detail later on.
The influence of turbulent transport on the system’s
dynamics is strongest for low Da and high Kd . In this
regime, the subpopulation densities are expected to behave effectively as passive (weakly diffusive) tracers on
the time scale of the flow τf , adapting a structure similar
to that of the vorticity field [29]. Figure 4 compares a
solution of Eq. (4) for Da = 0.18 and Kd = 1.6 × 104
with the instantaneous vorticity field and confirms this
prediction. However, on the time scale of the reaction
τr the concentration fields are highly sensitive to fluid
mixing and develop large oscillations in relative species
abundance as already mentioned above.
The most intriguing questions regarding the system’s
time evolution are those related to the long-time maintenance of biodiversity. In the species coexistence region,
the total space-averaged density ρ always reaches a nearly
steady value close to 0.9. On the contrary, the spaceaveraged subpopulation densities a, b, and c never settle
to a steady value, but rather oscillate around their spacetime average; approximately 1/3 of the total density. The
time evolution observed for low Damköhler numbers deserves some special attention. In this regime, the spaceaveraged concentrations display surprisingly regular periodic oscillations, and the three subpopulations cyclically
dominate the total biomass of the system (Fig. 5). A
large global concentration of one of the subpopulations
does not necessarily lead to a loss of biodiversity because
an abundant species represents a convenient “spreading
medium” for its superior competitor that can easily outperform the first species and become abundant itself before it is in turn replaced by the third species, and so
on. However, when the relative strength of mixing is in-

FIG. 3. (Color online) Snapshots of the concentration fields
a, b, and c for different Damköhler numbers Da and ratios of
the diffusion to reaction time scale Kd . Each subpopulation
density is represented by its own color channel (gray tone)—
red (medium gray) for a, green (light gray) for b, and blue
(dark gray) for c.
(a)

(b)

40
20
0
-20
-40

FIG. 4. (Color online) Adaptation of spatial patterns to the
vorticity field structure in the regime of long reaction-diffusion
time scales compared to the characteristic flow time scale. (a)
Snapshot of the subpopulation densities a, b, and c. Different
colors (gray tones) should be interpreted in the same way as
in Fig. 3. (b) The vorticity field of 2D turbulence. Only 1/4
of the whole domain is shown in (a) and (b). Both snapshots
are taken at the same time of the simulation run.

creased further, the amplitudes of oscillations approach
the lower bound of the total space-averaged concentration ρ, so that the probability of extinction increases,
until species coexistence becomes almost impossible.
Collective oscillations in cyclic competitions with fluid
mixing have also been reported by Károlyi et al. [6]. The

7
Da = 0.71

Average density

Average density

1
0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

0

2

2

4 6 8 10 12
Da = 0.29

4

Da = 0.41

1

6 8 10 12
t/τr

0
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

2

4 6 8 10 12
Da = 0.21

0

2

4

6 8 10 12
t/τr

FIG. 5. (Color online) Transition to low Damköhler numbers where space-averaged concentrations display large periodic oscillations. The solid red (medium gray), dashed green
(light gray), and dotted blue (dark gray) lines display the
space-averaged subpopulation densities. The dashed black
lines show the total space-averaged density. The diffusion to
reaction time scale ratio Kd was set to Kd = 8.1 × 103 in all
cases.

model studied in Ref. [6] was composed of cyclic interactions between three species and an analytically prescribed unidirectional shear flow with a changing direction. Like in our turbulence model, large-scale correlations were present in the velocity field used in Ref. [6].
Interestingly, transitions to states with global oscillations
have also been observed in studies of cyclic competitions
on regular small-world networks, where a given portion of
randomly chosen nearest-neighbor links is replaced with
long-range links [71, 72]. In view of these previous works,
our results provide further evidence that the collective
oscillations are a robust phenomenon, unaffected by the
details of cyclic interactions, as long as there exists a
mechanism capable of mediating interactions among spatially separated parts of the system. For sufficiently small
velocity field correlation lengths in statistically stationary and homogeneous flows, however, it should be possible to approximate advection with an effective diffusion, thereby eliminating the possibility of collective oscillations. Instead, the effect of advection in this case
would be to increase the size of spiral patterns observed
in the absence of fluid flow. This phenomenon was recently demonstrated in experiments by von Kameke et
al. [50] with the pattern-forming Belousov-Zhabotinsky
reaction in a quasi-2D turbulent flow.
To gain a more quantitative understanding of the system’s spatiotemporal dynamics, we computed the normalized space-time autocorrelation functions
Css (|r − r0 |, t, t0 ) ≡ σ12 hs(r, t)s(r0 , t0 )i
−

0 0
1
σ 2 hs(r, t)ihs(r , t )i,

(7)

where s ∈ {a, b, c}, σ 2 = hs(r, t)2 i − hs(r, t)i2 , and the
brackets h· · ·i should be in principle understood as ensemble averages over all possible realizations of the flow
and over all initial conditions. When the probability that
one (or two) of the species will go extinct becomes small
on any biologically reasonable time scale, the autocorrelations in the system’s long-time regime may be approximated with finite-time averages. Under such circumstances, the temporal part of Css (|r − r0 |, t, t0 ) in
the long-time regime depends only on |t − t0 |. For large
Damköhler numbers, the solutions of Eq. (4) strongly depend on initial conditions which raises a concern regarding the validity of approximating Eq. (7) with a time
average. Nevertheless, we found that various initial conditions in the form of expression (6) give very similar
estimates for Css (|r − r0 |, t, t0 ), even in the high Da limit.
Since the ecosystem model (4) is homogeneous, the autocorrelations may also be evaluated with the help of space
averages. However, space averages alone generally do
not give sufficiently accurate results due to the presence
of various finite-size effects in the solutions of Eq. (4).
Spatial autocorrelation functions Css (|r − r0 |) ≡
Css (|r − r0 |, t, t) for different choices of Da are shown in
Fig. 6. The functions Css (|r − r0 |) were calculated from a
space average and an additional time average over time
T ≈ 13τr , once the total population density had reached
a steady value. In this way, we were able to obtain wellbehaved estimates of Css (|r − r0 |) with a monotonically
decreasing correlation length ξ (the length ξ at which
Css (ξ) = exp(−1)) as a function of Da and Kd . The correlation length falls with Da (Kd ) because an increase of
Da (Kd ) generally corresponds to a reduced total mixing
rate. It has been previously shown that ξ scales with the
square root of the diffusion constant in the absence of
fluid flow√[12]. Our results suggest that the scaling rela√
tion ξ ∼ D ∼ 1/ Kd remains valid in general for any
choice of Da.
The time autocorrelations Css (|t − t0 |) ≡ Css (0, t, t0 )
were initially obtained from a time average over time
T ≈ 11τr , taken at a fixed point inside the simulation domain, once the total density had reached a steady value.
By examining the initial estimates, we realized that the
chosen averaging time was too short to give satisfactory
results. Therefore, we picked three points from different
regions of the parameter space and improved our estimates of Css (|t − t0 |)—for those three particular choices
of control parameters—by taking an additional average
over 15 realizations of the model. The final results for
Css (|t − t0 |) are shown in Fig. 7. The estimated time
autocorrelations are not as well behaved as their corresponding spatial part, but we are still confident that
the results in Fig. 7 are sufficiently accurate to correctly
predict the gross features of the time autocorrelations.
Namely, Css (|t − t0 |) display damped oscillations, except
for values of Da around Da ≈ 1. In the low Da regime,
the oscillations in Css (|t − t0 |) arise from the collective
oscillations in relative species abundance, whereas in the
high Da regime, the oscillations result from the (unsta-

8
1

1
0.1

0.8

0.8
ξ/L

0.4
Caa (t)

0.6
Caa (r)

0.6

0.4

0.01

0.2

0.0001

0.001
1/Kd

0.01

0
-0.2
-0.4

0

-0.6
0

-0.2
0

0.05

0.1
r/L

0.15

0.2

FIG. 6. (Color online) Spatial autocorrelation functions for
different Damköhler numbers Da. The correlations Caa (r) are
shown for Da = 4.7 (solid red line), Da = 0.92 (dashed green
line), and Da = 0.29 (dotted blue line). The diffusion to reaction time scale ratio Kd was kept fixed at Kd = 8.1×103 in all
cases. For higher values of Da, the autocorrelations suddenly
develop a local minimum which emerges due to the presence
of rotating spiral patterns. The inset shows the correlation
lengths as functions of 1/Kd for Da = 4.7 (red triangles),
Da = 0.92 (green squares), and Da = 0.29 (blue crosses).
The dashed lines on the logarithmic graph have a slope of
√ 1/2
which means that all correlation lengths scale as ξ ∼ 1/ Kd ,
albeit with a different proportionality factor for each Da.

ble) rotating spiral patterns. For intermediate values of
Da around Da ≈ 1, the time autocorrelations quickly
decay towards zero without any clear signs of (damped)
oscillations. This result justifies the use of the spirals’
rotation period T0 for the definition of the reaction time
scale τr because the reactions appear to be approximately
in balance with turbulent advection when Da ≈ 1 (i.e.,
when T0 ≈ τf ).

B.

0.2

Global attractors and ecosystem stability

The qualitative changes in the system’s spatiotemporal dynamics with respect to the control parameters seem
very pronounced, suggesting that the model’s parameter
space can be divided into different dynamical regimes.
To develop our idea further, we follow the approach of
Rulands et al. [51] and analyze the attractors of the global
(space-averaged) dynamics. Adopting the terminology of
Ref. [51], we call the attractors of the space-averaged dynamics global attractors. To avoid confusion, we note
that the same phrase is also used in a similar context in
mathematical literature but its specific meaning there is
different. Due to the inherent presence of flow-induced
statistical fluctuations, the global attractors correspond
to maxima of the probability density to find the system
in a specific global state (a, b, c) rather than to isolated
orbits or points, for example. In this framework, the

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

t/τr

FIG. 7. (Color online) Time autocorrelation functions for
different Damköhler numbers Da. Estimates of Caa (t) were
obtained for Da = 0.29 (dotted blue line), Da = 0.92 (dashed
green line), and Da = 4.7 (solid red line). The diffusion to
reaction time scale ratio Kd was set to Kd = 3.2 × 103 in all
cases.

transitions between different dynamical regimes are to
be interpreted as bifurcations of the global dynamics and
should not be confused with nonequilibrium phase transitions. Moreover, the observed qualitative changes in
the dynamics arise essentially from finite-size effects due
to variations of the physical length scales compared to
the domain size. Evidently, the global attractors do not
give any information regarding the small-scale variability of the subpopulation densities. However, the dimensional reduction of the problem considerably simplifies
the search for bifurcations in the parameter space, while
at the same time it still gives valuable insight into the
nature of biological interactions on the largest scales.
Figure 8 shows three global phase portraits of the solutions, corresponding to three different types of global attractors observed in our simulations. The attractors can
be readily identified as a “limit cycle” (Fig. 8(a)), a “fixed
point” (Fig. 8(b)), and a heteroclinic orbit (Fig. 8(c)).
The solutions starting in the vicinity of the reactive fixed
point of Eq. (2) converge (in a statistical sense) to a limit
cycle or to the fixed point attractor if turbulent mixing is
not too strong so that biodiversity can be maintained on
the time scales of interest. It is worth emphasizing that
the fixed point global attractor does not coincide with
the reactive fixed point of the rate equations. Instead,
it is shifted along the symmetry axis a = b = c towards
a higher density ρ ≈ 0.9 as compared to the well-mixed
limit where ρ = 3/4 in the reactive fixed point. The
limit cycle global attractors correspond to oscillations in
relative species abundance observed for low Da. In the
context of dynamical systems theory, the collective oscillations are quite a remarkable property, considering the
fact that the well-mixed system (2) is characterized by
heteroclinic orbits rather than by limit cycles. Neglecting
the mathematical details regarding the true asymptotic
nature of solutions corresponding to heteroclinic orbits,

9
Da = 4.7

Da = 1.8

Da = 0.92

Da = 0.47

Da = 0.29

Da ≈ 0.15

FIG. 9. (Color online) Approach to the absorbing state with a decreasing Damköhler number Da at a fixed diffusion to reaction
time scale ratio Kd = 8.1 × 103 . Each subpopulation density is represented by its own color channel (gray tone) as described
in Fig. 3. As illustrated above, a relative increase of turbulent advection enhances the dispersal of species and increases the
average size of spatial patterns, until the biodiversity is lost. For Kd = 8.1 × 103 , we were able to observe the first extinction
events around Da ≈ 0.15.

we may say that the heteroclinic orbits correspond to extinctions of all but one species. In the spatially extended
model (4), the system tends to get trapped into one of the
absorbing states when the average size of spatial patterns
approaches the domain size (Fig. 9). The size of spatial
patterns is, in turn, controlled by Da and Kd . Therefore,
species coexistence depends essentially on the choice of
Da and Kd .
(a)

a

1 c

1 c

(b)

0

a

b
1

1
(c)

0
1

b
1

2D surface spanned by the solutions of Eq. (4) has a very
mild curvature at the intersection with the symmetry axis
around ρ ≈ 0.9 and becomes slightly more curved close
to the boundaries of the phase space where it touches
the single-species equilibrium points. For most values of
Da and Kd considered in our simulations, even the solutions that correspond to transitions into absorbing states
lie on this surface rather than on the invariant manifold
of the well-mixed system. A significant departure of the
phase portraits from the global surface of solutions was
observed only for Kd ∼ 10, and it should be probably
required that Kd ∼ 1 in order to completely neglect the
spatial degrees of freedom.

c
1

1 c
√1 (1, 1, 1)
3

a

0
1

b
1

FIG. 8. (Color online) Global phase portraits of the dynamics for different Damköhler numbers Da and ratios of
the diffusion to reaction time scale Kd . The trajectories
of the space-averaged solutions are shown for Da = 0.21,
Kd = 8.1 × 103 (a); Da = 0.71, Kd = 8.1 × 103 (b); and
Da = 0.29, Kd = 5.4 × 102 (c).

A common feature shared by all global attractors of
the spatially extended model is their confinement to a
quasi-2D geometry within the three-dimensional global
phase space. In Fig. 10, we show the projections of longtime solutions for various Da and Kd onto the global
phase space and compare the obtained result with the
invariant manifold of Eq. (2). It is shown that the global
dynamics can be effectively reduced to a quasi-2D surface within the global phase space which does not correspond to the invariant manifold of Eq. (2). The quasi-

b
1
0
1

a

FIG. 10. (Color online) The invariant manifold of Eq. (2)
(black dots) compared to the solutions of Eq. (4) projected
onto the global phase space (green/gray dots). The dashed
arrow denotes the unit vector along the symmetry axis.

Let us now try to analyze the transition into the collective oscillations regime in more detail. Due to the
inherent presence of noise in the system, it is necessary
to use a statistical approach to distinguish between the
fixed point and limit cycle global attractor. In order to
distinguish a limit cycle from small fluctuations around
the symmetry axis which correspond to the fixed point

10
attractor, the global trajectories have to be well separated from the symmetry axis a = b = c. To introduce a
measure for the mean separation of trajectories from the
symmetry axis, we can make use of the Lyapunov function of the global concentrations L ≡ (a b c)/(a + b + c)3 ,
which can be regarded as a radial coordinate, measuring the distance of a point from the boundaries of the
global phase space [51, 53]. Using the Lyapunov function, an effective radius of a limit cycle as measured from
the symmetry axis can be defined as R ≡ 1 − L/Lmax ,
where Lmax = 1/27. Hence, to distinguish a fixed point
from a limit cycle in a statistical sense, we should at
√
least require that R/ χ & 1 in the collective oscillations regime, where χ = hR2 i − hRi2 . The dependence
√
of the rescaled radius R/ χ on Da is shown in Fig. 11.
The abrupt jump around Dac ≈ 0.4 reflects the underlying bifurcation of the global dynamics. We do not rule
out a possible weak dependence of the transition also on
Kd , but the available simulation data are insufficient to
clearly confirm or neglect a possible dependence on Kd .
8

first glance appear as completely unrelated, however, our
approach illustrates that the results of the PDE model
are equivalent to the ones produced from discrete lattice
simulations with a large number of particles [7, 12], provided that the initial conditions match the solutions of
the discrete lattice model at early stages of the system’s
time evolution. In our case, this means that the initial
conditions for the PDE model should be generated as
random, δ-correlated-in-space perturbations around the
reactive fixed point of Eq. (2). In Fig. 12, we show the
dependence of Pext on Kd in the limit Da → ∞. Since
the spatial patterns of the reaction-diffusion system remain unchanged for all times after an initial transient of
a typical duration T ∼ 10τr , we consider a waiting time
T ≈ 9.8τr , and each estimate for Pext is obtained from
an average over 100 initial conditions. The critical value
Kd,c = 35 ± 5, below which species coexistence becomes
almost impossible, is in good agreement with the result
from Reichenbach et al. [7] obtained from discrete lattice
simulations (written in terms of Kd , the estimate from
Ref. [7] reads Kd,c = 36 ± 4).

1

7
R

6

Kd∗
Pext <1/2

0.1
0.75

5
4

0.01

3

0.1

Da

Pext

√
R/ χ

Kd,c

1

1

2

0.5
0.25
Pext >1/2

1
0

0.4

0.8

1.2

1.6

2

2.4

Da

FIG. 11. (Color online) Dependence of the rescaled radius
√
R/ χ on the Damköhler number Da for different diffusion to
√
reaction time scale ratios Kd . Estimates of R/ χ are shown
for Kd = 8.1 × 103 (red crosses), Kd = 1.8 × 103 (green
squares), and Kd = 5.4 × 102 (blue circles). The inset shows
the measurements of R with the error bars representing the
√
magnitude of statistical fluctuations χ.

To quantitatively describe the transitions into absorbing states, one can consider the extinction probability
Pext that two species have gone extinct after time T [7].
For the sake of simplicity, and for consistency with previous works [7, 51] performed for the discretized version of
model (4) in the absence of fluid flow, let us first discuss the limiting case Da → ∞. To begin with, the
meaning of the extinction probability in deterministic
reaction-diffusion models requires some special attention.
The randomness in discrete models originates from the
stochastic nature of biological interactions, whereas in
models described by partial differential equations (PDEs)
the “randomness” can be achieved by considering various initial conditions. These two formulations might at a

0
10

100
Kd

1000

FIG. 12. (Color online) Extinction probability Pext calculated
in the absence of fluid flow as a function of the diffusion to
reaction time scale ratio Kd . The values Kd,c and Kd∗ on the
graph denote the points above which the extinction probability drops below Pext ≈ 1 and Pext ≈ 1/2, respectively.

A large number of simulations are required for an accurate estimate of the threshold Kd,c because the survivals
of all three competitors are statistically very rare near
Kd,c . If one only requires rough estimates of the transition points into the absorbing states, a better alternative
is to consider a threshold Kd∗ for which Pext ≈ 1/2 (see
Fig. 12). Indeed, rough estimates of Kd∗ can be obtained
even if only a single simulation run is performed for each
choice of the control parameters because the point Kd∗
should be in any case bounded from above by the values
of Kd for which Pext ≈ 0 and from below by those values
for which Pext ≈ 1. Therefore, in order to spend our computational resources wisely, we have not explicitly considered the extinction probabilities for the more general
case of a nonzero fluid velocity since it is already possi-

11

IV.

CONCLUSIONS

We studied the population dynamics of three cyclically
competing species in a two-dimensional turbulent flow
forced at large scales. The presented results of our numerical simulations give new insight into how turbulent
transport affects ecosystem structure in biological communities without a clear competition hierarchy. More
specifically, we performed simulations over a broad range
of relative advection and diffusion strengths compared to
the biological reactions and studied how different choices
of ecosystem parameters affect the system’s spatiotemporal dynamics and species’ biodiversity. For short reaction time scales τr compared to the characteristic flow
time scale τf , corresponding to large Damköhler numbers Da = τf /τr , the subpopulations self-organize into
rotating spiral waves. This phenomenon is consistent
with previous studies of cyclic competitions in reaction-

Dac
10000

Kd

ble to make qualitative conclusions regarding ecosystem
stability from a very limited number of simulation runs,
performed for various choices of Da and Kd . For the reasons explained above, we use the threshold Pext ≈ 1/2
as a more formal definition of the boundary between the
species coexistence region and the extinction region. It
should be emphasized that in the presence of random
fluctuations, such as the ones arising from a turbulent
flow, the ecosystem can never remain stable in the strict
limit T → ∞ because there always exists a possibility
that the random disturbances will drive the system into
one of its absorbing states. The global attractors from
the species coexistence region are therefore in a strict
mathematical sense only long-lived transients. However,
for sufficiently large Kd and Da the extinction probability becomes very small on the biological time scales of
interest, and the states corresponding to these parameters may be for practical purposes regarded as states of
species coexistence [73].
To determine the relative extent of the species coexistence region in the parameter space, we performed several
simulations for various Da and Kd . In each of these simulations we integrated Eq. (4) for at least T ≈ 23τr . Figure
13 finally summarizes the main global dynamical features
of our spatially extended ecosystem with a nonequilibrium phase diagram. Based on how the species extinction
events and their survivals are distributed across the parameter space, it is possible to sketch a rough dependence
of the Pext ≈ 1/2 extinction probability threshold on Da
and Kd . Below the transition into the collective oscillations regime around Dac , the turbulent flow becomes
increasingly capable of synchronizing the local subpopulation density oscillations among distant parts of the
domain, which in turn greatly reduces the extent of the
species coexistence region with respect to Kd . For high
Da, our results seem to be consistent with the limiting
value Kd∗ , estimated from the simulations performed in
the absence of fluid flow.

1000

100

Kd∗
0.1

1
Da

10

FIG. 13. (Color online) Nonequilibrium phase diagram of the
spatiotemporal dynamics. The black crosses show the simulation runs where biodiversity was lost before T ≈ 23τr , and
the brown triangles show the survivals of all three species.
The (medium) gray shading indicates the region of extinction
where transitions into absorbing states become more probable than long-lived states of biodiversity. The horizontal and
vertical dashed lines show the thresholds Kd∗ and Dac , respectively (see text for further details). Above the phase diagram
we show three long-time snapshots of the solutions from different parts of the species coexistence region.

diffusion systems, with the exception that the spiral patterns become unstable when subjected to perturbations
induced by a turbulent flow. For Damköhler numbers
around Da ≈ 1, with τr defined as the spirals’ rotation period measured in the absence of fluid flow, the
reaction-diffusion dynamics and turbulent advection are
found to be in an approximate dynamic balance. This
is most clearly seen by inspecting the species (Eulerian)
time autocorrelation functions, which do not show any
clear signs of periodic oscillations for Da ≈ 1. When
the Damköhler number is decreased even further, a sharp
transition to a state with collective oscillations in relative
species abundance is observed at a certain threshold value
of Da. The observed phenomenon suggests that turbulence might play an important role in the structuring of
marine phytoplankton communities, which are typically
composed of only a few dominant species while the remaining ones represent only a small fraction of the total
biomass [74]. This type of interpretations are also supported by some recent numerical experiments presented
in Ref. [75].
To further investigate the transitions between the qualitatively different dynamical regimes observed in our simulations, we studied the attractors of the global (spaceaveraged) dynamics and identified three different types
attractors, corresponding to maxima of the probability
density to find the system in a specific global (spaceaveraged) state. The three different types of global at-

12
tractors have been identified as a fixed point, limit cycles,
and heteroclinic orbits. The transitions between these
attractors should be interpreted as bifurcations of the
global dynamics. The fixed point attractor corresponds
to states of species coexistence observed for Damköhler
numbers of order unity and above, whereas the limit
cycles correspond to collective oscillations observed for
low Da. The heteroclinic orbits indicate transitions to
homogeneous states, where the system’s biodiversity is
lost. The probability that two of the species will go extinct depends essentially on the choice of ecosystem parameters. Outside the regime of collective oscillations,
the extinction probability depends most strongly on the
relative strength of diffusion compared to the reactions.
However, as the Damköhler number drops below a certain threshold, turbulence becomes increasingly capable
of synchronizing oscillations among distant parts of the
domain, which greatly reduces the acceptable range of
relative diffusion strengths that still allow for species coexistence.
In all of our simulations, we used the same type of turbulent flow. Further studies could investigate the effects
of different types of flows on cyclic interactions, and identify which system properties are more general and which
ones depend on the details of the turbulence model. In
particular, it would be interesting to consider the dependence of solutions on the correlation length of the
flow, since it would seem reasonable to expect that the
turbulent flow becomes incapable of producing collective
oscillations in relative species abundance when the correlation length is much smaller than the domain size.

To shed some light on these speculations, we performed
a couple of trial simulations at `f = L/10. There, we
were still able to observe the collective oscillations but
their amplitude for the same choice of Da was somewhat
smaller.
Finally, it should also be noted that, even though the
main motivation for this work comes from the field of
theoretical population biology, the presented results are
also relevant in other fields where RDA systems of a similar type as the one studied here can be found. In particular, pattern-forming reactions in fluid flows have also
been realized in experiments with the chemical BelousovZhabotinsky reaction [32, 49, 50].
See Ref. [76] for information regarding the project’s
source code.

[1] R. Durrett and S. Levin, J. Theor. Biol. 185, 165 (1997).
[2] R. Durrett and S. Levin, Theor. Popul. Biol. 53, 30
(1998).
[3] A. Bracco, A. Provenzale, and I. Scheuring, Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. B 267, 1795 (2000).
[4] M. Frean and E. R. Abraham, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B
268, 1323 (2001).
[5] B. Kerr, M. A. Riley, M. W. Feldman, and B. J. M.
Bohannan, Nature (London) 418, 171 (2002).
[6] G. Károlyi, Z. Neufeld, and I. Scheuring, J. Theor. Biol.
236, 12 (2005).
[7] T. Reichenbach, M. Mobilia, and E. Frey, Nature (London) 448, 1046 (2007).
[8] W.-X. Wang, X. Ni, Y.-C. Lai, and C. Grebogi, Phys.
Rev. E 83, 011917 (2011).
[9] K. I. Tainaka, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 2688 (1989).
[10] L. Frachebourg, P. L. Krapivsky, and E. Ben-Naim,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 2125 (1996).
[11] M. Perc and A. Szolnoki, New J. Phys. 9, 267 (2007).
[12] T. Reichenbach, M. Mobilia, and E. Frey, J. Theor. Biol.
254, 368 (2008).
[13] Q. He, M. Mobilia, and U. C. Täuber, Phys. Rev. E 82,
051909 (2010).
[14] J. Juul, K. Sneppen, and J. Mathiesen, Phys. Rev. E
85, 061924 (2012).
[15] A. Roman, D. Konrad, and M. Pliemling, J. Stat. Mech.

(2012) P07014 .
[16] P. P. Avelino, D. Bazeia, L. Losano, J. Menezes, and
B. F. Oliveira, Phys. Rev. E 86, 036112 (2012).
[17] A. Szolnoki, M. Mobilia, L.-L. Jiang, B. Szczesny, A. M.
Rucklidge, and M. Perc, J. R. Soc. Interface 11,
20140735 (2014).
[18] A. P. Martin, Prog. Oceanogr. 57, 125 (2003).
[19] C. Pasquero, A. Bracco, and A. Provenzale, in Shallow
Flows, edited by G. H. Jirka and W. S. J. Uijttewaal
(Balkema, Leiden, 2004).
[20] M. Lévy, Lect. Notes Phys. 744, 219 (2008).
[21] J. Huisman and F. J. Weissing, Ecology 82, 2682 (2001).
[22] A. D. Barton, S. Dutkiewicz, G. Flierl, J. Bragg, and
M. J. Follows, Science 327, 1509 (2010).
[23] S. M. Burrows, T. Butler, P. Jöckel, H. Tost, A. Kerkweg,
U. Pöschl, and M. G. Lawrence, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 9,
9281 (2009).
[24] A. M. Womack, B. J. M. Bohannan, and J. L. Green,
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 365, 3645 (2010).
[25] N. DeLeon-Rodriguez, T. L. Lathem, L. M. Rodriguez-R,
J. M. Barazesh, B. E. Anderson, A. J. Beyersdorf, L. D.
Ziemba, M. Bergin, A. Nenes, and K. T. Konstantinidis,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 2575 (2013).
[26] I. R. Epstein, Nature (London) 374, 321 (1994).
[27] E. R. Abraham, C. S. Law, P. W. Boyd, S. J. Lavender,
M. T. Maldonado, and A. R. Bowie, Nature (London)

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The research leading to these results has received
funding from the European Research Council under
the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-013)/ERC Grant Agreement No. 277870.
This research was also supported by the German Excellence Initiative via the program “Nanosystems Initiative Munich” and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
via Contract No. FR 850/9-1. We thank V. Bratanov,
K. Reuter, T. Görler, and E. Sonnendrücker for useful
discussions. We also thank M. Perc for comments on the
manuscript.

13
407, 727 (2000).
[28] I. Koszalka, A. Bracco, C. Pasquero, and A. Provenzale,
Theor. Popul. Biol. 72, 1 (2007).
[29] Z. Neufeld and E. Hernández-Garcia, Chemical and Biological Processes in Fluid Flows (Imperial College Press,
London, 2010).
[30] Z. Neufeld, P. H. Haynes, and T. Tél, Chaos 12, 426
(2002).
[31] Z. Neufeld, I. Z. Kiss, C. Zhou, and J. Kurths, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 91, 084101 (2003).
[32] M. S. Paoletti, C. R. Nugent, and T. H. Solomon, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 96, 124101 (2006).
[33] Z. Neufeld, Chaos 22, 037102 (2012).
[34] B. Sinervo and C. M. Lively, Nature (London) 380, 240
(1996).
[35] C. E. Paquin and J. Adams, Nature (London) 306, 368
(1983).
[36] B. C. Kirkup and M. A. Riley, Nature (London) 428, 412
(2004).
[37] M. F. Weber, G. Poxleitner, E. Hebisch, E. Frey, and
M. Opitz, J. R. Soc. Interface 11, 20140172 (2014).
[38] A. Bracco, S. Clayton, and C. Pasquero, J. Geophys.
Res. 114, C02001 (2009).
[39] K. J. Richards and S. J. Brentnall, J. Theor. Biol. 238,
340 (2006).
[40] P. Perlekar, R. Benzi, D. R. Nelson, and F. Toschi, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 105, 144501 (2010).
[41] R. Benzi, M. H. Jensen, D. R. Nelson, P. Perlekar,
S. Pigolotti, and F. Toschi, Eur. Phys. J. Special Topics
204, 57 (2012).
[42] W. M. Durham, E. Climent, M. Barry, F. De Lillo,
G. Boffetta, M. Cencini, and R. Stocker, Nat. Commun.
4, 2148 (2013).
[43] E. R. Abraham, Nature (London) 391, 577 (1998).
[44] W. J. McKiver and Z. Neufeld, Phys. Rev. E 79, 061902
(2009).
[45] W. J. McKiver and Z. Neufeld, Phys. Rev. E 83, 016303
(2011).
[46] T. Ishikawa, J. R. Soc. Interface 6, 815 (2009).
[47] J. Gachelin, A. Rousselet, A. Lindner, and E. Clement,
New J. Phys. 16, 025003 (2014).
[48] M. C. Cross and P. C. Hohenberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 65,
851 (1993).
[49] C. R. Nugent, W. M. Quarles, and T. H. Solomon, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 93, 218301 (2004).
[50] A. von Kameke, F. Huhn, A. P. Muñuzuri, and V. PérezMuñuzuri, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 088302 (2013).
[51] S. Rulands, A. Zielinski, and E. Frey, Phys. Rev. E 87,
052710 (2013).

[52] R. M. May and W. J. Leonard, SIAM J. Appl. Math. 29,
243 (1975).
[53] J. Hofbauer and K. Sigmund, Evolutionary Games
and Population Dynamics (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1998).
[54] E. Frey, Physica A 389, 4265 (2010).
[55] R. Salmon, Lectures on Geophysical Fluid Dynamics (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998).
[56] S. D. Danilov and D. Gurarie, Phys.-Usp. 43, 863 (2000).
[57] R. Kraichnan, Phys. Fluids 10, 1417 (1967).
[58] P. A. Davidson, Turbulence (Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2004).
[59] G. Boffetta and R. E. Ecke, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 44,
427 (2012).
[60] E. Lindborg and K. Alvelius, Phys. Fluids 12, 945 (2000).
[61] A. Bracco, J. von Hardenberg, A. Provenzale, J. B.
Weiss, and J. C. McWilliams, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
084501 (2004).
[62] A.-K. Kassam and L. N. Trefethen, SIAM J. Sci. Comput.
26, 1214 (2005).
[63] K. Alvelius, Phys. Fluids 11, 1880 (1999).
[64] G. Boffetta and S. Musacchio, Phys. Rev. E 82, 016307
(2010).
[65] T. Reichenbach, M. Mobilia, and E. Frey, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 99, 238105 (2007).
[66] W. Hundsdorfer and J. G. Verwer, Numerical Solution
of Time-Dependent Advection-Diffusion-Reaction Equations, Springer Series in Comput. Math. 33 (Springer,
Berlin, 2003).
[67] M. Spiegelman and R. F. Katz, Geochem. Geophys.
Geosyst. 7, Q04014 (2006).
[68] A. Staniforth and J. Côté, Mon. Weather Rev. 119, 2206
(1991).
[69] F. N. Fritsch and R. E. Carlson, SIAM J. Numer. Anal.
17, 238 (1980).
[70] See Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by
publisher] for movies of the system’s spatiotemporal evolution.
[71] G. Szabó, A. Szolnoki, and R. Izsák, J. Phys. A 37, 2599
(2004).
[72] C. Rulquin and J. J. Arenzon, Phys. Rev. E 89, 032133
(2014).
[73] A. Hastings, Trends Ecol. Evol. 19, 39 (2004).
[74] T. Pommier, B. Canbäck, L. Riemann, K. H. Boström,
K. Simu, P. Lundberg, A. Tunlid, and Å. Hagström,
Mol. Ecol. 16, 867 (2007).
[75] M. Lévy, O. Jahn, S. Dutkiewicz, and M. J. Follows,
Limnol. Oceanogr. Fluids and Environments 4, 67 (2014).
[76] The simulation source code used in this study is publicly
available at https://github.com/dgroselj/DRASLA.

