Extinctions in large ecosystems under periodic and chaotic forcing
S.A. Vakulenko,1, 2 I. Sudakov,3, a) K.M. Golden,3 and D. Kirievskaya4
1) Institute

arXiv:1412.1006v2 [q-bio.PE] 24 Feb 2015

for Problems in Mechanical Engineering, Russian Academy of Sciences, Bolshoy pr. V.O., 61, St. Petersburg 199178,
Russia
2) Laboratory of Power Electronics and Automated Electric Drive, ITMO University, Kronverkskiy pr., 49, St. Petersburg 197101,
Russia
3) Department of Mathematics, University of Utah, 155 S 1400 E, RM 233, Salt Lake City, UT 84112,
USA
4) Research Center, Novgorod State University, Bolshaya St. Petersburgskaya ul., 41, Veliky Novgorod 173003,
Russia

We consider a model for plankton ecosystems with resources, self-limitation effects, and time dependent parameters.
The model takes into account the extinction of multiple species. We show that the model is well posed and investigate
its dynamical properties. The number of species which can coexist depends on both parameters and forcing. Our
numerical simulations show that the system is more stable under chaotic forcing.
Phytoplankton are a critical component of Earth’s carbon cycle and thus play an important role in the climate
system. They are sensitive indicators of climate change.
As a key part of the global ecosystem, they influence climate feedback processes and possible tipping points. The
complex plankton ecosystem has been studied in terms of
internal processes within the ecosystem such as the competition for resources, conditions for chemical reactions,
etc. However, recent observations have shown that climate
change can be a leading factor influencing ecosystem behavior.
Here we suggest a mathematical model of a plankton
ecosystem with many species, which exhibits complicated
behavior under time periodic or chaotic parameter oscillations. These oscillations can model the influence of environmental temperature oscillations. A new element of this
model, with respect to previous ones, is that we take into
account species extinctions.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Models of large ecosystems form an important class of dynamical systems generating complicated patterns and strange
(chaotic) attractors. However, modeling these large systems
is made difficult by rapid, small scale biological evolution
and gaps in observations to use for comparison. Also, there
is uncertainty in how to set up reliable experiments on such
ecosystems.
A well studied example is the ocean ecosystem, where the
main resource for many species is phytoplankton. Phytoplankton plays an important role in the dynamics of the climate system through the oceanic carbon cycle by removing
about half of all carbon dioxide from the atmosphere during
photosynthesis1. Previous studies2,3 have shown that phytoplankton communities respond to climate warming through
changes in diversity and productivity. However, it was determined4 that changing the climate temperature directly impacts

a) Electronic

mail: sudakov@math.utah.edu.

the chemical cycles in plankton, affecting the system as much
as nutrients and light.
Another example where environmental temperature may be
related to the dynamics of the plankton ecosystem is the very
recent appearance of a fall phytoplankton bloom in the Arctic
Ocean5 . In contrast to previous observations, the new plankton dynamics may be approaching a possible bistable regime,
where plankton bloom not only during the spring time, but in
early fall as well. This in turn could affect surface ocean temperature and delay sea ice re-freezing. Also, an unusual massive phytoplankton bloom which has been found underneath
the Arctic ice pack in the Chukchi Sea6 may correlate with
planetary warming. Thus, theoretical investigation of the dynamical properties of large ecosystems under external forcing
makes a significant contribution to understanding properties
of the ecosystems as well as the climate system.
We consider here a new phytoplankton model, which takes
into account resources, self-limitation effects, and species extinctions. The model parameters depend on the state of the
environment via time dependent coefficients. This system is
connected with some phytoplankton models, and under certain assumptions can be derived from them. If the resource
turnover rate is large enough, the model reduces to a LotkaVolterra system 7 . If we remove self-limitation effects for the
Lotka-Volterra system, one finds8,9 that a single species can
survive only in an ecosystem for certain fixed climate parameters. Biologically, it is the exclusion principle. In the framework of the phytoplankton model, it is the so-called plankton
paradox studied in many interesting works10–13 . In fact, in
contrast to the exclusion principle, we observe the coexistence
of many plankton species sharing the same niche. Numerical
simulations10–12 have shown that in such systems chaos and
unpredictable behavior occur. In the papers 14,15 it was shown
that a temporal variability of the nutrient supply can lead to
coexistence of species.
In this paper, we extend the model of Huisman and Weissing12 by introducing self-limitation for species and species
extinctions. Such an extended model can describe the coexistence of many species when self-regulation is stronger than
species competition.
Our primary goal is to compare the two following situations: A) system with fixed parameters; B) the same system

2
with time dependent parameters. In case B we consider two
situations: time periodic oscillations and time chaotic ones.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we
state the standard model of species coexistence. Further, we
prove a general assertion on attractor existence for this model.
For the case of a single resource we show that the global attractor consists of equilibria and derive an equation for species
abundances. For large turnover D this equation has a simple
asymptotic solution.
In Section III we introduce the new extended model, which
takes into account species extinctions and time oscillations
of the resource S. We also prove the existence of a compact
global attractor when S = const. For the model with time dependent parameters we describe two situations where we can
find asymptotic solutions. In Section IV we describe the results of numerical simulations.

N
dv j
= D j (S j − v j ) − ∑ c jk xk φk (v),
dt
k=1

where v = (v1 , v2 , ..., vM ), and
a j v1
a j vM
}.
, ...,
K1 j + v1
KM j + vM

φ j (v) = min{

We consider the following standard model of plankton biodiversity12:
N
dxi
= xi (−ri + ρi (v) − ∑ γi j x j ),
dt
j=1

N
dv
= D(S − v) − ∑ c j x j ρ j (v),
dt
j=1

(1)

φ j (v) ∈ C1 ,

a jv
,
Kj + v

a j , K j > 0,

(7)

where C+ > 0 is a positive constant, and
∀k

v ∈ ∂ RN>

(8)

where ∂ RN> denotes the boundary of the positive cone RN> =
{v : v j ≥ 0, ∀ j}. Note that condition (8) holds if φ j are defined by (6). Similarly as above, we assume that ∑Nk=1 cik =
1, cik > 0.
A.

General properties of the standard model

(2)

(3)

γii − ∑ |γi j | = κi > 0.

(9)

j6=i

are Michaelis-Menten’s functions, xi are species abundances,
ri are the species mortalities, D is the resource turnover rate,
S is the supply of resource v, and ci is the content of the resource in the i-th species. These constants define how different species share resources. Note that if ci = 0 then the
equation for v becomes trivial and v(t) → S for large times t,
i.e., the resource equals the resource supply.
The terms γii xi define self-regulation of species populations
that restrict the species abundances, and γi j x j with i 6= j define
a possible competition between species for resources.
The coefficients ai are specific growth rates and the Ki are
self-saturation constants. The coefficients ci determine how
the species share the resource (nutrient supply). It is natural
thus to assume that ∑Ni=1 ci = 1, ci > 0.
When γi j = 0 this system is equivalent to those in works
where the plankton paradox12 is studied (see the previous section). For the case of M resources we have more complicated
equations
N
dxi
= xi (−ri + φi (v) − ∑ γi j x j ),
dt
j=1

0 ≤ φ j (v) ≤ C+ ,

Let us first describe some sufficient conditions which guarantee that systems (1), (2) and (4), (5) are dissipative and have
a global attractor. Define the matrix Γ with the entries γi j
to satisfy the following condition (this is a classical assumption9 ):
Assumption. The matrix Γ with the entries γi j has a positive
dominant diagonal:

where

ρ j (v) =

(6)

where a j and Ki j > 0. This model is widely used for primary
producers like phytoplankton and it can also be applied to describe competition for terrestrial plants11 . Relation (6) corresponds to the von Liebig minimum law, but we can consider
even more general φ j satisfying the conditions

φk (v) = 0,
II. THE STANDARD MODEL OF PLANKTON
BIODIVERSITY

(5)

(4)

This assumption means that species self-regulation is
stronger than competition between species. Then, we can assert that the solutions to (4), (5) are non-negative and bounded.
Lemma II.1. Assume the φ j satisfy (7). Let us consider for
(4), (5) the Cauchy problem with positive initial data for x and
bounded positive initial resources
xi (0) > 0,

v j (0) ∈ (0, S j ).

(10)

Then solutions of this Cauchy problem are positive and a priori bounded, that is,
0 < v j (t) < S j ,

0 < xi (t) < Mi ,

t > 0,

(11)

where the Mi are positive constants.
Proof. The proof is standard. Let us prove that v j (t) > 0.
Assume that this fact is violated. Then there exists an index
j0 and a time t0 > 0 such that
v j0 (t0 ) = 0,

dv j0
≤ 0,
dt

v j (t0 ) ≥ 0,

f or all j 6= i. (12)

3
Condition (8) entails that the term ∑Nk=1 c jk xk φk (v) equals
zero. Then we substitute these inequalities into the j0 -th equation (5) and obtain a contradiction.
In a similar way, we can prove that v j (t) < S j . Here, we use
the positivity of the c jk and φk which implies
dv j
≤ D j (S j − v j ).
dt
Positivity of xi follows from the fact that the i-th right
hand side of system (4) is proportional to xi , thus, xi (t) =
xi (0) exp(ξi (t)), where ξi is a function.
Let us prove that xi (t) < M0 for some M0 > 0. Let E(t) =
max{x1 (t), ..., xN (t)}. Let us estimate dE/dt for large E. Let
i0 (t) be an index such that E(t) = xi0 (t). According to (7) the
φi are uniformly bounded by C+ . Therefore within any open
interval, where i0 is fixed, one has
dxi0
≤ xi0 Ri0 ,
dt

Ri0 ≤ C+ − κi xi0 (t),

where κi > 0 due to assumption (9) on Γ. Thus, if E is large
dxi
enough, Ri0 is a negative number and dt0 < 0. Thus E is
bounded, which completes the proof.
We then obtain the following corollary.
Lemma II.2. Under the conditions of the previous lemma,
system (4), (5) is dissipative and has a compact global attractor.

B.

Equilibria

On the attractor structure, one can say more for the particular case (1), (2). Numerical simulations for this system
show that all trajectories tend to equilibria. To understand
this fact, let us recall the fundamental concept of cooperative
systems16,17 . The condition which determines a cooperative
system16,17 does not hold for (1), (2) but if we change variables to yi = −xi , then in the new variables in this system
become cooperative. This fact implies that all local attractors
are stable equilibria. The stable rest points (x̄, v̄) of systems
(1) and (2) can be found as follows. Let us set, for simplicity,
that

γi j = γi δi j ,

γi > 0.

(13)

γi−1 (ri − ρi (v̄))+ ,

Setting dxi /dt = 0 in (1), we obtain x̄i =
where f+ denotes max{ f , 0}. This gives the following nonlinear equation for v̄:
D(S − v̄) = ∑ ci γi−1 (ri − ρi(v̄))+ ρi (v̄).

(14)

i=1

This equation has an asymptotic solution for large turnovers
D >> 1. We obtain v̄ = S + O(D−1) and
x̄i = γi−1 (ri − ρi (S))+ + O(D−1 ).

(15)

III. EXTENDED TIME DEPENDENT PLANKTON
MODEL

We extend system (4) and (5) to describe two important
effects. The first effect is species extinctions. In reality abundances xi are discrete numbers, therefore, if the abundance
becomes too small, the corresponding species must become
extinct. To describe this effect mathematically, we introduce
a parameter δ > 0 and suppose that if the i-th species abuni (t0 )
dance xi (t) becomes less than δ , i.e., xi (t0 ) = δ and dxdt
<0
for some i and t0 > 0, then the corresponding species should
be excluded from systems (4) and (5). We then set formally
that xi (t) ≡ 0 for all t > t0 .
Note that after this modification the model stays mathematically well posed. In fact, let us introduce a function Ne (t),
which is the number of surviving species at time t, i.e. the
number of indices i such that xi (t) > δ . It is clear that Ne (t)
is a piecewise constant non-increasing function. Let t0 < t1 <
... < tm < ... be the points of discontinuity of this function.
Within the intervals [tk ,tk+1 ] the Cauchy problem for systems
(4) and (5) is well posed therefore the Cauchy problem is well
posed for the modified systems (4) and (5) with extinctions.
There are two possible situations. If limt→+∞ Ne (t) = N∞ = 0,
then all the species vanish. If N∞ > 0, then on some infinite semiaxis (tm , +∞) the modified system is equivalent to
the standard model, which has a compact global attractor.
Therefore, in this case the modified model also has a compact global attractor. The time Ts when at least one species
with x j (t) > Xext exists is called the survival time.
The second effect is a result of climate (environmental) influence on the dynamics of the modified systems (4) and (5)
and species extinctions. To introduce dependence on the climate state (for example, on the average environmental temperature T ) we can assume that the resource depends on T
and that T is a periodic function of time. We also include
stochastic effects. For example, we can suppose that
S = S0 + S1sin(ω t) + εη (t)

(16)

where S0 , S1 > 0 are parameters, ω is a frequency, η is standard white noise and and ε is the noise amplitude. This means
that the temperature changes periodically in time. The parameter S0 is a mean nutrient supply (resource), whereas the parameter S1 describes the intensity of periodic forcing.
To simulate chaotic time forcing we set
S = S0 + S1θ (t) + εη (t)

(17)

where the function θ can be obtained by chaotic trajectories
of the Lorenz system, a rough model of atmospheric dynamics
given by
dx/dt = τ −1 (α (y − x)),

dy/dt = τ −1 (x(ρ − z) − y),

(18)

dz/dt = τ −1 (xy − β z),

where α , β , ρ are parameters and τ > 0 is a parameter that
controls the speed of the trajectories. This system shows

4

IV.

40

coexistence (case 1)
35

e

coexistence (case 2)

Number of Species, N

chaotic behaviour for α = 10, β = 8/3 and ρ = 28. We construct θ as follows. The third component z in (18) describes
the time evolution of temperature. We set θ (t) = (z(t)− z̄)/µz ,
where µz = max(|z(t)|) on a large interval [0, T ] and z̄ is the
R
average of T −1 0T z(t)dt on this interval.
The time extended model reduces to the time independent
model with constant S in the two opposite cases: (a) ω >> 1
and (b) ω << 1. Assume S = S(t) is defined by (16). In case
(a), we can apply the averaging principle to (1), (2) and replace S(t) by S0 in (2). This averaging also works for S(t)
defined by (17). The number Ne (t) of coexisting species tends
to a constant for large t. This asymptotic approach is confirmed by numerical results in a large diapason of parameter
values (see the next section).
In case (b) we introduce a slow time t¯ = ω t and use the quasistationary approximation. Then we obtain that the equilibria
x̄(t¯), v̄(t¯) are functions of slow time. The number Ne of coexisting species is also a function of t¯. Note that Ne is a measure
of biodiversity.

30

25

20

15

10

5
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Time, t

FIG. 1: This graph shows the number of coexisting species
Ne (t) in the two cases. In case 1, the number of species
Ne (T ) coexists in a system depending on t when the nutrient
supply S is a constant, S0 = 200 and S1 = 0. In the case 2, the
number of species Ne (T ) coexists in a system with time
varying resource, S0 = 200, S1 = 180.

NUMERICAL RESULTS
0.9

0.8

We consider the Cauchy problem for the system given by
(1) and (2) on a time interval [0, T ], where the initial data are
given by
(19)

and T is a positive number. We assume that N >> 1 (the
case of a large ecosystem) and Xi > 0 is distributed randomly
according to a lognormal law with parameters a, σ . The corresponding distribution density is given by

probablity (case 2)
probablity (case 1)

0.6

Probability

xi (0) = Xi > 0

0.7

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Averaged Resource, S

0



−(ln x − a)2
1
f (x) = √ exp
2σ 2
xσ 2 π

(20)

We assume that the coefficients ai are random numbers obtained from the normal distribution N(ā, σa ). Similarly Ki are
distributed by N(K̄, σK ), ri are distributed by N(r̄, σr ) etc. The
share coefficients ci are taken as random numbers uniformly
distributed on [0, 1/N]. The other parameters are as follows:
the turnover coefficient D ∈ [3, 20] and ω ∈ [2, 8], the species
number N = 20, the time T = 10, δ = 0.1, X0 = 1,V0 = 10 and
ε ∈ [0, 10].
In the numerical simulations, in order to simplify the problem, we assume that the concurrence is absent (condition (13
holds).
The following results are obtained. The number of coexisting species Ne (t) is shown on Fig. 1.
In some cases the strongly time oscillating supply S(t) defined by (16) can increase biodiversity, Ne (T ) at S1 = 0.8S0 is
grater than Ne (T ) at S1 = 0, see Fig. 2. In case 1, we calculate the probability that the periodic oscillations of the nutrient
resource will increase biodiversity. Also, we define the probability (case 2) that the periodic oscillations of the nutrient
resource will decrease biodiversity. We note this plot (Fig. 2)
is obtained by the Euler method with the time step 0.001 for

FIG. 2: This graph shows that in some rare cases the time
oscillating supply S(t) can increase biodiversity. Here,
S1 = 0.8S0 for time depending model and S1 = 0 for time
independent one. In case 1, the probability that the Ne (T ) for
the time dependent model is larger than Ne (T ) for the time
independent model with S1 = 0. In case 2, the probability
that the Ne (T ) for the time dependent model is larger than
Ne (T ) for the model with S1 = 0.

the following parameter values: N = 20, ā = 10, σa = 2, r̄ =
1, σr = 1, D = 3, T = 10, K̄ = 5, σK = 1. When the value of ε
is large (ε = 10) the noise is large. To compute the probabilities, M = 50 solutions to the Cauchy problems were obtained
with random data. The procedure was the same for both the
time dependent and time independent models.
Fig. 3 displays the number of coexisting species on the averaged resource S0 vs time as presented in (16). Case 1 is the
situation when the environment does not influence the system.
In case 2 Ne is always above that of case 1, this implies that
the time oscillating recourse diminishes biodiversity.
Fig. 4 shows the dependence of the number Ne on the speed
parameter τ when the resource S(t) evolves chaotically ac-

5
V.

12

CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION

coexistence (case 2)
10

Number of Species, N

e

coexistence (case 1)

8

6

4

2

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Averaged Resource, S

0

FIG. 3: This graph shows the dependence of the number of
coexisting species on the averaged resource S0 in the case of
(16). Case 1 corresponds to the record, where S1 = 0. Case 2
corresponds to S1 = 0.8S0 .

In the case of time dependent resource oscillations two
regimes are found which can be investigated analytically. The
first regime describes fast oscillations. Then one can proceed
by averaging the resource over time. The second regime arises
when the resources change slowly, here we use the quasistationary approximation.

7
6.5

Number of Species, N

e

6
5.5
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
2

In this paper, a resource model for phytoplankton species
is developed, which generalizes the well known model12
and takes into account species self-regulation, extinctions,
and time dependence of resources. Such conceptual models describe a simple and easily understandable mechanism
for resource competition. For the case of fixed parameters,
a general assertion on attractor existence for this model is
proved. The sufficient condition of the attractor existence is
that species self-regulation is stronger than the species competition. For the case of a single resource the large time behaviour of solutions can be described since then the system is
cooperative. We find that all local attractors are stable steady
points. These points can be found from a simple nonlinear
equation for the equilibrium resource level. For large supply
turnovers we find an asymptotic solutions of this equation.

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Speed Parameter,τ

FIG. 4: This graph shows the dependence of the number Ne
of coexisting species on the parameter τ in the case of
chaotic supply dynamics defined by (18). The time interval
T = 80, S0 = 5 and S1 = 4.

cording to (18). We observe that the biodiversity is a decreasing function of the speed parameter. This decrease depends on
the averaged supply level S0 , for larger S0 the effect is weaker.
Finally, the numerical and analytical results are as follows.
For large values of S0 and ω ∈ (3, 8), when the period of time
oscillations is much less, the system defined by (1), (2) shows
formidable stability even for S1 close to S0 . The periodic and
chaotic oscillations always decrease biodiversity, but the effect on coexisting species is small: the numbers Ne (T ) remain
close or they coincide. To obtain diminishing biodiversity, it
is necessary to take S1 = 0.95S0 which corresponds to the case
of very strong oscillation. In seldom situations, the counterintuitive effect of biodiversity increasing under oscillations is
possible. It may happen when the averaged resource S0 is not
large (see Fig.2). Note that this effect can be explained. In
fact, the time oscillations and increasing supply can conserve
some species which were close to extinction.

The numerical results show that when the averaged supply
level is large enough, sufficiently fast resource time oscillations do not affect essential biodiversity, i.e., the number of
coexisting species. This result is valid both for chaotic and periodic oscillations. The effect of oscillations becomes observable when the averaged resource value is sufficiently small.
Then, typically, the oscillations (both chaotic and periodic) diminish biodiversity, however, in some cases oscillations with
a noise component can increase biodiversity.
These results can be interesting for the biodiversity problem, where new ideas have been proposed recently (see 18
and also references therein). Some ecologists emphasized the
roles of competition and environmental interactions in ecological system structure (niche theory). This niche model considers ecological selection as a driving force of ecosystem evolution. In contrast, so-called neutral models assume an equivalency between species and the role of stochasticity. In 18 it is
shown that a transition is possible between two models, niche
and neutral. The model 18 involves three terms: a term describing a species immigration into communities from a large
regional species pool, a term that limits a species population
to its carrying capacity and a stochastic force. Our model also
includes different terms. It involves self-limitation terms and
the resource term, which increases species populations but is
much more sophisticated than the immigration term. Moreover, we consider noisy periodic and chaotic resourse oscillations instead of purely stochastic forcing18. Instead of immigration, we consider an inverse process, namely, species extinctions. Our results lead to the conclusion that a chaotically
varying environment only affects an ecosystem when the averaged resource level is not large enough. Then the resource
rate decrease can lead to a sharp biodiversity decline.

6
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by the Government of the Russian Federation through mega-grant 074-U01, President’s
grant MK-128.2014.1, and RFBR grants 13-01-90701 and 1401-31053. We gratefully acknowledge support from the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Division of Polar Programs at the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) through
Grants DMS-0940249 and DMS-1413454. We are also grateful for support from the Office of Naval Research (ONR)
through Grant N00014-13-10291. Finally, we would like to
thank the NSF Math Climate Research Network (MCRN) as
well for their support of this work.
1

C.B. Field, M.J. Behrenfeld, J.T. Randerson, and P. Falkowski, Science 281,
237 (1998).
2 G.B. Arhonditsis and M.T. Brett, Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 271,13 (2004).
3 M. Travers, Y.-J. Shin, S. Jennings, and P. Cury, Prog. Oceanogr. 75, 751
(2007).
4 A. Toseland, S.J. Daines, J.R. Clark, A. Kirkham, J. Strauss, C. Uhlig, T.M.
Lenton, K. Valentin, G.A. Pearson, V. Moulton et al., Nat. Clim. Chang. 3,
979 (2013).

5 M.

Ardyna, M.Babin, M. Gosselin, E. Devred, L. Rainville, J-E Tremblay,
Geophys. Res. Lett. 41, 6207 (2014).
6 K.R. Arrigo, D.K. Perovich, R.S. Pickart, Z.W. Brown, G.L. van Dijken,
K.E. Lowry, M.M. Mills, M.A. Palmer, W.M. Balch, F. Bahr et al., Science
336, 1408 (2012).
7 S. Vakulenko, Complexity and Evolution of Dissipative Systems; an Analytical Approach (Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/Boston, 2013).
8 Y. Takeuchi, Global Dynamical Properties of Lotka-Volterra Systems
(World Scientific, Singapore, 1996).
9 J. Hofbauer and K. Sugmund, Evolutionary Games and Population Dynamics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1988).
10
G.E. Hutchinson, Am. Nat. 95, 137 (1961).
11 D. Tilman, Ecology 58, 338 (1977).
12 J. Huisman and F.J. Weissing, Nature 402, 407 (1999).
13 X. Irigoien, J. Huisman and R. Harris, Nature 429, 863 (2004).
14 S.B. Hsu, S. Hubbell, and P. Waltman, SIAM J. Appl. Math. 32, 366 (1977).
15 H.L. Smith, SIAM J. Appl. Math. 40, 498 (1981).
16 M. Hirsch, SIAM J. Math. Anal. 16, 423 (1985).
17 H.L. Smith and H.R. Thieme, SIAM J.Math. Anal. 22, 1081 (1991).
18
C. K. Fisher and P. Mehta, PNAS, 111, no. 36, 13111, (2014).

