A Note on the Capability Profile – Localized Increase in
Force Production and Its Effect on Overall Resistance
Training Performance

arXiv:1501.02254v1 [q-bio.TO] 29 Nov 2014

Ognjen Arandjelović

Abstract In this article I resolve formally the apparent paradox that arises in
the context of the computational model of resistance exercise introduced in my
previous work. Contrary to intuition, the model seems to allow for a localized
increase in force production to degrade the ultimate exercise performance. I
show this not to be the case.

Resolution of the apparent paradox

Following the publication of my article in which the concept of an exercise
capability profile of an athlete was first introduced [1] and subsequent studies
which adopted it as the basis for further inquiry [2, 3, 4, 5], I was contacted
by a number of researchers and strength practitioners who sought further inCentre for Pattern Recognition and Data Analytics
Deakin University
Australia
E-mail: ognjen.arandjelovic@gmail.com

2

Ognjen Arandjelović

sight regarding a particular observation made therein. I cite the key paragraph
from [2]:
“Determining the optimality of a training approach is further complicated by the dependence of force produced by muscle on its elongation and rate of contraction. Alteration of force produced at a certain
point in a lift affects the velocity of the bar, and with it the rate of
contraction of muscles involved, throughout the remainder of the lift.
Higher velocity of the bar can then offset, or more than offset, lower
force production at a position of increased velocity in a lift. Thus and
seemingly paradoxically, even if force production characteristics of the
athlete are only increased, the overall performance may not be improved.”
The question which interested many readers who got in touch with me is if
an increase in the velocity of the bar can affect subsequent force production
to such a degree so as to result in a decrease of the overall performance, i.e.
the load used in an exercise. The practical significance of this question is clear
and the methodology which was adopted in the original paper can be used to
reach the answer.
Consider the capability plane paths ẋ(x) and ẋm (x) corresponding to respectively repetitions completed using the initial and modified force production characteristics (the reader should consult [1] for a detailed description of
the methodology), the modification taking on the form of a localized increase
in force production capability. If it holds that ∀x. ẋm (x) > ẋ(x), that is if for

Localized Increase in Force Production and its Effect on Performance

3

all points in the lift the velocity of the load becomes greater with the modification, the performance is clearly improved. This is illustrated in Figure 1(a).
Thus, we need to consider the case when the two paths intersect for some xn ,
as shown in Figure 1(b). For the overall performance to be affected negatively,
after an intersecting point xn in the ROM1 , the new path has to enter the
region of the capability plane of lower velocities than ẋ(x), i.e. it has to hold
that ẋ(x + dx) > ẋm (x + dx).
Next, notice that the fatigue accumulated up to the point xn is lower for
the path ẋm (x) than ẋ(x). This is so because the velocity of the bar in the
former case is consistently greater before the point of the ROM corresponding
to xn and thus the time under tension shorter. Consequently, for the repetition
performed using the modified force production characteristics, the force at xn
when the velocity of the load is ẋn ≡ ẋ(xn ) must be greater than that which
allows the repetition to follow the original path. This means that the behaviour
depicted in Figure 1(c) cannot occur. Therefore we can conclude that in the
very worst case, the altered path ẋm (x) will asymptote towards ẋ(x) as the lift
progresses, as shown in Figure 1(d). As such the performance is not worsened
but merely not improved, as stated originally [2].

References

1. O. Arandjelović. A mathematical model of neuromuscular adaptation to
resistance training and its application in a computer simulation of accom1

Note that we cannot yet assume that there is at most one intersecting point.

4

Ognjen Arandjelović

Altered path

Velocity of the load

Velocity of the load

Altered path

Initial path

Elevation of the load

Initial path

Elevation of the load

End of ROM

(a)

End of ROM

(b)

Altered path

Velocity of the load

Velocity of the load

Altered path

Initial path

Elevation of the load

End of ROM

Initial path

Elevation of the load

(c)

End of ROM

(d)

Fig. 1 Repetition profiles for the initial (thick blue line) and altered (thin black line) force
production characteristics shown as paths in the capability plane described in [1]. Cases
considered are: (a) overall performance is improved, (b) higher initial velocity is followed
by inferior force production environment and the initial and altered paths intersection, (c)
impossible inferior behaviour of the altered path, and (d) higher initial force production
with no overall performance improvement.

modating loads. Eur J Appl Physiol, 110(3):523–538, 2010.
2. O. Arandjelović. Optimal effort investment for overcoming the weakest
point - new insights from a computational model of neuromuscular adaptation. Eur J Appl Physiol, 111(8):1715–1723, 2011.

Localized Increase in Force Production and its Effect on Performance

5

3. O. Arandjelović. Common variants of the resistance mechanism in the
Smith machine: analysis of mechanical loading characteristics and application to strength-oriented and hypertrophy-oriented training. J Stren Cond
Res, 26(2):350–363, 2012.
4. O. Arandjelović. Does cheating pay: the role of externally supplied momentum on muscular force in resistance exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol, 113(1):
135–145, 2013.
5. O. Arandjelović. Computer simulation based parameter selection for resistance exercise. Modelling and Simulation, pages 24–33, 2013.

