Functional optoacoustic neuro-tomography (FONT)
for whole-brain monitoring of calcium indicators
Gali Sela1, Antonella Lauri1,2, X. Luís Deán-Ben1, Moritz Kneipp1,3, Vasilis Ntziachristos1,3, Shy Shoham4,*,
Gil G. Westmeyer1,2,3,*, and Daniel Razansky1,3,*
1

Institute for Biological and Medical Imaging (IBMI), Helmholtz Center Munich, Neuherberg, Germany
2
Institute of Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Center Munich, Neuherberg, Germany
3
Department of Medicine, Technische Univeristät München, Munich, Germany
4
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel



Non-invasive observation of spatiotemporal neural activity of
large neural populations distributed over entire brains is a
longstanding goal of neuroscience. We developed a real-time
volumetric and multispectral optoacoustic tomography
platform for imaging of neural activation deep in scattering
brains. The system can record 100 volumetric frames per second
across a 200mm3 field of view and spatial resolutions below
70µm. Experiments performed in immobilized and freely
swimming larvae and in adult zebrafish brains demonstrate, for
the first time, the fundamental ability to optoacoustically track
neural calcium dynamics in animals labeled with genetically
encoded calcium indicator GCaMP5G, while overcoming the
longstanding penetration barrier of optical imaging in
scattering brains. The newly developed platform offers
unprecedented capabilities for functional whole-brain
observations of fast calcium dynamics; in combination with
optoacoustics' well-established capacity in resolving vascular
hemodynamics, it could open new vistas in the study of neural
activity and neurovascular coupling in health and disease.

Neuronal activation occurs concurrently or in a highly
coordinated fashion in different areas across the nervous
system, reflecting functional interconnection between
specialized neuronal sub-circuits. Imaging neuronal
activation with high temporal and spatial resolution over an
entire intact brain, including deep and normally inaccessible
areas, could thus play a critical role in the attempt to decipher
the fundamental operating principles underlying neural
circuit activity. Major efforts are underway to advance the
ability to optically image the activity of large, distributed
neural populations1,2. Recently, these efforts have led to
whole-brain activity imaging in transparent organisms using
single3 and multi-photon4 light-sheet and light-field5
microscopy. However, these approaches are unable to resolve
deep neural activity in intact scattering brains where current
state-of-the-art optical imaging strategies based on rapidly
scanning multiphoton microscopy are limited to volumes
below 1mm3 due to limited penetration depth and field of
view (FOV).
Conversely, optoacoustic imaging, an extremely powerful
approach with demonstrated capacity for centimeter scale
penetration into highly scattering tissues6, can potentially
provide functional neural imaging beyond the limit of current
* Correspondence to S. S (sshoham@bm.technion.ac.il), G. G. W.
(gil.westmeyer@tum.de) or D. R. (dr@tum.de)

optical imaging technologies. To date, functional
optoacoustic brain imaging mainly focused on probing
hemodynamics and blood oxygenation variations7–9, slow and
delayed processes that only indirectly reflect neural
activation. In contrast, modern approaches towards imaging
neural activation are largely based on measuring calcium
dynamics, which provides a much more direct correlate of
neural activity. Calcium dynamics are conventionally tracked
using fluorescent sensors, which change their fluorescence
output because of a change in their extinction coefficient,
fluorescence quantum yield or both as a function of
intracellular calcium concentrations10,11. Recent advances in
the field of genetically encoded calcium indicators (GECIs)
have provided a variety of genetically modified reporter
animal models with calcium indicators in specific neuronal
structures12–14, which in some cases can give rise to signals
down to the level of single action potentials13,15.
We hypothesized that some members of the GCaMP5G
family of fluorescent GECIs could provide a suitable calcium
dependent optoacoustic contrast due to their strong
calcium-dependent absorption changes in the presence of
calcium12. To test this hypothesis, we selected the zebrafish
reporter line HuC:GCAMP5G that exhibits expression of the
calcium sensor in a large fraction of neurons to obtain
high-resolution optoacoustic measurements from larvae and
isolated adult brains.
To enable tomographic imaging of the whole scattering
brain in this model system with high spatiotemporal
resolution, we developed a new generation functional
optoacoustic neuro-tomography (FONT) system that can
simultaneously monitor calcium activity in all five
dimensions, i.e. space, time and wavelength (spectrum) (Fig.
1A). The experimental setup and accompanying image
reconstruction algorithms enable real-time rendering of
~200mm3 volumes at a frame rate of 100Hz; this temporal
resolution is high enough to allow tracking of freely moving
organisms (e.g., a freely swimming 6 day old wild type
zebrafish larva, supplementary video 1). This major
improvement
over
previous
state-of-the-art
implementations16 further enables the acquisition of over 106
informative voxels over a 6  6  6 mm FOV with spatial
resolution down to 52m and 71m in the axial and lateral
directions, respectively (Fig. 1B). The laser also has fast
wavelength tuning capability, enabling the fast acquisition of
spectroscopic information regarding chromophores of

1

Figure 1. FONT setup. (A) The imaged sample is placed in the vicinity of the geometrical center of a custom-made spherical ultrasound detection array.
Light illumination of the entire object is provided via an optical fiber bundle. The generated optoacoustic signals are acquired by the array transducer while
the induced fluorescence is simultaneously recorded by the high speed sCMOS camera. (B) Characterization of the spatial resolution of the volumetric
optoacoustic imaging system was done by analyzing 3D optoacoustic images from an absorbing sphere (shown as insets with scale bar of 50µm). Considering
the 50µm diameter of the microsphere, the depicted one-dimensional signal profiles correspond to lateral and axial spatial resolution of 71µm and 52µm,
respectively. (C) Spectral dependence of the absorbance on calcium-bound versus calcium free GCaMP5G (reproduced from 12). (D) Optoacoustic images of
a 6 days old HuC:GCAMP5G larva acquired at 488nm and 530nm (maximal intensity projection (MIP) views through volumetric reconstructions are shown).
While the pigmented eyes are strongly absorbing at both wavelengths, GCaMP5G is hardly absorbing at 530nm, thus neural tissue is much more visible at
488nm (scale bar - 250µm).

interest. To explore the fundamental spectral signature of our
experimental system, 6 days old HuC:GCaMP5G zebrafish
larvae were imaged using two distinct wavelengths: 488nm
where GCaMP5G has high absorption and 530nm where
GCaMP5G absorption is close to zero (Fig 1C). The larva’s
eyes, with their characteristically highly absorbing melanin
pigmentation are readily visible in both optoacoustic images,
whereas tissues expressing GCaMP5G do not yield a strong
signal at 530 nm but provide clear contrast at 488nm, where
the protein is highly absorbing (Fig. 1D). Optoacoustic
measurement of calcium-related dynamic changes in
GCaMP5G absorption were compared with planar
fluorescence by coupling the system to a fast sCMOS camera.
To elicit and image strong neural activation we exposed
immobilized HuC:GCaMP5G zebrafish larvae (n=5) to a
neuroactivating agent (Pentylenetetrazole, PTZ) that induces
fast ictal-like spikes in the larvae’s nervous system and
changes in their swimming behavior17, most likely by
interfering with GABAergic signaling18. PTZ exposure
caused robust calcium waves propagating from the larva's
posterior (site of drug injection) to the anterior parts of its
spinal cord (Fig. 2). Strong correlations between the
simultaneously acquired optoacoustic and fluorescent signals
were observed during evoked calcium transients both at the
tip (R2=0.98) and midtail (R2=0.97) regions, providing
confirmation that GCaMP5G calcium sensing can be read out
via optoacoustics (Fig. 2 and supplementary video 2).
Next, we examined FONT’s imaging performance in
isolated brains of adult HuC:GCaMP5G zebrafish (n=4),
measuring 2-3 mm on their short axis. The system was found
to provide high-quality time-resolved 3D reconstructions
across these highly scattering brains (Fig. 3); note that only

the forebrain and part of the optic tectum were effectively
illuminated and thus visualized. Five volumes of interest
(VOIs) were then selected for analysis of the dynamics of
GCaMP5G using time series of both the optoacoustic
(absorption) and the planar fluorescence signals during neural
activation (Fig. 3B). According to the optoacoustic signal
traces, activation patterns associated with high contrast
calcium-related changes occurred mainly in deep brain areas
with maximal contrast OA/OA0=8.5, while voxels close to

Figure 2. Imaging of neuronal activation in HuC:GCAMP5g zebrafish
larvae. (A) Planar epi-fluorescence (green) and 3D optoacoustic (absorption
contrast - orange) images of a 6 day old larvae at 4 time points after injection
of neurostimulant show a similar dynamics of the signals (scale bar - 500m).
The arrows show direction of the activation as it progresses from the
posterior (site of injection marked by a double arrow in the left frame) to the
anterior part of the tail. Eyes are marked with a dotted line (B) Traces of the
fluorescence and optoacoustic signal changes in the posterior region of spinal
cord (marked by red rectangle in panel A). (C) Corresponding traces in the
anterior region (marked by the blue rectangle). The time points shown in
panel A are marked by vertical dotted lines. Since both the background
fluorescence and optoacoustic signals were close or below the noise level, the
changes in the signals (S) were normalized to unity instead of being divided
by the respective resting signals. The injection phase caused image artifacts
and is therefore excluded from the graphs.

2

Figure 3. Activity in isolated scattering brains. (A) Typical 3D optoacoustic image acquired from a highly scattering brain of an adult fish in its resting
state (two side views and one isometric view of the 3D reconstruction are shown). The telencephalon (T) and most of the optic tectum (OT) are clearly visible.
Five 300µm x 300µm x 300µm VOIs were chosen at different locations and depths within the brain. (B) Traces of the fluorescence (top) and optoacoustic
(bottom) signal changes are shows for the five regions in corresponding colors (all signal changes are normalized to the resting signal levels). Note that the
optoacoustic traces are calculated over volumes whereas the fluorescent signals are calculated over the roughly corresponding planar areas. Snapshots
acquired at 5 different time points before and after introduction of the neurostimulant are shown (scale bar - 500 µm). The injection phase caused image
artifacts and is therefore excluded from the graphs.

the surface actually showed a slight decrease in activity (blue
VOI). However, as compared to true 3D information provided
by the tomographic optoacoustic reconstructions, whose
spatial resolution is not affected by the intense light
scattering, the planar fluorescence lacks optical sectioning
thus may result in wrong conclusions based on smeared
sub-surface information averaged over large volumes19. The
signal traces from the gray VOI placed over a superficial part
of the optic nerve show a similar overall trend in both the
fluorescence and optoacoustic modality, although the
optoacoustic signal shows some faster signal fluctuations
(Fig. 3B and supplementary video 3). However, signal
changes can be detected in the pink VOI by optoacoustics that
are absent in the planar fluorescence images. Similarly, the
time course averaged over the yellow VOI placed deeper in
the brain shows signal changes that are not detected by the
fluorescence read out from an approximately corresponding
planar region. This simultaneous dual-mode imaging
demonstrates that epi-fluorescence fails to faithfully identify
the calcium fluxes that optoacoustics localized deep inside
scattering brain.
Finally, we examined whether the system's exceptionally
large FOV opens up the capability to non-invasively measure
neural activity while simultaneously monitoring ongoing
natural behavior. Indeed, one of neuroscience's major
challenges is to study neural processing during unrestrained
motion, motivating the successful recent introduction of a
number of experimental paradigms for studying behaving

zebrafish larvae using e.g. bioluminescence imaging20 as well
as light sheet21 and light field5 microscopies (note however
that these strategies cannot provide volumetric information in
scattering brains). We therefore tested whether our
optoacoustic system enables high-speed volumetric imaging
in larvae that were allowed to swim freely in ~0.5cm2
chamber and then exposed to the neurostimulant PTZ leading to rapid movements followed by long resting periods.
The optoacoustically-recorded responses indeed revealed an
increase up to OA/OA0=1.8 in calcium signal (see arrows in
Fig. 4), just before the fish moves.

Figure 4. Activation in freely swimming larvae. Two separate activation
events, as captured by volumetric optoacoustic tomography, are shown.
Following injection of the neurostimulating agent at approximately t=0, the
larva occasionally stops swimming while experiencing a surge of activation
through its tail (the arrows point to the location of optoacoustic signal
increase) before it starts moving promptly to a new position (notice
movement of the tail in the two rightmost frames). Scale bar - 500µm.

3

In summary, we demonstrated a novel, state-of-the-art
optoacoustic imaging platform for direct imaging of
spatio-temporal neural activity across an entire
light-scattering brain while maintaining similar values of
spatial resolution at highly scalable depths. Our study is also,
to the best of our knowledge, the first to examine the
optoacoustic signature of modern GECIs, showing that the
strong changes in GCaMP5G fluorescence are directly related
to their optoacoustic signature. Since FONT uses a
widely-tunable nanosecond OPO laser technology, it can be
conveniently tuned to work with a large array of other
functional probes, including for instance the newer generation
of GCaMP6 probes 13 and red shifted probes like RGECO22,
or future sensors optimized for in vivo deep tissue
optoacoustic detection providing high extinction coefficient
changes in the near-infrared window as well as lower
quantum yield. Furthermore, the ability to simultaneously
track the movement and neural activation of living
unrestrained organisms could form a basis for behavioral
studies not currently possible with other neuroimaging
techniques. While the current spatial resolution does not
allow to distinguish individual cells, future generations of the
described
tomographic
approach
could
utilize
higher-frequency
transducer
technology
and/or
super-resolution strategies for fast functional observations at
the cellular-scale. In addition, the high sensitivity of
optoacoustics to a variety of intrinsic absorption tissue
contrasts, most prominently the oxy- and de-oxy hemoglobin,
is well established23,24. This may provide highly
complementary information to the functional calcium
imaging and thus enhance the amount of spectrally- and
time-resolved volumetric information available for the five
dimensional optoacoustic studies looking at coupling
between the vascular changes and nervous system in more
complex animal models. While we recently demonstrated
high-resolution imaging of near-infrared fluorescent proteins
(iRFP) in mouse brain in-vivo using multispectral
optoacoustic tomography25, development of similar calcium
sensitive indicators in the near-infrared is expected to greatly
expedite translation of our technology into mammalian
brains.

Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge grant support from the European Research
Council ERC-2010-StG-260991 (D. R.) and ERC-2012-StG
_20111109 (A. L. and G.G.W.), the German-Israeli Foundation (GIF)
for Scientific Research and Development (S. S. and D. R.), the
Helmholtz Association of German Research Centers and the
Technische Universität München (G. G. W.). The authors
acknowledge technical assistance from M. Sadasivam, A. Lin, and L.
Ding.

References
1. Adesnik, H., Waller, L. & Shoham, S. Optics on the Brain: OSA’s
Mulitphoton and Patterned Optogenetics Incubator. Opt. Photonics News
25, 42–49 (2014).
2. Dana, H. et al. Hybrid multiphoton volumetric functional imaging of
large-scale bioengineered neuronal networks. Nat. Commun. 5, (2014).
3. Ahrens, M. B., Orger, M. B., Robson, D. N., Li, J. M. & Keller, P. J.
Whole-brain functional imaging at cellular resolution using light-sheet
microscopy. Nat. Methods 10, 413–20 (2013).
4. Schrödel, T., Prevedel, R., Aumayr, K., Zimmer, M. & Vaziri, A.
Brain-wide 3D imaging of neuronal activity in Caenorhabditis elegans
with sculpted light. Nat. Methods 10, 1013–20 (2013).
5. Prevedel, R. et al. Simultaneous whole-animal 3D imaging of neuronal
activity using light-field microscopy. Nat. Methods 11, 727–30 (2014).
6. Wang, L. V & Hu, S. Photoacoustic tomography: in vivo imaging from
organelles to organs. Science 335, 1458–62 (2012).
7. Nasiriavanaki, M. et al. High-resolution photoacoustic tomography of
resting-state functional connectivity in the mouse brain. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111, 21–6 (2014).
8. Yao, J. et al. Noninvasive photoacoustic computed tomography of
mouse brain metabolism in vivo. Neuroimage 64, 257–66 (2013).
9. Yao, L., Xi, L. & Jiang, H. Photoacoustic computed microscopy. Sci.
Rep. 4, 4960 (2014).
10. Takahashi, A., Camacho, P., Lechleiter, J. D. & Herman, B.
Measurement of intracellular calcium. Physiol. Rev. 79, 1089–125
(1999).
11. Wilms, C. D. & Eilers, J. Photo-physical properties of Ca2+-indicator
dyes suitable for two-photon fluorescence-lifetime recordings. J.
Microsc. 225, 209–13 (2007).
12. Akerboom, J. et al. Optimization of a GCaMP calcium indicator for
neural activity imaging. J. Neurosci. 32, 13819–40 (2012).
13. Chen, T. W. et al. Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging
neuronal activity. Nature 499, 295–300 (2013).
14. Hires, S. A., Tian, L. & Looger, L. L. Reporting neural activity with
genetically encoded calcium indicators. Brain Cell Biol. 36, 69–86
(2008).
15. Wilms, C. D. & Häusser, M. Twitching towards the ideal calcium sensor.
Nat. Methods 11, 139–140 (2014).
16. Deán-Ben, X. L. & Razansky, D. Portable spherical array probe for
volumetric real-time optoacoustic imaging at centimeter-scale depths.
Opt. Express 21, 28062–28071 (2013).
17. Baraban, S. C., Taylor, M. R., Castro, P. a & Baier, H. Pentylenetetrazole
induced changes in zebrafish behavior, neural activity and c-fos
expression. Neuroscience 131, 759–68 (2005).
18. Leweke, F., Louvel, J., Rausche, G. & Heinemann, U. Effects of
pentetrazol on neuronal activity and on extracellular calcium
concentration in rat hippocampal slices. Epilepsy Res. 6, 187–198
(1990).
19. Buehler, A. et al. High resolution tumor targeting in living mice by
means of multispectral optoacoustic tomography. EJNMMI Res. 2, 14
(2012).
20. Naumann, E. A., Kampff, A. R., Prober, D. A., Schier, A. F. & Engert, F.
Monitoring neural activity with bioluminescence during natural
behavior. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 513–20 (2010).
21. Vladimirov, N. et al. Light-sheet functional imaging in fictively
behaving zebrafish. Nat. Methods 11, 1–2 (2014).
22. Akerboom, J. et al. Genetically encoded calcium indicators for
multi-color neural activity imaging and combination with optogenetics.
Front. Mol. Neurosci. 6, 2 (2013).
23. Beard, P. Biomedical photoacoustic imaging. Interface Focus 1,
602–631 (2011).
24. Xu, M. & Wang, L. V. Photoacoustic imaging in biomedicine. Rev. Sci.
Instrum. 77, 041101 (2006).
25. Deliolanis, N. C. et al. Deep-tissue reporter-gene imaging with
fluorescence and optoacoustic tomography: a performance overview.
Mol. Imaging Biol. 16, 652–60 (2014).

4

