Spatio-temporal Patterns in Multi-Electrode Array Local Field
Potential Recordings
Bronwyn Woods

arXiv:1501.00230v1 [q-bio.NC] 1 Jan 2015

June 2011

Abstract
This paper presents a method for the detection of traveling waves of activity in neural recordings
from multielectrode arrays. The method converts local field potential measurements into the phase
domain and fits a series of linear models to find planar traveling waves of activity. Here I present
the new approach in the context of the previous work it extends, apply the approach to data from
neural recordings from a single animal, and verify the success of the method on simulated data.

1

Background and Overview

neuroscience literature (Delaney et al., 1994;
Huang et al., 2004; Manjarrez et al., 2007; Wu
et al., 2008; Xu et al., 2007; Reimer et al., 2010).
Propagating waves of oscillation have been reported in the visual, auditory, olfactory and somatosensory systems as well as in motor cortex,
hippocampus, and spontaneous cortical activity.
Theoretical work reported in Ermentrout and
Kleinfeld (2001) demonstrates that the traveling
wave patterns reported in experimental studies
are likely to arise in realistic neural networks.
Even so, the possible computational purpose, if
any, of traveling waves remains unclear. Determining their significance, or even relegating them
to the realm of the epiphenomenal, will require
advances in the methodology used to detect and
describe them.

Current technology allows for neural recording
on many scales, each with trade offs in terms
of spatial resolution, temporal resolution, and
recording target. A single extracellular electrode
has high temporal resolution and relatively high
spatial precision. Electrode arrays, by recording
from spatially structured collections of electrodes
simultaneously, supplement this with some information on spatio-temporal patterns. Electrode
arrays may therefore be a useful recording technique for exploring local network dynamics in
vivo.
The signal recorded by a single electrode
contains high frequency electrical signals from
nearby spiking neurons and a low frequency signal referred to as the local field potential (LFP).
The LFP is believed to be a measure of the
summed synaptic activity in a radius around
an electrode (Katzner et al., 2009). Previous
work in the Hatsopoulos lab at the University
of Chicago (Rubino et al., 2006) suggests that
LFP recorded over an array of electrodes can reveal spatio-temporal patterns in activity. Specifically, it can reveal traveling waves of oscillation.
Traveling waves are widely discussed in the

Currently, there is no generally established
methodology for detecting and describing traveling waves. Many studies rely on visual inspection of Voltage Sensitive Dye (VSD) images. Several recent papers using LFP electrode
recordings make a start on developing formal
wave detection techniques. Lubenov and Siapas (2009) used regression methods on a collection of electrodes, and Rubino et al. (2006) used
phase derivative calculations on electrode array
1

where f is the frequency of the oscillators and s
is the speed of the wave.
This linear phase relationship can be easily extended to describe planar waves in two dimensions by making x a vector. With two spatial
dimensions, more complex patters are possible
such as bull’s eye or spiral waves. However, this
research addresses only the simpler, linear case.
Since the phase is linear, fitting this model requires estimating three parameters: the change
in phase in the x, y and t dimensions. From
these parameters we can calculate properties of
the wave that are of scientific interest such as its
speed and direction. Table 1 shows this relationship.

data. This project synthesizes ideas from these
two papers (applied to the data from the later)
to develop methodology that allows for statistically rigorous single trial analysis of LFP array
data.
This research analyzes data from the Hatsopoulos Lab at the University of Chicago. I
first replicated the results reported in Rubino
et al. (2006) regarding the detection of traveling waves. This previous methodology was able
to detect the presence of wavelike activity and
capture its broad characteristics, but was unable
to provide a single trial description of activity.
I made several improvements to the methodology, allowing for single trial analysis. I also
demonstrated that wavelike activity is persistent
rather than occurring in short isolated time periods as previously reported. Finally, I created
artificial data to test both the original and improved methodology under varying noise conditions, demonstrating the efficacy of my improvements.
The next two sections of this paper are introductory. Section 2 states the model for a planar
wave of oscillation. Section 3 describes the data
being modeled. The following section discusses
the results of previous analysis, while section 5
describes my analysis and results in detail. Finally, section 6 describes the conclusions from
artificial data analysis.

2

3

Data

The data I analyze here were recorded by Nicho
Hatsopoulos’ lab at the University of Chicago.
They consist of 391 trials of a center-out reaching task performed by a monkey. On each trial,
the monkey was given a target in one of eight directions (the “instruction”) and then had to wait
for one second before initiating movement to the
target (after the “go” cue).
LFP voltages were recorded on a 96 channel
Utah array implanted in motor cortex. The data
were sampled at 1 kHz. Based on prior research
(Rubino et al., 2006) I chose the waiting period
between the “instruction” and “go” cues to be
the period of interest for further analysis. As
shown in Figure 1, this period is characterized
by strong oscillatory activity in the Beta band
between 15 and 20 Hz.
Fourier analysis of the waiting period data revealed the expected peak in the Beta band. Additionally, the Fourier spectrum revealed significant high frequency noise at multiples of 60 Hz,
especially in two channels. This noise is presumably electrical line noise, and is removed by
filtering during analysis.
The 96 channels on the array are very highly
correlated. Figure 2 shows the voltages for all
channels superimposed for one trial. For this

Traveling Waves

A traveling wave is composed of a collection of
oscillators whose relative phases depend on their
spatial location. The simplest form of this phase
relationship is a planar wave, where the phase of
the oscillators is linear in space and time. Without loss of generality, we can set the phase at
time 0 and position 0 to be 0. In one dimension,
the equation to describe a planar wave can then
be written
 

f
V (x, t) ∝ sin 2π f t − x
(1)
s
2

Parameter

Interpretation

Calculation

Frequency

The frequency of the oscillators composing the wave. The
current model requires all oscillators to have the same frequency.

Direction

Wave propagation direction.

Speed

Spatial speed of contours of constant phase. Higher speeds
indicate more synchronous activity.

fˆ ∝ δˆt

dˆ ∝ atan

δy
δˆx

ˆ
q δt
2
2
ˆ
δx +δˆy

Table 1: Calculating wave parameters from linear model parameters. Here δx ,
δy , and δt are the change in phase in the x, y, and t dimensions. Wave speed
and direction are the primary parameters of scientific interest.

Fig. 1: This spectrogram, computed using Morlet wavelets, shows high power
between 15 and 20 Hz during the waiting period (between 2000 and 3000 ms in
this figure). The spectrogram was computed individually for each trial and then
averaged over all trails, aligning on the time at which the monkey received the
direction cue.

3

ˆ

figure, the data were wide-band filtered between
10 and 45 Hz for clarity, but the correlation of the
channels and strong oscillatory activity around
20 Hz is quite clear.

4

Summary of Previous Work

Previous work reported in Rubino et al. (2006)
found evidence of wavelike activity. The directions of wave propagation were seen to follow a
bimodal distribution with peaks approximately
π radians apart (nearly opposite directions). The
wavelike activity was found to consist of short
periods of waves surrounded by non-wavelike periods. Here I give a very brief summary of these
results and the analysis used to reach them.
More details can be found in the Analysis section or in the original paper.
As described in section 2, fitting a planar wave
model to data requires estimating three parameters: δx , δy , and δt (the change in phase in each
of the three dimensions). The first step of the
analysis is to extract the phase. This is done
using the analytic signal, discussed in detail in
section 5.1. At each point in space and time, the
local gradient of the phase is computed. These
gradients are then averaged spatially to give estimates δˆx , δˆy , and δˆt at each time point.
In addition to fitting the three parameters, it
is necessary to evaluate the model fit and determine whether activity is indeed wavelike. Previous work used a measure of phase gradient alignment. If the data are actually a planar wave,
then the phase will be linear in space and time
and the spatial phase gradients at all locations
will point in the same direction. If the data are
not wavelike, the spatial gradients would be unlikely to align. Figure 3 demonstrates this contrast.
To measure phase alignment, Rubino et al.
used a measure they called Phase Gradient Directionality (PGD).
P
|| n1 ni=1 (δxi , δyi )||
P GD = 1 Pn
i=1 ||(δxi , δyi )||
n

Fig. 3: Two time points demonstrating high
and low phase gradient alignment. Each
black line indicates the direction of the spatial gradient on one of the channels of the
array at the time point. The red line is the
mean over the array. The length of the red
line is the MRL, a measure of phase gradient alignment. At time 1 the gradients
are well aligned (indicating wavelike activity). At time 2, the gradients are not aligned
(indicating non wavelike activity)
where n ranges over electrodes. This is very similar to the standard circular variance measure
known as Mean Resultant Length or MRL (Mardia and Jupp, 1999).
n

M RL = ||

1 X (δxi , δyi )
||
n
||(δxi , δyi )||

(3)

i=1

The only difference is that PGD weights individual gradients according to their magnitude while
MRL normalizes all gradients. The two measures
are very similar for practical purposes.
The alignment measure is computed for each
time point. Since wavelike activity should have
high alignment, Rubino et al. set a threshold of
0.5 and classified times at which the PGD was
above this value to be wavelike. The alignment
measure for an example trial is shown in figure
4.
Once the model is fit to the data, it is possible
to examine the wave characteristics such as prop(2)
agation direction. Figure 5 shows histograms
4

Fig. 2: Voltage from all channels superimposed for one trial. The data were wideband filtered between 10 and 45 Hz before being plotted.

Fig. 4: Alignment measures computed for an example trial. Previous work
identifies waves and time periods when the alignment measure is above 0.5.
This leads to the identification of short periods of wavelike activity, such as
those highlighted in the figure. The alignment measures appear quite noisy,
making single trial interpretation questionable.

5

of wave propagation direction for all times and
for times classified as waves. Especially during
the wavelike periods, the propagation directions
show a clear bimodal pattern.
The conclusions from previous work were that
the data show short periods of wavelike activity during which the waves propagate in two
primary directions. I performed a permutation
test to determine if the PGD threshold of 0.5
was appropriate for wave identification. By permuting the spatial organization of the channels
I destroyed any spatial wavelike pattern while
maintaining the temporal structure of the individual channels and the overall level of correlation across the array. In this way I computed
a null distribution for the alignment measures,
shown in figure 6.
Comparing the true PGD distribution to this
null distribution, I concluded that the threshold of 0.5 was inappropriate. A better threshold
would be closer to 0.2. This indicates that the
wavelike activity in the data is a more pervasive and consistent pattern in the system than
previous work suggested. The rest of this paper
describes the analysis methods I used to extract
interpretable single trial results showing nearly
constant wavelike activity.

5

Improved Analysis Methods
Fig. 5: Histograms of estimated wave propagation direction. (A) shows estimated directions over all times and trials. (B) shows
estimated directions for those times identified as being wavelike. The bimodal pattern
of propagation directions is clear, especially
in B.

A planar traveling wave of oscillation is defined by linear dependence of phase on spatiotemporal position. For this reason, a natural approach to detecting such waves is to work in the
phase domain. This approach is taken in papers
such as Rubino et al. (2006) and Lubenov and
Siapas (2009). The first step of this modeling
approach is to extract the phase at each point in
space and time. This process is described in section 5.1. Once the data is transformed into the
phase domain, the remaining analysis involves
fitting a linear model and evaluating model fit.
6

Fig. 6: The results of a permutation procedure to derive a null distribution for
the alignment measure (PGD) used in previous work. The grey distribution is
the null distribution, and the black line indicates the 99th percentile of the null
distribution. This indicates that an appropriate threshold for the PGD would
be 0.2 rather than 0.5.

5.1

Extracting Phase


1
xa (t) = x(t) + i x(t) ∗
πt


i
= x(t) ∗ δ(t) +
πt

The first step of a phase-based analysis is to
(5)
extract the instantaneous phase at each spatiotemporal point. This is typically accomplished
(6)
using the Hilbert transform to calculate the analytic signal, as described below.
Taking the Fourier transform of this, and
The Fourier transform of a real-valued func- defining h(f ) to be the Heaviside step function,
tion is Hermitian. Because of this, the infor- we see that the negative frequencies are 0, as exmation about negative frequencies is redundant. pected.
The analytic signal discards these negative frequency components at the cost of converting the
Xa (f ) = X(f ) · 2h(f )
(7)
associated signal from real-valued to complex
valued. If x(t) is a real valued function with

2X(f ) f > 0
Fourier spectrum X(f ), the corresponding ana= X(f ) f = 0
(8)
lytic signal is defined to be


0
f <0
xa (t) = x(t) + ix̂(t)

Returning to the time domain analytic signal,
we can write equation (4) in polar coordinates as

(4)

where x̂(t) is the Hilbert transform of x(t).
xa (t) = A(t)eiφ(t)
(9)
The Hilbert transform is the convolution of x(t)
1
with πt
. We can therefore see that equation (4)
where A(t) is called the amplitude envelope
becomes
and φ(t) is the instantaneous phase, wrapped
7

results reported here used a filter with a 1 Hz
passband (plus rolloff).

5.2

Unwrapping Phase

As shown in the previous section, the phase as
extracted by the analytic signal is wrapped between −π and π. Fitting a model to the data requires removing the 2π jumps in the phase. This
is a well-studied problem known as “phase unwrapping”. With data satisfying strong assumptions about the sampling rate and noise levels,
phase unwrapping is a trivial problem. However,
with realistic data, the problem is unidentifiable.
The multitudes of unwrapping algorithms that
have been proposed aim to find a good solution
in the realistic case.
To unambiguously unwrap the phase, we must
make the assumption that the data were sampled
according to the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem in all dimensions; that is, that the data
were sampled at a minimum rate of twice the
highest frequency present in the data. If this assumption is satisfied, the true phase difference
between any adjacent points will be less that π.
Therefore, unwrapping can be done by traversing the data with some spanning tree, adding or
subtracting units of 2π to a point if its value differs from that of the previous point by more than
π.
When local noise is introduced into the data, it
may cause violations of the assumption. The basic unwrapping algorithm may erroneously add
or subtract 2π or fail to do so when it should.
Since the unwrapping is done along some tree,
any points that are unwrapped subsequent to
the error along the same branch of the tree will
have the same error. This error propagation can
result in wildly inaccurate unwrapping results.
The general approach of any improved unwrapping algorithm is to chose the structure of the
unwrapping tree such that noisy areas are unwrapped last and error is not propagated.
Previous work used very simple phase unwrapping, repeatedly unwrapping small portions of
the data in one dimension at a time. As de-

Fig. 7: The instantaneous amplitude and
phase calculated via the analytic signal for
an amplitude modulated pure sine wave. The
upper graph shows the original signal in black
with the amplitude envelope A(t) plotted in
red. The lower graph shows the instantaneous wrapped phase φ(t).

between −π and π. Figure 7 shows the instantaneous amplitude and phase described by the
analytic signal for an amplitude modulated pure
sine wave.
One concern in using the analytic signal to extract phase is that φ(t) is only interpretable as instantaneous phase for signals with narrow band
frequency content. The data in this research is
not a pure sine wave, so this characteristic of the
analytic signal is a potential problem. In addition, the model for a planar wave has only one
frequency term, requiring a single frequency for
all oscillators. However, since the data do show
a well-defined peak frequency, it is reasonable
to filter the data and look for wavelike activity
around that peak. Previous work used a wideband filter from 10-45Hz. My work shows that
the previous filter was too wide. Interpretable
results require a much narrower band filter; the
8

edges are unwrapped first. Examples of these
quality heuristics are local variance of phase values or of phase differences. This research involved a three dimensional phase volume, so I
implemented these 3-D unwrapping algorithms
and applied them to the Utah array data.
We know from examining the voltage data
that the LFP is highly correlated over the array
channels. Since all the channels are oscillating
together, we observe that the phase should differ
by no more than 2π across the array at any given
time. This observation gives us a heuristic for
evaluating the performance of phase unwrapping
algorithms: calculating the mean phase difference across the array for the unwrapped phase.
Though the performance of the algorithms varies
somewhat with the passband chosen, the quality guided algorithms generally outperformed the
branch cut algorithm. For the rest of the analysis, the data were unwrapped with the quality guided unwrapping algorithm using the loIt can be demonstrated that considering all cal variance of phase differences as the quality
available dimensions during unwrapping can heuristic.
yield better results. This is because unwrapping requires choosing a path or tree to traverse
5.3 Fitting the Model
the data. In one dimension, the path is predetermined. In higher dimensions, there are in- The planar wave model is linear. Therefore,
creasing numbers of paths to choose from, in- modeling the unwrapped phase using the estabcreasing the likelihood that one can be found lished technique of linear regression is approprithat avoids traveling through noisy regions of ate. The model is the simple linear model
data. There are dozens of unwrapping algorithms that have been proposed for two dimenφ(x, y, t) = β0 + β1 x + β2 y + β3 t.
(10)
sions (Ghiglia and Pritt, 1998). At least two
types of unwrapping algorithms have been ex- However, we must be able to account for changes
tended to three dimensions: branch cut algo- over time so we cannot fit the entire phase volrithms (Salfity et al., 2006; Huntley, 2001; Mark- ume simultaneously. Instead, we fit multiple
lund et al., 2007) and quality guided unwrapping separate models to overlapping time windows of
(Cusack and Papadakis, 2002; Abdul-Rahman data. To estimate the wave parameters at time
et al., 2007, 2009). Branch cut algorithms iden- t using a window size of 5ms, we use data from
tify singularities in the phase volume and use time [t−2]ms to [t+2]ms. This means that modthem to identify and remove unwrapping paths eling a 2 second section of data requires fitting
that will lead to error. The phase is then 1,996 separate models, one for each time point
unwrapped using a breadth-first spanning tree. from 3ms to 1,998ms.
Once all the models are fitted, we can estiQuality guided algorithms use some heuristic to
evaluate the quality of each possible connection mate the wave parameters along with standard
between adjacent points. The highest quality confidence intervals. We can also examine the
scribed in section 4, Rubino et al. (2006) estimated the model parameters by computing the
local phase gradient at each point and then averaging over the array. Computing each component of the gradient only requires using several
data points in a line in a single dimension and
so it is only strictly necessary to unwrap those
points. Rubino et al. unwrap the necessary
data points, compute the gradient component,
discard the unwrapping results and then repeat
the process for each dimension at each point.
This unwrapping technique restricts dramatic error propagation in the unwrapping by only unwrapping small portions of data at a time. However, it does nothing to limit propagation of error within the local regions and restricts possible
model fitting techniques to those that do not require simultaneous consideration of a large set of
data points (precluding, for instance, regression
approaches).

9

R2 values as one indicator of whether the planar
wave model is a good fit to the data. Finally,
we can perform formal hypothesis tests to determine whether there is any statistically significant linear dependence of phase on spatial position. If we fail to reject the null hypothesis that
β1 = β2 = 0, we can conclude that we have no
evidence for wavelike activity.
By modeling narrow-band filtered data using
3D phase unwrapping and linear regression we
can produce interpretable estimates of wave parameters on a single trial basis. Figure 8 shows
the results of this analysis for one trial. In this
trial we see two primary wave propagation directions and a switch between them. For most of
the trial, the speed is around 40 cm/s, which is
physiologically reasonable (Rubino et al., 2006).
At the time when the wavelike activity switches
direction, the speed increasing drastically as the
LFP activity becomes temporarily more synchronous. Additionally, during this transition we
fail to reject the null hypothesis of the test described above. Overall, the null hypothesis was
rejected for over 98% of the time points analyzed
in the 17-18Hz band. This indicates that the
wavelike activity is a highly persistent feature of
the pre-motor neural system.

5.4

Evaluating the Model

The linear regression framework allows us to use
standard analysis techniques to evaluate model
performance. For instance, identifying outliers
that result from isolated noise or unwrapping
errors can explain some decreases in R2 values
such as that observed at around time 950 in figure 8. Figure 9 shows the residuals for one of
the regressions fit to data in this time period.
The residuals reveal outliers limited to two channels. Identifying and removing outlying channels
could allow improved model fitting.

Fig. 10: The distribution over δx and δy
used to generate artificial data.

6

Artificial Data

In order to assess the improved and previous
analysis techniques, we created artificial data
that mimicked the bimodal wave direction distribution observed in the real data. The artificial data were generated using model parameters generated using temporally smoothed
Metropolis-Hastings sampling from a bimodal
distribution. This distribution is shown in figure 10. The frequency term of the artificial data
model is specified to be 17.5Hz. The wave parameters of an example trial of artificial data is
shown in figure 11. By adding various types of
noise to this artificial data, we can evaluate the
performance of wave detection methodology.
When no noise is added to the artificial data,
both the original and improved methodologies
do a good job of estimating both the speed and
direction of the waves. Both methods make some
significant error on less than 0.5% of the data
during times when the speed and direction of
the artificial waves are changing rapidly.
When noise is added to the system, differences
between the methods become apparent. Figure
12 shows the mean estimation errors for three

10

Fig. 8: Results from analyzing a single trial of data in the 17-18Hz band. For
each plot, time runs along the horizontal axis and the values for each time point
are calculated using the linear regression centered at that time point. The top plot
shows the R2 values. The middle plot shows estimated wave propagation direction.
The bottom plot shows estimated wave speed. The shaded areas are 95% confidence
intervals. Vertical grey lines indicate the beginning and ending of the waiting period.
Though the switch in direction in this trial occurs near the end of the waiting period,
there is no clear pattern of this type apparent over all trials.

11

Fig. 9: Residuals plotted against model terms for a regression with low R2 . The
highlighted residuals are outlying data points from two channels. The schematic in
the center shows the location of these channels.

12

Fig. 11: An example of the direction and
speed values for an artificial data trial.
different methods when filtered white noise is
added to the artificial data. The three methods
are (1) the original method from Rubino et al.
(2006), (2) the original estimation technique using the new narrow band filtering, and (3) the
new method. The estimation errors from the
three models show that the narrow band filtering
is very important to both speed and direction estimation while the new model fitting technique
further improves estimation of speed.

7

Conclusions
Work

and

Future

The work reported in this paper makes a new
scientific claim about the pattern of wavelike activity observed in monkey motor cortex: it is a
persistent pattern, characteristic of the system.
This contrasts with previous work which suggested that the wavelike activity was episodic.
The methodology developed in this research allows single trial analysis of the data, and simulated data confirms that it results in improved
estimation of wave parameters. This improve13

Fig. 12: Mean error measures for estimation of artificial data parameters. “Old” indicates the original method, “old+filtering”
uses the original estimation technique with
the new filtering technique, and “new” uses
the entire improved processing pipeline. The
apparently heavy tails on the box plots represent less than half a percent of the data but
appear heavy because each box plot is generated using around 800,000 points.

ment in analysis methodology opens the door functional significance of such spatio-temporal
for additional investigation of the properties and patterns.
purpose of traveling waves in the neural system.
The largest estimation improvements resulted References
from modifications of the filtering procedure
used before extracting instantaneous phase. Be- Abdul-Rahman, H., Arevalillo-Herráez, M.,
cause of the characteristics of the Hilbert transGdeisat, M., Burton, D., Lalor, M., Lilley, F.,
form and analytic signal, it is very important
Moore, C., Sheltraw, D., and Qudeisat, M.
to apply a narrow band filter. A principled
(2009). Robust three-dimensional best-path
method for selecting the appropriate width and
phase-unwrapping algorithm that avoids sinlocation of the pass band for filtering is a matgularity loops. Applied Optics.
ter for future investigation. It is possible to repeat the analysis for multiple narrow frequency Abdul-Rahman, H. S., Gdeisat, M. A., Burton,
D. R., Lalor, M. J., Lilley, F., and Moore, C. J.
bands, thereby covering a wide frequency space.
(2007). Fast and robust three-dimensional
However, methodology for integrating the results
best path phase unwrapping algorithm. Apfrom multiple frequency bands has not yet been
plied
optics, 46(26):6623–35.
developed. It is scientific question whether is is
appropriate to treat LFP data as a truly narrow Cusack, R. and Papadakis, N. (2002). New
band signal. The current planar wave model has
Robust 3-D Phase Unwrapping Algorithms:
only a single term for frequency, so if we wish to
Application to Magnetic Field Mapping and
model data with multiple frequency components
Undistorting Echoplanar Images*1. NeuroImthe model would need to be extended.
age, 16(3):754–764.
Phase-based modeling of wavelike activity is
the most common approach, but it would also Delaney, K. R., Gelperin, a., Fee, M. S., Flores, J. a., Gervais, R., Tank, D. W., and
be possible to develop a method for modeling
Kleinfeld, D. (1994). Waves and stimulusthe LFP voltage directly. Since the voltage
modulated dynamics in an oscillating olfactory
model for a traveling wave is nonlinear, fitting
network. Proceedings of the National Academy
such a model would require nonlinear estimaof Sciences of the United States of America,
tion techniques. However, modeling the volt91(2):669–73.
age would avoid the phase extraction and phase
unwrapping process which introduces strict fil- Ermentrout, G. B. and Kleinfeld, D. (2001).
tering requirements and possible unwrapping erTraveling electrical waves in cortex: insights
ror. If the planar wave model cannot be fit
from phase dynamics and speculation on a
successfully to data, other voltage domain techcomputational role. Neuron, 29(1):33–44.
niques are possible. Gabriel and Eckhorn (2003)
present a method based on pairwise correla- Gabriel, A. and Eckhorn, R. (2003). A multichannel correlation method detects traveling
tions between channels, successfully demonstratγ-waves in monkey visual cortex. Journal of
ing wavelike activity in monkey striate cortex usNeuroscience Methods, 131(1-2):171–184.
ing a linear 15-electrode array.
In summary, the work presented here con- Ghiglia, D. C. and Pritt, M. D. (1998). Twotinues the task of creating an automated, staDimensional Phase Unwrapping: Theory, Altistically principled detection methodology for
gorithms, and Software. Wiley-Interscience.
the detection of planar waves in neural systems.
This could aid the community of neuroscien- Huang, X., Troy, W. C., Yang, Q., Ma, H.,
Laing, C. R., Schiff, S. J., and Wu, J.-Y.
tists attempting to determine the prevalence and
14

(2004). Spiral waves in disinhibited mam- Wu, J.-Y., Xiaoying Huang, and Chuan Zhang
(2008). Propagating waves of activity in the
malian neocortex. The Journal of neuroneocortex: what they are, what they do.
science : the official journal of the Society for
The Neuroscientist : a review journal bringNeuroscience, 24(44):9897–902.
ing neurobiology, neurology and psychiatry,
Huntley, J. M. (2001). Three-dimensional noise14(5):487–502.
immune phase unwrapping algorithm. Applied
Xu, W., Huang, X., Takagaki, K., and Wu, J.-y.
optics, 40(23):3901–8.
(2007). Compression and reflection of visually
Katzner, S., Nauhaus, I., Benucci, A., Bonin,
evoked cortical waves. Neuron, 55(1):119–29.
V., Ringach, D. L., and Carandini, M. (2009).
Local origin of field potentials in visual cortex.
Neuron, 61(1):35–41.
Lubenov, E. V. and Siapas, A. G. (2009).
Hippocampal theta oscillations are travelling
waves. Nature, 459(7246):534–9.
Manjarrez, E., Vazquez, M., and Flores, A.
(2007). Computing the center of mass for traveling alpha waves in the human brain. Brain
Research.
Mardia, K. V. and Jupp, P. E. (1999). Directional Statistics. Wiley.
Marklund, O., Huntley, J. M., and Cusack, R.
(2007). Robust unwrapping algorithm for
three-dimensional phase volumes of arbitrary
shape containing knotted phase singularity
loops. Optical Engineering, 46(8):085601.
Reimer, A., Hubka, P., Engel, A., and Kral, A.
(2010). Fast Propagating Waves within the
Rodent Auditory Cortex. Cerebral Cortex.
Rubino, D., Robbins, K. A., and Hatsopoulos,
N. G. (2006). Propagating waves mediate information transfer in the motor cortex. Nature
Neuroscience.
Salfity, M. F., Ruiz, P. D., Huntley, J. M.,
Graves, M. J., Cusack, R., and Beauregard,
D. A. (2006). Branch cut surface placement for unwrapping of undersampled threedimensional phase data: application to magnetic resonance imaging arterial flow mapping.
Applied Optics.
15

