Extracting folding landscape characteristics of biomolecules using
mechanical forces
Changbong Hyeon

arXiv:1501.03448v1 [q-bio.BM] 14 Jan 2015

Korea Institute for Advanced Study, Seoul 130-722, Korea
Michael Hinczewski and D. Thirumalai
Biophysics Program, Institute for Physical Sciences and Technology,
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
(Dated: January 15, 2015)

Abstract
In recent years single molecule force spectroscopy has opened a new avenue to provide profiles of the
complex energy landscape of biomolecules. In this field, quantitative analyses of the data employing
sound theoretical models, have played a major role in interpreting data and anticipating outcomes
of experiments. Here, we explain how by using temperature as a variable in mechanical unfolding of
biomolecules in force spectroscopy, the roughness of the energy landscape can be measured without
making any assumptions about the underlying reaction coordinate. Estimates of other aspects of the
energy landscape such as free energy barriers or the transition state (TS) locations could depend on
the precise model used to analyze the experimental data. We illustrate the inherent difficulties in
obtaining the transition state location from loading rate or force-dependent unfolding rates. Because
the transition state moves as the force or the loading rate is varied, which is reminiscent of the Hammond
effect, it is in general difficult to invert the experimental data. The independence of the TS location
on force holds good only for brittle or hard biomolecules whereas the TS location changes considerably
if the molecule is soft or plastic. Finally, we discuss the goodness of the end-to-end distance (or
pulling) coordinate of the molecule as a surrogate reaction coordinate in a situation like force-induced
ligand-unbinding from a gated molecular receptor as well as force-quench refolding of an RNA hairpin.

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The energy landscape, which projects the multidimensional conformational space of biopolymers onto low dimension, has played a critical role in visualizing their folding routes [1–3]. To
account for the rapid, reversible folding and unfolding of proteins, it is suspected that the folding energy landscape of many evolved proteins is relatively smooth, which allows for an efficient
navigation of the landscape. To be more precise, the gradient of the energy landscape ∆F (χ) towards the native basin of attraction (NBA), corresponding to the driving force, is “large” enough
that during the folding process the biomolecule does not get kinetically trapped in local minima
(competing basins of attraction (CBA)) for arbitrarily long times. Here, F (χ) is expressed as
a function of a non-unique variable, namely, the structure overlap function χ, an order parameter that measures how similar a given conformation is to the native state. However, perfectly
smooth energy landscapes are difficult to realize because of energetic and topological frustration
[4, 5]. In proteins, the hydrophobic residues prefer to be sequestered in the interior while polar
and charged residues are better accommodated on the surfaces where they can interact with
water. Often these conflicting requirements cannot be simultaneously satisfied and hence proteins can be energetically “frustrated”. It is clear from this description that only evolved or well
designed sequences can minimize energetic frustration. Even if a particular foldable sequence
minimizes energetic conflicts, it is nearly impossible to eliminate topological frustration which
arises due to chain connectivity [6, 7]. Topological frustration refers to the conflict between
local and global packing of structures. Both sources of frustration, energetic and topological,
render the energy landscape rugged on length scales that are larger than those associated with
secondary structures (≈ (1 − 2) nm).
Thus, the free energy, projected along a 1D coordinate, is rough on certain length scale
and may be globally smooth on a larger scale. Under the assumption that the characteristic
2 /22

roughness  has a Gaussian distribution (P () ∼ e−

), the overall transition time from the
‡

unfolded basin to NBA over free energy barrier ∆F ‡ and τ (β) = τo eβ∆F may be written as
Z ∞
Z ∞
2
2
2 2
β
τU →F = τ (β)
de P () ≈ τ (β)
deβ e− /2 ≈ τ (β)eβ  /2
(1)
kB T

kB T

where τ (β) is the temperature dependent Arrehius-like transition time from unfolded (U) to
folded state (F) over a single barrier in the perfectly smooth one-dimensional coordinate, and  is
the average value of ruggedness. The last part of the equation becomes valid at low temperatures.
2

The additional factor eβ

2 2 /2

in Eq.1, which slows down the folding time, was derived in an

elegant paper by Zwanzig [8] and was also obtained in [9, 10] by analyzing the dynamics of
Derrida’s random energy model [11]. If folding takes place in a rough energy landscape then the
dependence of the characteristic time scale on length l may be estimated as τ = τSS ≈ (10−100)
ns when l ≈ (1 − 2) nm where τSS ≈ l2 /D is the diffusion time with a diffusion constant on the
order of (10−7 −10−6 ) cm2 /sec, and τ = τU →F when l ≈ L where L is the effective contour length
of the biomolecule. Given the crude physical picture, the estimate of τSS is not inconsistent with
the time needed to form α-helices or β-hairpin.
With the possibility of mechanically manipulating biological molecules, one molecule at a
time, it is becoming possible to probe the features of their energy landscape (such as roughness
and the transition state location) that are not easy to measure using conventional experiments.
Such experiments, performed using Laser Optical Tweezers (LOTs) [12, 13] or Atomic Force
Microscopy (AFM) [14], have made it possible to mechanically unfold proteins [15–21], RNA
[22–28], and their complexes [29–34], or initiate refolding of proteins [35] and RNA [26, 27]. These
remarkable experiments show how the initial conditions affect refolding and also enable us to
examine the response of biological molecules over a range of forces and loading rates. In addition,
fundamental aspects of statistical mechanics, including non-equilibrium work theorems [36, 37],
can be rigorously tested using single molecule experiments [38, 39]. Here, we are concerned with
using the data and theoretical models to extract key characteristics of the energy landscape of
biological systems.
The crude physical picture of folding in a rough energy landscape (Fig.1) is not meaningful
unless the ideas can be validated experimentally, which requires direct measurement of the
roughness energy scale , absolute value of the barrier height, etc. In conventional experiments,
in which folding is triggered by temperature, it is difficult to measure τ0 and ∆F ‡ even when
β ≡ 0 [40]. We proposed, using theoretical methods, that β can be directly measured using
forced-unfolding of biomolecules and biomolecular complexes. The Hyeon-Thirumalai (HT)
theory [41] showed that if unbinding or unfolding lifetime (or rates) are known as a function of
the stretching force (f ) and temperature (T ) then  can be inferred without explicit knowledge of
τ0 or ∆F ‡ . Recently, the loading-rate dependent unbinding times of a protein-protein complex
using atomic force microscopy (AFM) at various temperatures have been used to obtain an
estimate of  [42]. Similarly, variations in the forced-unfolding rates as a function of temperature
3

of Dictyostelium discoideum filamin (ddFLN4) were used to estimate  [43]. The variation in
unbinding or unfolding rates of proteins as a function of f and T provides an opportunity to
obtain quantitative estimates of the energy landscape characteristics.
Single molecule force spectroscopy can also be used to measure force-dependent unfolding
rates from which the location of the transition state (TS) in terms of the spatial extension (R)
can be computed. This procedure is a not straightforward because, as shown in a number of
studies [44–48], the location of the transition state changes as f changes unless the curvature
of the free energy profile at the TS location is large, i.e, the barrier is sharp. The extent to
which the TS changes depends on the load. By carefully considering the variations of force
distributions it is possible to obtain reliable estimates of the TS location [43]. Here, we review
recent developments in single molecule force spectroscopy that have attempted to obtain the
energy landscape characteristics of biological molecules [41, 48–54]. Using theoretical models
that consider dynamics in higher dimensions we also point out some of the ambiguities in
interpreting the experimental data from dynamic force spectroscopy.

II.

THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

Single molecule mechanical unfolding experiments differ from conventional unfolding experiments in which unfolding (or folding) is triggered by varying temperature or concentration of
denaturants or ions. In single molecule experiments folding or unfolding can be initiated by precisely manipulating the initial conditions. In both forced-unfolding and force-quench refolding,
the initial conformation, characterized by the extension of biomolecule, is precisely known. By
contrast, the nature of the unfolded states, from which refolding is initiated, is hard to describe
in ensemble experiments. For RNA and proteins, whose energy landscape is complex [3, 55],
details of the folding pathways can be directly monitored by probing the time dependent changes
in the end-to-end distance R(t) of individual molecules. Analysis of such mechanical folding and
unfolding trajectories allows one to explore regions of the energy landscape that are difficult to
probe using ensemble experiments.
Force experiments can measure the extension of the molecule as a function of time. There
are three modes in which stretching experiments are performed. Most of the initial experiments
were performed by unfolding biomolecules (especially proteins) by pulling on one of the molecule

4

at a constant velocity while keeping the other end fixed [16, 22, 23, 56]. More recently, it has
become possible to apply constant force on the molecule of interest using feed-back mechanism
[26, 35, 57–59]. In addition, force-quench experiments have been reported in which the forces are
decreased or increased linearly [26, 27, 35]. It is hoped that a combination of such experiments
can provide a detailed picture of the complex energy landscape of proteins and RNA. In all the
modes, the variable conjugate to f is the natural coordinate that describes the progress of the
reaction of interest (folding, unbinding or catalysis). If there is a energy barrier confining the
molecular motion to a local minimum, whose height is greater than kB T , then a sudden increase
(decrease) of extension (force) signifies the transition of the molecule over the barrier. A rip in
the force-extension curve (FEC) is the signature of such a transition. Surprisingly, for proteins
and RNA it has been found that the portions of the FEC between rips can be quantitatively
fit using the semi-flexible or worm-like chain model [16, 22, 23, 56, 60, 61]. From such fits, the
global polymeric properties of the biomolecule, such as the contour length and the persistence
length can be extracted [21, 60].
Single molecule pulling experiments provide distributions of the unfolding times (or unfolding force) by varying external conditions. The objective is to construct the underlying energy
landscape from such measurements and from mechanical folding or unfolding trajectories. However, it is difficult to construct all the features of the energy landscape of biomolecules from
FEC or mechanical folding trajectories that report only changes at two points. For example,
although the signature of roughness in the energy landscape may be reflected as fluctuations in
the dynamical trajectory it is difficult to estimate its value unless multiple pulling experiments
are performed. We had proposed that the power of single molecules can be more fully realized
if temperature (T ) is also used as an additional variable [41, 45, 62, 63]. By using T and f
it is possible to obtain a phase diagram as a function of T and f that can be used to probe
the nature of collapsed molten globules which are invariably populated but are hard to detect
in conventional experiments. We also showed theoretically that the roughness energy scale ()
can be measured [41] if both f and temperature (T ) are varied in single molecule experiments.
The effect of  manifests itself in the 1/T 2 dependence of the rates of force-induced unbinding
or unfolding kinetics. In the following subsections we first review the theoretical framework to
describe the force-induced unfolding kinetics and show how the 1/T 2 dependence emerges when
the roughness is treated as a perturbation in the underlying energy profile.
5

Bell model: Historically, phenomenological descriptions of the force-induced fracture of materials and unbinding of adhesive contacts were made by Zhurkov [64] and Bell [49], respectively,
long before single molecule experiments were performed. In the context of ligand unbinding from
a binding pocket, Bell [49] conjectured that the kinetics of bond rupture can be described using
a modified Eyring rate theory [65],
k=κ

kB T −(E ‡ −γf )/kB T
e
h

(2)

where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, h is the Planck constant, and κ is the
transmission coefficient. In the Bell description the activation barrier E ‡ is reduced by a factor
γf when the bond or the biomolecular complex is subject to external force f . The parameter
γ is a characteristic length of the system under load and specifies the distance at which the
molecule unfolds or the ligand unbinds. The prefactor

kB T
h

is the vibrational frequency of a

single bond. The Bell model shows that the unbinding rates increase when tension is applied to
the molecule. Although Bell’s key conjecture, i.e., the reduction of th activation barrier due to
external force, is physically justified, the assumption that γ does not depend on the load is in
general not valid. In addition, because of the multidimensional nature of the energy landscape
of biomolecules, there are multiple unfolding pathways which require modification of the Bell
description of forced-unbinding. It is an oversimplification to restrict the molecular response to
the force merely to a reduction in the free energy barrier. Nevertheless, in the experimentally
accessible range of loads the Bell model in conjunction with Kramers’ theory of escape from a
potential well have been remarkably successful in fitting much of the data on forced-unfolding
of biological molecules.
Mean first passage times: In order to go beyond the popular Bell model many attempts have
been made to describe the unbinding process as an escape from a free energy surface in the presence of force [41, 50, 52, 66, 67]. This is traditionally achieved by a formal procedure that adapts
the Liouville equation describing the time evolution of the probability density representing the
molecular configuration in phase space.
For the problem at hand, one can project the entire dynamics onto a single reaction coordinate provided the relaxation times of other degrees of freedom are shorter than the time scale
associated with the presumed order parameter of interest [68, 69]. In applications to forcespectroscopy, we assume that the variable conjugate to f is a reasonable approximation to the
6

reaction coordinate. The probability density of the molecular configuration, ρ(x, t|x0 ), whose
configuration is represented by order parameter x at time t, obeys the Fokker-Planck equation.
∂ρ(x, t|x0 )
∂
= LF P (x)ρ(x, t|x0 ) =
D(x)
∂t
∂x



∂
1 dF (x)
+
∂x kB T dx


ρ(x, t|x0 ),

(3)

where D(x) is the position-dependent diffusion coefficient, and F (x) is an effective onedimensional free energy, x0 is the position at time t = 0. If the initial distribution is given
by ρ(x0 , t = 0|x0 ) = δ(x − x0 ) the formal solution of the above equation reads ρ(x, t|x0 ) =
etLF P δ(x − x0 ). If we use an absorbing boundary condition at a suitably defined location, the
probability that the molecule remains bound (survival probability) at time t is
Z
Z
S(x0 , t) = dxρ(x, t|x0 ) = dxetLF P δ(x − x0 ).

(4)

In terms of the first passage time distribution, pF P (x0 , t) = −dS(x0 , t)/dt, the mean first passage
time can be computed using,
Z

∞

dt [tpF P (x0 , t)]

Z ∞ 
dS(x0 , t)
= −
dt t
dt
0
Z ∞ Z
dt dxetLF P (x) δ(x − x0 )
=
Z0 ∞ Z
†
=
dt dxδ(x − x0 )etLF P (x)

τ (x0 ) =

0

(5)

0

where L†F P is the adjoint operator. In obtaining the above equation we used S(x0 , t = ∞) = 0
and integrated by parts in going from the second to third line. By operating L†F P (x0 ) on both
sides of Eq.5 and exchanging the variable x with x0 we obtain
L†F P (x)τ (x) = eF (x)/kB T

∂
∂
D(x)e−F (x)/kB T τ (x) = −1.
∂x
∂x

(6)

The rate process with reflecting boundary ∂x τ (a) = 0 and absorbing boundary condition τ (b) = 0
in the interval a ≤ x ≤ b, leads to the well-known expression for mean first passage time,
Z b
Z y
1
F (y)/kB T
τ (x) =
dye
dze−F (z)/kB T .
D(y)
a
x

(7)

Diffusion in a rough potential: In the above analysis the 1D free energy profile F (x) that
approximately describes the unfolding or unbinding event is arbitrary. In order to explicitly
7

examine the role of the energy landscape ruggedness we follow Zwanzig and decompose F (x)
into F (x) = F0 (x)+F1 (x) [8]. where F0 (x) is a smooth potential that determines the global shape
of the energy landscape, and F1 (x) is periodic ruggedness superimposed on F0 (x). By taking the
Rl
spatial average over F1 (x) using he±βF1 (x) il = 1l 0 dxe±βF1 (x) , where l is the ruggedness length
scale, the associated mean first passage time can be written in terms of the effective diffusion
constant D∗ (x) as,
D∗ (x) =
τ (x) ≈

D(x)

,

heβF1 (x) il he−βF1 (x) il
Z b
1
dyeF0 (y)/kB T ∗
D (y)
x

Z

y

dze−F0 (z)/kB T .

(8)

a

An inversion of roughness potential, i.e., F1 ↔ −F1 does not alter D∗ (x). In the presence of
roughness D∗ (x) ≤ D(x). When β 2 hF12 (x)i = β 2 2 is small the effective diffusion coefficient
can be approximated as D0∗ ≈ D0 exp (−β 2 2 ) where D0 is the bare diffusion constant. If P (F1 )
is a Gaussian then this expression is exact. The coefficient associated with 1/T 2 behavior is
due to the energy landscape roughness provided the extension is a good reaction coordinate.
2 /k 2 T 2
B

The dependence of e−

in D∗ suggests that the diffusion in a rough potential can be

substantially slowed even when the scale of roughness is not too large.
Barrier crossing dynamics in a tilted potential: In writing the one-dimensional Fokker-Planck
equation (Eq.3) we assumed that the order parameter x is a slowly changing variable. This
assumption is valid if the molecular extension, in the presence of f , describes accurately the
conformational changes in the biomolecule.
Following the Bell’s conjecture we can replace F (x) by F (x) − f x in which f ”tilts” the free
energy surface. Thus, in the presence of mechanical force Eq.8 becomes
Z b
Z y
1
−1
(F0 (y)−f y)/kB T
dze−(F0 (z)−f z)/kB T .
k (f ) = τ (f ; x) ≈
dye
∗
D (y) a
x

(9)

As long as the energy barrier is large enough (see Fig.1) Eq.9 can be further simplified using
the saddle point approximation. The Taylor expansions of the free energy potential F0 (x) − f x
at the barrier top and the minimum result in Kramers’ equation [70, 71],
2πkB T
β(∆F0‡ (f )−f ∆x‡ (f ))
e
D∗ mωb (f )ωts (f )


‡
2πζ
‡
βF1 (x)
−βF1 (x)
=
he
il he
il eβ(∆F0 (f )−f ∆x (f ))
ωb (f )ωts (f )

k −1 (f ) = τ (f ) ≈

8

(10)

where ωb and ωts are the curvatures of the potential, |∂x2 F0 (x)|, at x = xb and xts , respectively,
the free energy barrier ∆F0‡ = F0 (xts ) − F0 (xb ), m is the effective mass of the biomolecule, ζ is
the friction coefficient, and ∆x‡ ≡ xts − xb .
In the presence of f , the positions of the transition state xts and bound state xb change because
unbinding kinetics should be determined using F0 (x) − f x and not F0 (x) alone. Because xts
and xb satisfy the force dependent condition F00 (x) − f = 0, it follows that all the parameters,
∆x‡ (f ), ωts (f ), and ωb (f ), are intrinsically f -dependent. Depending on the shape of the free
energy potential F0 (x), the degree of force-dependence of ∆x‡ , ωts , and ωb can vary greatly.
Previous theoretical studies [44, 51, 52, 72] have examined some of the consequences of the
moving transition state. In addition, simulational studies [44–46] in which the free energy
profiles were explicitly computed from thermodynamic considerations alone clearly showed the
change of ∆x‡ when f is varied. These authors also provided a structural basis for transition
state movements in the case of unbinding of simple RNA hairpins. The nontrivial coupling of
force and free energy profile makes it difficult to unambiguously extract free energy profiles from
experimental data. In order to circumvent some of the problems, Schlierf and Rief have used
Eq.9 to analyze the load-dependent experimental data on unfolding of ddFLN4 and extracted
an effective one dimensional free energy surface F (x) without making additional assumptions.
The results showed that the effective free energy profile is highly anharmonic near the transition
state region [73].
Forced-unfolding dynamics at constant loading rate:

Many single molecule experiments

are conducted by ramping the force over time [14, 16, 23, 38]. In this mode the load on the
molecule or the complex increases with time. When the force increases beyond a threshold value,
unbinding or bond-rupture occurs. Because of thermal fluctuations the unbinding events are
stochastic and as a consequence one has to contend with the distribution of unbinding forces.
The time-dependent nature of the force makes the barrier crossing rate also dependent on t. For
a single barrier crossing event with a time-dependent rate k(t), the probability of the barrier
crossing event being observed at time t is P (t) = k(t)S(t), where the survival probability S(t)
 R

t
that the molecule remains folded is given as S(t) = exp − 0 dτ k(τ ) .
When the molecule or complex is pulled at a constant loading rate (rf ) the distribution
(P (f )) of unfolding forces is asymmetric. The most probable rf -dependent unfolding force (f ∗ )
is often used to determine the TS location of the underlying energy landscape with the tacit
9

assumption that the TS is stationary. When rf = df /dt is constant, the probability of observing
an unfolding event at force f is written as,
 Z f

1
0 1
0
df k(f ) .
P (f ) = k(f ) exp −
rf
rf
0

(11)

The most probable unfolding force is obtained from dP (f )/df |f =f ∗ = 0, which leads to
!
‡
∗
k
T
r
∆x
(f
)
B
f
f∗ =
{log
‡ ∗
∗
∆x‡ (f ∗ )
νD (f )e−β∆F0 (f ) kB T



0
‡
∗
∆F0 (f ) ν 0 (f ∗ ) k T 
(∆x‡ )0 (f ∗ )

B
+ log 1 + f ∗
−
+ D ∗

∆x‡ (f ∗ )
∆x‡ (f ∗ )
νD (f ) ∆x‡ (f ∗ )
+ log heβF1 il he−βF1 il },

(12)

where ∆F0‡ ≡ F0 (xts (f )) − F0 (x0 (f )), 0 denotes differentiation with respect to the argument,
∆x(f ) ≡ xts (f ) − x0 (f ) is the distance between the transition state and the native state, and
νD (f ) ≡ ωo (f )ωts (f )/2πγ. Note that ∆F0‡ , νD , and ∆x‡ depend on the value of f [41, 45, 46].
Because f ∗ changes with rf , ∆x‡ obtained from the data analysis should correspond to a value at
a certain f ∗ , not a value that is extrapolated to f ∗ = 0. Indeed, the pronounced curvature in the
plot of f ∗ as a function of log rf makes it difficult to obtain the characteristics of the underlying
energy landscape using data from dynamic force-spectroscopy without a reliable theory or a
model. If ∆F0‡ , νD , and ∆x‡ are relatively insensitive to variations in force, the second term
on the right-hand side of Eq.12 would vanish, leading to f ∗ ∝ (kB T /∆x‡ ) log rf [50]. If the
loading rate, however, spans a wide range so that the force-dependence of ∆F0‡ , νD , and ∆x‡
are manifested, then the resulting f ∗ can substantially deviate from the linear dependence on
log rf . Indeed, it has been shown that for a molecule or a complex known to have a single free
energy barrier, the most probable rupture force f ∗ obeys (1 − f ∗ /fc ) ∼ (log rf )ν with fc being a
critical force in the absence of force. The effective exponent ν should lie in the range 0.5 ≤ ν ≤ 1
[74]. And a fit with ν < 0.5 implies that the unbinding dynamics cannot be explained with a
one-dimensional barrier picture of crossing [74]. The precise value of ν depends on the nature
of the underlying potential and is best treated as an adjustable parameter.

10

III.

MEASUREMENT OF ENERGY LANDSCAPE ROUGHNESS

In the presence of roughness we expect that the unfolding kinetics deviates substantially
from an Arrhenius behavior. By either assuming a Gaussian distribution of the roughness
2

2

contribution, P (F1 ) ∝ e−F1 /2 , or simply assuming βF1  1 and hF1 i = 0, hF12 i = 2 , one can
further simplify Eq.10 to
2 2
log k(f )/k0 = −(∆F0‡ − f · ∆x‡ )/kB T − 2 /kB
T .

(13)

This relationship suggests that the roughness scale  can be extracted if log k(f ) is measured
over a range of temperatures. Variations in temperature also result in changes in the viscosity, η,
and because k0−1 ∝ η, corrections arising from the temperature-dependence of η have to be taken
into account in interpreting the experiments. It is known that η for water varies as exp(A/T )
over the experimentally relevant temperature range (5o C < T < 50o C) [75]. Thus, we expect
log k(f, T ) = a + b/T − 2 /T 2 . The coefficient of the 1/T 2 term can be quantified by performing
force-clamp experiments at several values of constant temperatures. In addition, the robustness
of the HT theory can be confirmed by showing that 2 is a constant even if the coefficients a and
b change under different force conditions [41]. The signature of the roughness of the underlying
energy landscape is uniquely reflected in the non-Arrhenius temperature dependence of the
unbinding rates. Although it is most straightforward to extract  using Eq.13, no roughness
measurement, to the best of our knowledge, has been performed using force clamp experiments.
To extract the roughness scale, , using dynamic force spectroscopy (DFS) in which the force
increases gradually in time, an alternative but similar strategy as in force clamp experiments
can be adopted. A series of dynamic force spectroscopy experiments should be performed as
a function of T and rf so that reliable unfolding force distributions are obtained. Since a
straightforward application of Eq.12 is difficult due to the force-dependence of the variables in
Eq.12, one should simplify the expression by assuming that the parameters ∆x‡ (f ), ∆F0‡ (f ),
and νD (f ), depend only weakly on f . If this is the case then the second term of Eq.12 can be
neglected and Eq.12 becomes
kB T
kB T
∆x‡
2
f ≈
log rf +
log
+
.
‡
∆x‡
∆x‡
∆x‡ kB T
νD e−∆F0 /kB T kB T
∗

(14)

One way of obtaining the roughness scale from experimental data is as follows [42]. From the
f ∗ vs log rf curves at two different temperatures, T1 and T2 , one can obtain rf (T1 ) and rf (T2 )
11

for which the f ∗ values are identical. By equating the right-hand side of the expression in Eq.12
at T1 and T2 the scale  can be estimated [41, 42] as
∆x‡ (T1 )kB T1 × ∆x‡ (T2 )kB T2
∆x‡ (T1 )kB T1 − ∆x‡ (T2 )kB T2




rf (T1 )∆x‡ (T1 )
rf (T2 )∆x‡ (T2 )
kB T1
1
1
kB T2
‡
+
× ∆F0
−
log
−
log
(15)
.
νD (T1 )kB T1
νD (T2 )kB T2
∆x‡ (T1 ) ∆x‡ (T2 )
∆x‡ (T1 )
∆x‡ (T2 )

2 ≈

Nevo et. al. [42] used DFS to measure  for a biomolecular protein complex consisting
of nuclear import receptor importin-β (imp-β) and the Ras-like GTPase Ran that is loaded
with non-hydrolyzable GTP analogue (Fig.2-C). The Ran-imp-β complex was immobilized on a
surface and the unbinding forces were measured using AFM at three values of rf that varied by
nearly three orders of magnitude. At high rf the values of f ∗ increases as T increases. At lower
loading rates (rf . 2 × 103 pN/s), however, f ∗ decreases as T increases (see Fig.2-B). The data
over distinct temperatures were used to extract, for the first time, an estimate of . The values
of f ∗ at three temperatures (7, 20, 32o C) and Eq.15 were used to obtain  ≈ 5 − 6kB T . Nevo
et. al. explicitly showed that the value of  was nearly the same from the nine pairs of data
extracted from the f ∗ vs log rf curves. Interestingly, the estimated value of  is about 0.2∆F0‡
where ∆F0‡ is the major barrier for unbinding of the complex. This shows that for this complex
the free energy in terms of a one-dimensional coordinate resembles the profile shown in Fig.1.
It is worth remarking that the location of the transition state decreases from 0.44 nm at 7 o C
to 0.21 nm at 32 o C. The extracted TS movement using the roughness model is consistent with
Hammond behavior (see below).

IV.

EXTRACTING TS LOCATION (∆x‡ ) AND UNFOLDING RATE (κ) FROM DY-

NAMIC FORCE SPECTROSCOPY

The theory of DFS, f ∗ ≈

kB T
∆x‡

log rf +

kB T
∆x‡

‡

∆x
log κk
, is used to identify the forces that destaBT

bilize the bound state of the complex or the folded state of a specific biomolecule. A linear
regression provides the characteristic extension ∆x‡ at which the molecule or complex ruptures
(more precisely ∆x‡ is the thermally averaged distance between the bound and the transition
state along the direction of the applied force). It is tempting to obtain the zero force unfolding
rate κ from the intercept with the abscissa. Substantial errors can, however, arise in the extrap12

olated values of ∆x‡ and κ to the zero force if f ∗ vs log rf is not linear, as is often the case when
rf is varied over several orders of magnitude. Nonlinearity of the [f ∗ , log rf ] curve arises for two
reasons. One is due to the complicated molecular response to the external load that results in
dramatic variations in ∆x‡ . Like other soft matter, the extent of the response (or the elasticity)
depends on rf [44, 46, 47]. The other is due to multiple energy barriers that are encountered in
the unfolding or unbinding process [31].
If the TS ensemble is broadly distributed along the reaction coordinate then the molecule can
adopt diverse structures along the energy barrier depending on the magnitude of the external
load. Therefore, mechanical force should grasp the signature of the spectrum of the TS conformations for such a molecule. Mechanical unzipping dynamics of RNA hairpins whose stability
is determined in terms of the number of intact base pairs is a good example. The conformation
of RNA hairpins at the barrier top can gradually vary from an almost fully intact structure
at small forces to an extended structure at large forces. Under these conditions the width of
the TSE is large. The signature of diverse TS conformations manifests itself as a substantial
curvature over the broad variations of forces or loading rates. Meanwhile, if the unfolding is
a highly cooperative all-or-none process characterized by a narrow distribution of the TS, the
nature of the TS may not change significantly.
The linear theory of DFS is not reliable if the TSE is plastic because it involves drastic
approximations of the Eq.12. From this perspective it is more prudent to fit the the experimental
unbinding force distributions directly using analytical expressions derived from suitable models.
If such a procedure can be reliably implemented then the extracted parameters are likely to be
more accurate. Solving such an inverse problem does require assuming a reduced dimensional
representation of the underlying energy landscape which cannot be a priori justified.

V.

MECHANICAL RESPONSE OF HARD (BRITTLE) VERSUS SOFT (PLASTIC)

BIOMOLECULES

With few exceptions [66], lifetimes of a complex decrease upon application of force. The
compliance of the molecule is determined by the location of the TS, and hence it is important
to understand the characteristics of the molecule that determine the TS. As we pointed out,
many relevant paramters have strong dependence on f , rf , or T . Thus, it is difficult to extract

13

the energy landscape parameters without a suitable model. In this section we illustrate two
extreme cases of mechanical response [44, 47, 47, 72] of a biomolecule using one-dimensional
energy profiles. In one example the location of the TS does not move with force whereas in the
other there is a dramatic movement of the TS. In the presence of force f , a given free energy
profile F0 (x) changes to F (x) = F0 (x) − f x. The location of the TS at non-zero values of f
depends on the shape of barrier in the vicinity of the TS. Near the barrier (x ≈ xts ) we can
approximate F0 (x) as
1
F0 (x) ≈ F0 (xts ) − F000 (xts )(x − xts )2 + · · · .
2

(16)

f
. If the transition barrier
In the presence of force the TS location becomes xts (f ) = xts − F 00 (x
ts )
0

in F0 (x) is sharp (xts F000 (xts )  f ) then we expect very little force-induced movement in the
TS. We refer to molecules that satisfy this criterion as hard or brittle. In the opposite limit
the molecule is expected to be soft or plastic so that there can be dramatic movements in the
TS. We illustrate these two cases by numerically computing rf -dependent P (f ) using Eq.9 and
Eq.12 for two model free energy profiles.
Hard response: A nearly stationary TS position (independent of f ) is realized if the energy
barrier is sharp (Eq.16). We model F0 (x) using
F0 (x) = −V0 |(x + 1)2 − ξ 2 | with x ≥ 0

(17)

where V0 = 28 pN/nm and ξ = 4 nm. The energy barrier forms at x = 1 nm and this position
does not change much even in the presence of force as illustrated in Fig.3A (top panel). In
dynamic force spectroscopy the free energy profiles drawn at constant force may be viewed as
snapshots at different times. The shape of the unbinding force distribution depends on rf . We
calculated P (f ) numerically using Eq.9 and Eq.12 (see the middle panel of Fig.3A). Interestingly,
a plot of the the most probable force f ∗ obtained from P (f ) does not exhibit any curvature
when rf is varied over six orders of magnitude (the bottom panel of Fig.3A). Over the range
of rf the [f ∗ , log rf ] plot is almost linear. The slight deviation from linearity is due to the
force-dependent curvature near the bound state (ωb (f )). From the slope we find that ∆x‡ ≈ 1
nm which is expected from Eq.17. In addition, we obtained from the intercept in Fig.3-C that
κ = 1.58 s−1 . The value of κ[≡ k(f = 0)] directly computed using Eq.9 is κ = 1.49 s−1 . The
two values agree quite well. Thus, for brittle response the Bell model is expected to be accurate.
14

Soft response: If the position of the TS sensitively moves with force the biomolecule or the
complex is soft or plastic. To illustrate the behavior of soft molecules we model the free energy
potential in the absence of force using
F0 (x) = −V0 exp (−ξx) with x ≥ 0

(18)

where V0 = 82.8 pN·nm and ξ = 4 (nm)−1 . The numerically computed P (f ) and [f ∗ , log rf ] plots
are shown in the middle and bottom panels of Fig.3B, respectively. The slope of the [f ∗ , log rf ]
plot is no longer constant but increases continuously as rf increases. The extrapolated value
of κ to zero f varies greatly depending on the range of rf used. Even in the experimentally
accessible range of rf there is curvature in the [f ∗ , log rf ] plot. Thus, unlike the parameters
(∆x‡ , κ) in the example of a brittle potential, all the extracted parameters from the force profile
are strongly dependent on the loading rate. As a result, in soft molecules the extrapolation to
zero force (or minimum loading rate) is not as meaningful as in hard molecules. Note how the
extracted ∆x‡ (see the inset in the bottom panel of Fig.3B) changes as a function of rf . For
soft (plastic) molecules, the extracted parameters using the tangent at a certain rfo are not the
characteristics of the free energy profile in the absence of the load, but reflect the features for
the modified free energy profile tilted by (f ∗ )o at rfo .
In practice, biomolecular systems lie between the two extreme cases (brittle and plastic). In
many cases the [f ∗ , log rf ] appears to be linear over a narrow range of rf . The linearity in narrow
range of log rf , however, does not guarantee the linearity under broad variations of loading rates.
In order to obtain energy landscape parameters it is important to perform experiments at rf
as low as possible. The brittle nature of proteins (lack of change in ∆x‡ ) inferred from AFM
experiments may be the result of a relatively large rf (≈ 1, 000 pN/s). On the other hand, only
by varying rf over a wide range can the molecular elasticity of proteins and RNA be completely
described. Indeed, we showed that even in simple RNA hairpins the transition from plastic to
brittle behavior can be achieved by varying rf [44]. The load-dependent response may even have
functional significance.

15

VI.

HAMMOND/ANTI-HAMMOND BEHAVIOR UNDER FORCE AND TEMPER-

ATURE VARIATIONS

The qualitative nature of the TS movement with increasing perturbations can often be anticipated using the Hammond postulate which has been successful in not only analyzing a large
class of chemical reactions but also in rationalizing the observed behavior in protein and RNA
foldings. The Hammond postulate states that the nature of TS resembles the least stable species
along the reaction pathway. In the context of forced-unfolding it implies that the TS location
should move closer to the native state as f increases. In other words ∆x‡ should decrease as f
is increased. Originally the Hammond postulate was introduced to explain chemical reactions
involving small organic molecules [76, 77]. Its validity in biomolecular folding is not obvious
because there are multiple folding or unfolding pathways. As a result there is a large entropic
component to the folding reaction. Surprisingly, many folding processes are apparently in accord
with the Hammond postulate [78–80]. If the extension is an appropriate reaction coordinate for
forced unfolding then deviations from Hammond postulate should be an exception rather than
the rule. Indeed, anti-hammond behavior (movement of the TS closer to more stable unfolded
state as T increases) was suggested by Schlierf and Rief [43] based on a model used to analyze
the AFM data. The simple free energy profiles used in the previous section (Eq.17 and Eq.18)
can be used to verify the Hammond postulate when the external perturbation is either force or
temperature. First, for the case of hard response the TS is barely affected by force, thus the
Hammond or anti-Hammond behavior is not a relevant issue when unbinding is induced by f .
On the other hand, for the case of soft molecules ∆x‡ always decreases with a larger force. The
positive curvature in [f ∗ , log rf ] plot is the signature of the classical Hammond-behavior with
respect to f .
As long as a one dimensional free energy profile suffices in describing forced-unfolding of
proteins and RNA the TS location must satisfy the Hammond postulate. In general, for a fixed
force or rf , ∆x‡ can vary with T . The changes in ∆x‡ with temperature can be modeled using
T -dependent parameters in the potential. To evaluate the consequence of T -variations we set
ξ = ξ0 + α(T − 300K)

(19)

for both free energies in Eq.17 and Eq.18. Depending on the value of α the position of the TS can
move towards or away from the native state. We set α = ±0.1 for both the hard and soft cases.
16

The numerically computed [f ∗ , log rf ] plots are shown in Fig.3. One interesting point is found
in the soft molecule that exhibits Hammond behavior. For wide range of rf , ∆x‡ decreases as
T increases. However, the most probable unbinding force f ∗ at low temperatures can be larger
or smaller than f ∗ at high temperatures depending on the loading rate (see upper-right corner
of Fig.3). A very similar behavior has been observed in the forced-unbinding of Ran-imp-β
complex [42] (see also Fig.2-B). Although the model free energy profiles can produce a wide
range of behavior depending on T , f , and rf the challenge is to provide a structural basis for
the measurements on biomolecules.

VII.

MOLECULAR TENSEGRITY AND THE TRANSITION STATE.

For RT S (see Fig.4A for the definitions of RT S , RU , RF on a one-dimensional free energy
profile F (R)), associated with the barrier top of F (R) at f = fm where fm is the transition midforce, to be considered the “true” transition state, it is necessary to ensure that it is consistent
with other conventional definitions of the transition state ensemble. A plausible definition of
the TS is that the forward (to the unfolded state, Punf old ) and backward (to the folded state,
Pf old ) fluxes starting from the transition state on the reaction coordinate should be identical
[81]. For an RNA hairpin it means that if an ensemble of structures were created starting
at RT S then the dynamics in the full multidimensional space would result in these structures
reaching the folded and unfolded states with equal probability. The number of events reaching
RF and RU starting from RT S can be directly counted if folding trajectories with high temporal
resolution exhibiting multiple folding and unfolding transitions at f = fm can be generated
(Fig.4A). Our coarse-grained simulations of the P5GA RNA hairpin, which were the first to
assess the goodness of RT S as a descriptor of the TS, showed that starting from RT S the hairpin
crosses the TS region multiple times before reaching R = RF or RU , suggesting that the TS
region is broad and heterogeneous. The transition dynamics of biopolymers occurs on a bumpy
folding landscape with fine structure even in the TS region, which implies there is an internal
coordinate determining the fate of trajectory projected onto the R-coordinate. In accord with
this inference we showed that for the P5GA hairpin the TS structural ensemble is heterogeneous
(Fig. 4B). More pertinently, the forward and backward fluxes starting from the structure in TS
ensemble (see the dynamics of trajectories starting from RT S in Fig.4B) do not satisfy the equal

17

flux condition, Pf old = Punf old = 0.5. Thus, from a strict perspective R for a simple hairpin
may not be a good reaction coordinate even under tension, implying that R is unlikely to be an
appropriate reaction coordinate at f ≈ 0.
Based on simulations Morrison et al. [82] proposed a fairly general theoretical criterion to
determine if R could be a suitable reaction coordinate. The theory uses the concept of tensegrity
(tensional integrity), which was introduced by Fuller and developed in the context of biology to
describe the stability of networks. The notion of tensegrity has been used to account for cellular
structures [83] and more recently for the stability of globular proteins [84], the latter of which
made an interesting estimate that the magnitude of inter-residue precompression and pretension,
associated with structural integrity, can be as large as a few 100 pN. Using F (R) the experimentally measurable molecular tensegrity parameter is defined s ≡ fc /fm = ∆F ‡ (fm )/fm ∆R‡ (fm ),
where ∆F ‡ = F (RT S ) − F (RF ) and ∆R‡ = RT S − RF . The molecular tensegrity parameter s
represents a balance between the compression force (fm ) and the tensile force (fc ), a building
principle in tensegrity systems [85]. For hairpins such stabilizing interactions involve favorable base pair formation. In terms of s and the parameters characterizing the one dimensional
landscape (fm and ku in Fig. 4A) an analytic expression for Punf old has been obtained [82].


1 1
s1
2 1+s
(20)
Punf old (s) =
h
i
−1

 1 Φ + 32fm2 (Φ−1)3 s
s1
2

1+Φ

πku (Φ+1)

For R to be a good reaction coordinate, it is required that Punf old ≈

1
.
2

The theory has

been applied to hairpins and multi-state proteins. Using experimentally determinable values
for s, one can assess whether R is a good reaction coordinate by calculating Punf old using
theory. Applications of the theory to DNA hairpins [82] showed (Fig. 4C) that the precise
sequence determines whether R can be reliably used as an appropriate reaction coordinate, thus
establishing the usefulness of the molecular tensegrity parameter. Application of the theory
based on molecular tensegrity showed that R is not a good reaction coordinate for riboswitches
[86].

18

VIII.

MULTIDIMENSIONALITY

OF

ENERGY

LANDSCAPE

COUPLED

TO

”MEMORY” AFFECTS THE FORCE DYNAMICS

The natural one dimensional reaction coordinate in mechanical unfolding experiments is the
extension x of the molecule. In studies of chemistry and biophysics, it is quite standard to
project the dynamics of a molecule with many degrees of freedom onto a one-dimensional (1D)
reaction coordinate. Especially, in single molecule force experiments, the molecular extension
“x”, parallel to the direction of an external force, is routinely employed to describe the forceinduced dynamics of biomolecules. However, the assumption of 1D projection is valid only if
time scales of dynamics is clearly separated between a variable associated with the reaction
coordinate and other degrees of freedom [69]. For a complex biomolecule that has multiple
time scales intertwined in its dynamics, the signature of interference between two variables
with comparable time-scales should be displayed in experimental measurements. As a simple
extension of the theories discussed above, we consider a situation of an unbinding process where
the fluctuation of a molecular surface between open and closed states can gate the unbinding
kinetics of a ligand from its binding pocket (Fig.2). Depending on the ratio k/λ where λ is
the rate of gating and k is the time scale for unbinding in the absence of gating, the ligand is
expected to undergo disparate unbinding kinetics. If k/λ  1 or k/λ  1, the environment
appears static to the ligand [87, 88]. Thus, the ligand unbinding occurs via parallel paths over
multiple barriers (k/λ  1) or via single path over a rapidly averaging barrier (k/λ  1).
Whereas, if k/λ ∼ O(1), the open↔closed gating produces a fluctuating environment along the
dynamic pathway of the ligand and affects the unbinding process in a non-trivial fashion, which
is often termed dynamical disorder. Suppose that the reaction rate constant associated with
barrier crossing is controlled by the openness of the receptor molecule, which can be modeled
as kr2 where r is the radius of the bottleneck. Provided that the distribution of bottleneck size
is Gaussian, i.e., ϕ(r) ∼ e−r

2 /2θ

with θ = hr2 i, and r obeys a stochastic differential equation

∂t r = −λr+ξr (t) with hξr (t)ξr (t0 )i = 2λθδ(t−t0 ), two disparate unbinding kinetics are quantified.
If λ → ∞ much greater than barrier crossing rate then the reactivity is defined by a pre-averaged
reaction constant with respect to r, i.e., kr2 → kθ. In this case, the survival probability of
the ligand decays exponentially (S(t) = e−kθt ) with k = k0 ef x

‡ /k T
B

. In contrast, if λ → 0

(λ  k) so that the memory of the initial r value is retained while barrier crossing takes place,

19

S(t) =

R∞
0

2

e−kr t ϕ(r)dr ∼ (1 + 2kθt)−1/2 . Two scenarios of bottleneck gating frequency lead

to totally different consequences. The gating frequency λ, intrinsic to a molecule of interest, is
difficult to adjust independently although it can in principle be varied to a certain extent by
changing viscosity. However, in single molecule force spectroscopy it is feasible to vary k by
controlling the external tension, so that the ratio k/λ can be scanned from k/λ  1 to k/λ  1
via k/λ ∼ O(1).
The physical picture described above can be mathematically formulated as follows. In the
context of ligand binding to myoglobin Zwanzig first proposed such a model by assuming that
reaction (binding) takes place along the x-coordinate and at the barrier top (x = xts ) the
reactivity is determined by the cross section of bottleneck described by the r-coordinate [87].
We adopt a similar picture to describe the modifications when such a process is driven by force.
First, consider the Zwanzig case i.e, with loading rate rf = 0. The equations of motion for x
and r are, respectively,
dx dU (x)
d2 x
= −ζ
−
+ Fx (t)
2
dt
dt
dx
dr
= −γr + Fr (t).
(21)
dt
= 0) describes the time evolution of probability density, ρ(x, r, t), as




∂ρ
∂ dx
∂ dr
dρ
=
+
ρ +
ρ = 0.
(22)
dt
∂t ∂x dt
∂r dt
m

The Liouville theorem ( dρ
dt

2

By inserting of Eq.21 to Eq.22 and neglecting the inertial term, (m ddt2x ), and averaging over the
white-noise spectrum, and the fluctuation-dissipation theorem (hFx (t)Fx (t0 )i = 2ζkB T δ(t − t0 ),
hFr (t)Fr (t0 )i = 2λθδ(t − t0 ) where hr2 i ≡ θ) leads to a Smoluchowski equation for ρ(x, r, t) in
the presence of a reaction sink.
∂ρ
= Lx ρ + Lr ρ − kr r2 δ(x − xts )ρ
(23)
∂t



∂
∂
1 dU (x)
∂
∂
r
where Lx ≡ D ∂x
+
and
L
≡
λθ
+
. Integrating both sides of Eq.23
r
∂x
kB T dx
∂r ∂r
θ
R
using dxρ(x, r, t) ≡ C(r, t) leads to
∂C
= Lr C(r, t) − kr r2 ρ(xts , r, t).
(24)
∂t
By writing ρ(xts , r, t) = φx (xts )C(r, t) where φ(xts ) should be constant as φ(xts ) =
q 00
R
−U (xts )/kB T
−U (x)/kB T
e
/ dxe
≈ U2πk(xBbT) e−(U (xts )−U (xb ))/kB T , Eq.24 becomes
∂C
= Lr C(r, t) − kr2 C(r, t).
∂t
20

(25)

barrier, so we

q

U 00 (xb ) −(U (xts )−U (xb ))/kB T
e
.
2πkB T
ts ωb −∆U/kB T
e
can write k = κ ω2πγ

where k ≡ kr

In all likelihood kr reflects the dynamics near the
where κ describes the geometrical information of the

cross section of bottleneck. Now we rederive the equation in Zwanzig’s seminal paper where the
R∞
survival probability (Σ(t) = 0 drC(r, t)) is given under a reflecting boundary condition at r = 0
and Gaussian initial condition C(r, t = 0) ∼ e−r

2 /2θ

. By setting C(r, t) = exp (ν(t) − µ(t)r2 ),

Eq.25 can be solved exactly, leading to
ν 0 (t) = −2λθµ(t) + λ
µ0 (t) = −4λθµ2 (t) + 2λµ(t) + k.
The solution for µ(t) is obtained by solving

4θ
λ

R µ(t)−1/4θ
1/4θ

dα
σ 2 −16θ2 α2

(26)
= t, and this leads to



(S + 1) − (S − 1)E
1+S
(S + 1) + (S − 1)E

−1/2
λt
(S + 1) + (S − 1)E
ν(t) = − (S − 1) + log
2
2S

1
µ(t)
=
µ(0)
2

(27)

with µ(0) = 1/2θ. The survival probability, which was originally obtained by Zwanzig, is


−1/2
(S + 1)2 − (S − 1)2 E
λ
Σ(t) = exp − (S − 1)t
2
4S
where S = 1 +


4kθ 1/2
λ

(28)

and E = e−2λSt .

We wish to examine the consequences of coupling between local and global reaction coordinates under tension. In order to accomplish our goal we solve the Smoluchoski equation in the
presence of constant loading rate. In this case, k in Eq.25 should be replaced with ket(rf ∆x

‡ /k

BT )

.

Eq.25, however, becomes hard to solve if the sink term depends on t. Nevertheless, analytical
solutions can be obtained for special cases of λ. If λ → ∞, dΣ(t)/dt = −kθet(rf ∆x

‡ /k

BT )

Σ(t),

and hence,

Z
Σ(f ) = exp −kθ
0

f

1
‡
df ef ∆x /kB T
rf




kθkB T f ∆x‡ /kB T
= exp −
(e
− 1)
rf ∆x‡

)
Using the rupture force distribution P (f ) = − dΣ(f
and
df



dP (f )
|f =f ∗
df

(29)

= 0, one can obtain the most

probable force
f∗ =

kB T
rf ∆x‡
log
.
∆x‡
(kθ)kB T

21

(30)

Rt
If λ is small (λ → 0) then C(r, t) = exp [− 0 dtkr2 exp (t × rf ∆/kB T )] =
i
h
2
kr2 kB T
trf ∆x‡ /kB T
− 1) with the initial distribution of e−r /2θ . Thus,
exp − rf ∆x‡ (e

r
Z ∞
 2

kk
T
2
‡
B
f ∆x /kB T
dr exp −r2
Σ(f ) =
exp
−r
/2θ
(e
−
1)
rf ∆x‡
πθ
0
r 
−1/2
2
kkB T f ∆x‡ /kB T
1
=
.
(31)
(e
− 1) +
‡
πθ rf ∆x
2θ
Note that if rf → 0 we recover Zwanzig’s result Σ(t) ∼ (1+2kθt)−1/2 . Using P (f ) = −dΣ(f )/df
−3/2

1
k f ∆x‡ /kB T
kkB T f ∆x‡ /kB T
1
P (f ) = √
e
.
(32)
(e
−
1)
+
2θ
rf
2πθ rf ∆x‡
dP (f )/df |f =f ∗ = 0 gives
kB T
log
f =
∆x‡
∗



rf ∆x‡
kθkB T



2kθkB T
1−
,
rf ∆x‡

(33)

BT
since f ∗ ≥ 0. This shows that f ∗ vs rf has a different form when
in which rf ≥ (1 + 2θ) kθk
∆x‡

λ → 0 from the one when λ → ∞. The deviation of Eq.33 from the conventional relation is


BT
pronounced when rf − (1 + 2θ) kk
→ 0+ .
∆x‡
At present, experimental data have been interpreted using mostly one dimensional free energy profiles. The meaning and the validity of the extracted free energy profiles has not been
established. At the least, this would require computing the force-dependent first passage times
using the ”experimental” free energy profile assuming that the extension is the only slowly relaxing variable. If the computed force-dependent rates (inversely proportional to first passage
times) agree with the measured rates then the use of extension of the reaction coordinate would
be justified. In the absence of good agreement with experiments other models, such as the one
we have proposed here, must be considered. In the context of force-quench refolding we have
shown (see below) that extension alone is not an adequate reaction coordinate [89]. For refolding
upon force-quench of RNA hairpins, the coupling between extension and local dihedral angles,
which reports on the conformation of the RNA, needs to be taken into account to quantitatively
describe the refolding rates.

IX.

CONCLUSIONS

With the advent of single molecule experiments that can manipulate biomolecules using
mechanical force it has become possible to characterize energy landscapes quantitatively. Me22

chanical folding and unfolding trajectories of proteins and RNA show that there is great diversity
in the explored routes [23, 35, 90]. In certain well defined systems with simple native states,
such as RNA and DNA hairpins, it has been shown using constant force unfolding that the
hairpins undergo sharp bistable transitions from folded to unfolded states [24, 25, 38]. From
the dynamics of the extension as a function of time measured over a long period the underlying
force dependent profiles have been inferred. The force-dependent folding and unfolding rates
and the unfolding trajectories can be used to construct the one-dimensional energy landscape.
In a remarkable paper [25], Block and coworkers have shown that the location of the TS can be
moved, at will, by varying the hairpin sequence. The TS was obtained using the Bell model by
assuming that the ∆x‡ is independent of f . While this seems reasonable given the sharpness of
the inferred free energy profiles near the barrier top it will be necessary to show the ∆x‡ does
not depend on force.
The fundamental assumption in inverting the force-clamp data is that the molecular extension
is a suitable reaction coordinate. This may indeed be the case for force-spectroscopy in which
the response of the molecule only depends on force that is coupled to the molecular extension,
which may well represent the slow degrees of freedom. The approximation is more reasonable
for forced-unbinding. It is less clear if it can be assumed that extension x is the appropriate
reaction coordinate when refolding is initiated by quenching the force to low enough values
such that the folded state is preferentially populated. In this case the dynamic reduction in
x can be coupled to collective internal degrees of freedom. In a recent paper [44] we showed,
in the context of force-quench refolding of an RNA hairpin, that the reduction in x is largely
determined by local conformational changes in the dihedral angle degrees in the loop region.
Zipping by nucleation of the hairpin with concomitant reduction in x does not occur until the
transitions from trans to gauche state in a few of the loop dihedral angles take place. In this
case, one has to consider at least a two dimensional free energy landscape. Fig.6 clearly shows
such a coupling between end-to-end distance (R) and the dihedral angle degrees of freedom. The
”correctness” of the six dihedral angles representing the conformation of the RNA hairpin loop
region (φi , i = 19, . . . 24) is quantified using h1−cos (φi − φoi )i, where φoi is the angle value in the
native state and h. . .i is the average over the six dihedral angles. h1 − cos (φ − φo )i = 0 signifies
the correct dihedral conformation for the hairpin loop region. Once the ”correct” conformation
is attained in the loop region, the rest of the zipping process can easily proceed as we have
23

shown in [44]. Before the correct loop conformation is attained, RNA spends substantial time
in searching the conformational space related to the dihedral angle degree of freedom. The
energy landscape ruggedness is manifested as in Fig.6 when conformational space is represented
using multidimensional order parameters. The proposed coupling between the local dihedral
angle degrees of freedom and extension (global parameter) is fairly general. A similar structural
slowing down, due to the cooperative link between local and global coordinates, should be
observed in force-quench refolding of proteins as well.
One of the most exciting uses of singe molecule experiments is their ability to extract precise
values of the energy landscape roughness  by using temperature as a variable in addition to
f . In this case a straightforward measurement of the unbinding rates as a function of f or
rf can be used to obtain  without having to make any assumptions about the underlying
mechanisms of unbinding. Of course, this involves performing a number of experiments. In so
doing one can also be rewarded with a diagram of states in terms of f and T [45]. The theoretical
calculations and arguments given here also show that the power of single molecule experiments
can be fully realized only by using data from the experiments in conjunction with carefully
designed theoretical and computational models [91]. The latter can provide the structures that
are sampled in the process of forced-unfolding and force-quench refolding as was illustrated for
ribozymes and GFP [90]. It is likely that the promise of measuring the energy landscapes of
biomolecules, one molecule at a time, will be fully realized using a combination of single molecule
measurements, theory, and simulations. Recent studies have already given us a glimpse of that
promise with more to come shortly.

[1] Dill, K. A & Chan, H. S. From Levinthal to Pathways to Funnels. (1997) Nature Struct. Biol. 4,
10–19.
[2] Onuchic, J. N & Wolynes, P. G. Theory of protein folding. (2004) Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 14,
70–75.
[3] Thirumalai, D & Hyeon, C. RNA and Protein folding: Common Themes and Variations. (2005)
Biochemistry 44, 4957–4970.
[4] Thirumalai, D & Woodson, S. A. Kinetics of Folding of Proteins and RNA. (1996) Acc. Chem.
Res. 29, 433–439.

24

[5] Clementi, C, Nymeyer, H, & Onuchic, J. N. Topological and energetic factors: what determines
the structural details of the transition state ensemble and “en-route” intermediates for protein
folding? an investigation for small globular protein. (2000) J. Mol. Biol. 298, 937–953.
[6] Guo, Z & Thirumalai, D. Kinetics of Protein Folding: Nucleation Mechanism, Time Scales, and
Pathways. (1995) Biopolymers 36, 83–102.
[7] Thirumalai, D & Woodson, S. A. Maximizing RNA folding rates: a balancing act. (2000) RNA
6, 790 – 794.
[8] Zwanzig, R. Diffusion in rough potential. (1988) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 85, 2029–2030.
[9] Bryngelson, J. D & Wolynes, P. G. Intermediates and barrier crossing in a random energy-model
(with applications to protein folding). (1989) J. Phys. Chem. 93, 6902–6915.
[10] Thirumalai, D, Mountain, R. D, & Kirkpatrick, T. R. Ergodic behavior in supercooled liquids
and in glasses. (1989) Phys. Rev. A. 39, 3563–3574.
[11] Derrida, B. Random-energy model: An exactly solvable model of disordered system. (1981) Phys.
Rev. B 24, 2613–2626.
[12] Tinoco Jr., I. Force as a useful variable in reactions: Unfolding RNA. (2004) Ann. Rev. Biophys.
Biomol. Struct. 33, 363–385.
[13] Ritort, F. Single-molecule experiments in biological physics: methods and applications. (2006) J.
Phys. Cond. Matt. 18, R531–R583.
[14] Fisher, T. E, Oberhauser, A. F, Carrion-Vazquez, M, Marszalek, P. E, & Fernandez, J. M. The
study of protein mechanics with the atomic force microscope. (1999) TIBS 24, 379–384.
[15] Cecconi, C, Shank, E. A, Bustamante, C, & Marqusee, S. Direct Observation of Three-State
Folding of a Single Protein Molecule. (2005) Science 309, 2057–2060.
[16] Marszalek, P. E, Lu, H, Li, H, Carrion-Vazquez, M, Oberhauser, A. F, Schulten, K, & Fernandez,
J. M. Mechanical unfolding intermediates in titin modules. (1999) Nature 402, 100–103.
[17] Dietz, H & Rief, M. Exploring the energy landscape of GFP by single-molecule mechanical
experiments. (2004) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 16192–16197.
[18] Rief, M, Gautel, H, Oesterhelt, F, Fernandez, J. M, & Gaub, H. E. Reversible Unfolding of
Individual Titin Immunoglobulin Domains by AFM. (1997) Science 276, 1109–1111.
[19] Yang, G, Cecconi, C, Baase, W. A, Vetter, I. R, Breyer, W. A, Haack, J. A, Matthews, B. W,
Dahlquist, F. W, & Bustamante, C. Solid-state synthesis and mechanical unfolding of polymers

25

of T4 lysozyme. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 139–144.
[20] Oberhauser, A. F, Marszalek, P. E, Erickson, H. P, & Fernandez, J. M. The molecular elasticity
of the extracellular matrix protein tenascin. (1998) Nature 393, 181–185.
[21] Bustamante, C, Marko, J. F, Siggia, E. D, & Smith, S. Entropic elasticity of λ-phase DNA. (1994)
Science 265, 1599–1600.
[22] Liphardt, J, Onoa, B, Smith, S. B, Tinoco Jr., I, & Bustamante, C. Reversible Unfolding of Single
RNA Molecules by Mechanical Force. (2001) Science 292, 733–737.
[23] Onoa, B, Dumont, S, Liphardt, J, Smith, S. B, Tinoco, Jr., I, & Bustamante, C. Identifying
Kinetic Barriers to Mechanical Unfolding of the T. thermophila Ribozyme. (2003) Science 299,
1892–1895.
[24] Woodside, M. T, Behnke-Parks, W. M, Larizadeh, K, Travers, K, Herschlag, D, & Block, S. M.
Nanomechanical measurements of the sequence-dependent folding landscapes of single nucleic acid
hairpins. (2006) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 6190–6195.
[25] Woodside, M. T, Anthony, P. C, Behnke-Parks, W. M, Larizadeh, K, Herschlag, D, & Block, S. M.
Direct measurement of the full, sequence-dependent folding landscape of a nucleic acid. (2006)
Science 314, 1001–1004.
[26] Li, P. T. X, Collin, D, Smith, S. B, Bustamante, C, & Tinoco, Jr., I. Probing the Mechanical Folding Kinetics of TAR RNA by Hopping, Force-Jump, and Force-Ramp Methods. (2006) Biophys.
J. 90, 250–260.
[27] Li, P. T. X, Bustamante, C, & Tinoco, Jr., I. Unusual mechanical stability of a minimal RNA
kissing complex. (2006) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 15847–15852.
[28] Onoa, B & Tinoco, Jr, I. RNA folding and unfolding. (2004) Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 14, 374–379.
[29] Moy, V. T, Florin, E. L, & Gaub, H. E. Intermolecular forces and energies between ligands and
receptors. (1994) Science 266, 257–259.
[30] Fritz, J, Katopodis, A. G, Kolbinger, F, & Anselmetti, D. Force-mediated kinetics of single Pselectin/ligand complexes observed by atomic force microscopy. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 95, 12283–12288.
[31] Merkel, R, Nassoy, P, Leung, A, Ritchie, K, & Evans, E. Energy landscapes of receptor-ligand
bonds explored with dynamic force spectroscopy. (1999) Nature 397, 50–53.
[32] Schwesinger, F, Ros, R, Strunz, T, Anselmetti, D, Güntherodt, H. J, Honegger, A, Jermutus, L,

26

Tiefenauer, L, & Plückthun, A. Unbinding forces of single antibody-antigen complexes correlate
with their thermal dissociation rates. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 9972–9977.
[33] Marshall, B. T, Long, M, Piper, J. W, Yago, T, McEver, R. P, & Zhu, C. Direct observation of
catch bonds involving cell-adhesion molecules. (2003) Nature 423, 190–193.
[34] Nevo, R, Stroh, C, Kienberger, F, Kaftan, D, Brumfeld, V, Elbaum, M, Reich, Z, & Hinterdorfer,
P. A molecular switch between alternative conformational states in the complex of Ran and
importin β 1. (2003) Nature. Struct. Biol. 10, 553–557.
[35] Fernandez, J. M & Li, H. Force-clamp spectroscopy monitors the folding trajectory of a single
protein. (2004) Science 303, 1674–1678.
[36] Jarzynski, C. Nonequilibrium equality for free energy differences. (1997) Phys. Rev. Lett. 78,
2690.
[37] Crooks, G. E. Entropy production fluctuation theorem and the nonequilibrium work relation for
free energy differences. (1999) Phys. Rev. E 60, 2721 – 2726.
[38] Liphardt, J, Dumont, S, Smith, S. B, Tinoco, Jr., I, & Bustamante, C. Equilibrium information
from nonequilibrium measurements in an experimental test of Jarzynski’s equality. (2002) Science
296, 1832–1835.
[39] Trepagnier, E. H, Jarzynski, C, Ritort, F, Crooks, G. E, Bustamante, C. J, & Liphardt, J. Experimental test of Hatano and Sasa’s nonequilibrium steady-state equality. (2004) Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 101, 15038–15041.
[40] Yang, W. Y & Gruebele, M. Folding at the speed limit. (2003) Nature 423, 193 – 197.
[41] Hyeon, C & Thirumalai, D. Can energy landscape roughness of proteins and RNA be measured by
using mechanical unfolding experiments? (2003) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 10249–10253.
[42] Nevo, R, Brumfeld, V, Kapon, R, Hinterdorfer, P, & Reich, Z. Direct measurement of protein
energy landscape roughness. (2005) EMBO reports 6, 482.
[43] Schlierf, M & Rief, M. Temperature softening of a protein in single-molecule experiments. (2005)
J. Mol. Biol. 354, 497–503.
[44] Hyeon, C & Thirumalai, D. Forced-unfolding and force-quench refolding of RNA hairpins. (2006)
Biophys. J. 90, 3410–3427.
[45] Hyeon, C & Thirumalai, D. Mechanical unfolding of RNA hairpins. (2005) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 102, 6789–6794.

27

[46] Lacks, D. J. Energy Landscape Distortions and the Mechanical Unfolding of Proteins. (2005)
Biophys. J. 88, 3494–3501.
[47] West, D. K, Brockwell, D. J, Olmsted, P. D, Radford, S. E, & Paci, E. Mechanical Resistance of
Proteins Explained Using Simple Molecular Models. (2006) Biophys. J. 90, 287–297.
[48] Derenyi, I, Bartolo, D, & Ajdari, A. Effects of intermediate bound states in dynamic force spectroscopy. (2004) Biophys. J. 86, 1263–1269.
[49] Bell, G. I. Models for the specific adhesion of cells to cells. (1978) Science 200, 618–627.
[50] Evans, E & Ritchie, K. Dynamic Strength of Molecular Adhesion Bonds. (1997) Biophys. J. 72,
1541–1555.
[51] Dudko, O. K, Filippov, A. E, Klafter, J, & Urbakh, M. Beyond the conventional description
of dynamic force spectroscopy of adhesion bonds. (2003) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100,
11378–11381.
[52] Hummer, G & Szabo, A. Kinetics from Nonequilibrium Single-Molecule Pulling Experiments.
(2003) Biophys. J. 85, 5–15.
[53] Barsegov, V & Thirumalai, D. Probing protein-protein interactions by dynamic force correlation
spectroscopy. (2005) Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 168302.
[54] Barsegov, V, Klimov, D. K, & Thirumalai, D. Mapping the energy landscape of biomolecules
using single molecule force correlation spectroscopy: Theory and applications. (2006) Biophys. J.
90, 3827–3841.
[55] Treiber, D. K & Williamson, J. R. Beyond kinetic traps in RNA folding. (2001) Curr. Opin.
Struct. Biol. 11, 309–314.
[56] Fisher, T. E, Marszalek, P. E, & Fernandez, J. M. Stretching single molecules into novel conformations using the atomic force microscope. (2000) Nature Struct. Biol. 7, 719–724.
[57] Visscher, K, Schnitzer, M. J, & Block, S. M. Single kinesin molecules studied with a molecular
force clamp. (1999) Nature 400, 184–187.
[58] Schlierf, M, Li, H, & Fernandez, J. M. The unfolding kinetics of ubiquitin captured with singlemolecule force-clamp techniques. (2004) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 7299–7304.
[59] Brujić, J, Hermans Z, R. I, Walther, K. A, & Fernandez, J. M. Single-molecule force spectroscopy
reveals signatures of glassy dynamics in the energy landscape of ubiquitin. (2006) Nature Physics
2, 282–286.

28

[60] Marko, J. F & Siggia, E. D. Bending and Twisting Elasticity of DNA. (1996) Macromolecules 27,
981–988.
[61] Kellermeyer, M. Z, Smith, S. B, Granzier, H. L, & Bustamante, C. Folding-Unfolding Transitions
in Single Titin Molecules Characterized by Force-Measuring Laser Tweezers. (1997) Science 276,
1112–1116.
[62] Klimov, D. K & Thirumalai, D. Lattice model studies of force-induced unfolding of protein. (2001)
J. Phys. Chem. B 105, 6648–6654.
[63] Klimov, D. K & Thirumalai, D. Native topology determines force-induced unfolding pathways in
globular proteins. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 7254–7259.
[64] Zhurkov, S. N. Kinetic concept of the strength of solids. (1965) Intl. J. Fracture Mech. 1, 311–322.
[65] Eyring, H. The activated complex in chemical reactions. (1935) J. Chem. Phys. 3, 107–115.
[66] Barsegov, V & Thirumalai, D. Dynamics of unbinding of cell adhesion molecules: Transition from
catch to slip bonds. (2005) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 1835–1839.
[67] Dudko, O. K, Hummer, G, & Szabo, A. Intrinsic rates and activation free energies from singlemolecule pulling experiments. (2006) Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 108101.
[68] Zwanzig, R. Ensemble method in the theory of irreversibility. (1960) J. Chem. Phys. 33, 1338–
1341.
[69] Zwanzig, R. (2001) Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics. (Oxford University press, New York).
[70] Kramers, H. A. Brownian motion a field of force and the diffusion model of chemical reaction.
(1940) Physica 7, 284–304.
[71] Hanggi, P, Talkner, P, & Borkovec, M. Reaction-rate theory: fifty years after Kramers. (1990)
Rev. Mod. Phys. 62, 251–341.
[72] Manosas, M, Collin, D, & Ritort, F. Force-dependent fragility in RNA hairpins. (2006) Phys.
Rev. Lett. 96, 218301.
[73] Schlierf, M & Rief, M. Single-molecule unfolding force distributions reveal a funnel-shaped energy
landscape. (2006) Biophys. J. 90, L33–35L.
[74] Hyeon, C & Thirumalai, D. Multiple barriers in forced rupture of protein complexes. (2012) J.
Chem. Phys. 137, 055103.
[75] Lide, D. R. (1995) Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. (CRC press, Boca Raton, FL), 76th
edition, pp. 6–10.

29

[76] Hammond, G. S. A correlation of reaction rates. (1953) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 77, 334–338.
[77] Leffler, J. E. Parameters for the description of transition states. (1953) Science 117, 340–341.
[78] Matouschek, A, Otzen, D. E, Itzaki, L, Jackson, S. E, & Fersht, A. R. Movement of the position
of the transition state in protein folding. (1995) Biochemistry 34, 13656–13662.
[79] Dalby, P. A, Oliveberg, M, & Fersht, A. R. Movement of the Intermediate and Rate Determining Transition State of Barnase on the Energy Landscape with Changing Temperature. (1998)
Biochemistry 37, 4674 –4679.
[80] G. Pappenberger, C. S, Becker, M, & amd T. Kiefhaber, A. E. M. Denaturant-induced movement
of the transition state of protein folding revealed by high-pressure stopped-flow measurements.
(2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 17–22.
[81] Klosek, M. M, Matkowsky, B. J, & Schuss, Z. Kramers problem in the turnover regime - The role
of the stochastic separatrix. (1991) Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem. 95, 331.
[82] Morrison, G, Hyeon, C, Hinczewski, M, & Thirumalai, D. Compaction and Tensile Forces Determine the Accuracy of Folding Landscape Parameters from Single Molecule Pulling Experiments.
(2011) Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 138102.
[83] Ingber, D. E. Tensegrity I. Cell structure and hierarchical systems biology. (2003) J. Cell. Sci.
116, 1157–1173.
[84] Edwards, S. A, Wagner, J, & Gräter, F. Dynamic prestress in a globular protein. (2012) PLoS
Comp. Biol. 8, e1002509.
[85] Fuller, B. Tensegrity. (1961) Protfolio Artnews Annual 4, 112–127.
[86] Lin, J.-C, Hyeon, C, & Thirumalai, D. Rna under tension: Folding landscapes, kinetic partitioning
mechanism, and molecular tensegrity. (2012) J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 3, 3616–3625.
[87] Zwanzig, R. Dynamic disorder: Passage through a fluctuating bottleneck. (1992) J. Chem. Phys.
97, 3587–3589.
[88] Zwanzig, R. Rate processes with dynamical disorder. (1990) Acc. Chem. Res. 23, 148–152.
[89] Hyeon, C & Thirumalai, D. Multiple probes are required to explore and control the rugged energy
landscape of RNA hairpins. (2008) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 1538–1539.
[90] Hyeon, C, Dima, R. I, & Thirumalai, D. Pathways and kinetic barriers in mechanical unfolding
and refolding of RNA and proteins. (2006) Structure 14, 1633–1645.
[91] Hinczewski, M, Chrostof, J, Gebhardt, M, & Thirumalai, D. From mechanical folding trajectories

30

to intrinsic energy landscapes of biopolymers. (2013) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 4500.
[92] Vetter, I. R, Arndt, A, Kutay, U, Görlich, D, & Wittinghofer, A. Structural View of the RanImportin β Interaction at 2.3 Å Resolution. (1999) Cell 97, 635–646.
[93] Greenleaf, W. J, Frieda, K. L, Foster, D. A. N, Woodside, M. T, & Block, S. M. Direct observation
of hierarchical folding in single riboswitch aptamers. (2008) Science 319, 630–633.

31

Figure Caption

Figure 1 : Caricature of the rough energy landscape of proteins and RNA that fold in an
apparent ”two-state” manner using extension x, the coordinate that is conjugate to force f .
Under force f , the zero-force free energy profile (F0 (x)) is tilted by f × x and gives rise to the
free energy profile, F (x). In order to clarify the derivation of Eq.7 we have explicitly indicated
the average location of the relevant parameters.

Figure 2 : Dynamic force spectroscopy measurements of single imp-β-RanGppNHp pairs
at different temperatures. A. Distributions of measured unbinding forces using AFM for the
lower-strength conformation of the complex at different loading rates at 7 and 32 o C. Roughness
acts to increase the separation between the distributions recorded at different temperatures.
The histograms are fit using Gaussian distributions. The width of the bins represents the
thermal noise of the cantilever. B. Force spectra used in the analysis. The most probable
unbinding forces f ∗ are plotted as a function of log(rf ). The maximal error is ±10% because of
uncertainities in determining the spring constant of the cantilevers. Statistical significance of
the differences between the slopes of the spectra was confirmed using covariance test. (Images
courtesy of Reinat Nevo and Ziv Reich [42]). C. Ran-importinβ complex crystal structures
(PDB id: 1IBR [92]) in surface (left) and ribbon (right) representations. In AFM experiments,
Ran (red) protein complexed to importinβ (yellow) is pulled until the dissociation of the
complex takes place.

Figure 3 : Dynamic force spectroscopy analysis using two different free energy models.
From the top to bottom, (top) free energy profiles at different forces, (middle) rupture force
distributions, and (bottom) relationship of most probable force as a function of log-loading
rates are shown for (A) hard and (B) soft potentials. For hard potential, free energy profile
in the absence of force is F0 (x) = −V0 |(x + 1)2 − ξ 2 | with V0 = 20 pN/nm, ξ = 4 nm, and
x ≥ 0. The lack of change in xts as f changes shows a brittle response under tension. For soft
potential, free energy profile in the absence of force is F0 (x) = −V0 exp (−ξx) with V0 = 82.8
pN·nm, ξ = 4 (nm)−1 . The lack of change in xts as f changes shows a brittle response under
tension. For emphasis on the soft response of the potential, the position of TS at each force

32

value is indicated with arrows. C. By tuning the value of ξ (see Eq. (23)) as a function of
temperature, Hammond and anti-Hammond behaviors emerge in the context of force spectra
in the free energy profiles that show hard and soft responses. The condition for Hammond or
anti-Hammond behavior depends on α (Eq. (23)).

Figure 5: Fluctuating bottleneck model under an external force. Gating dynamics of
receptor protein conformation with frequency λ can interfere with the dynamics of ligand
unbinding if the unbinding rate (k) is comparable or slower than λ.

Figure 4: A. Time trace of end-to-end distance (R) of RNA hairpin at transition midforce
fm = 14.7 pN (left). The corresponding free energy profile in terms of R, F (R) (right). The
positions of native, unfolded, and transition states are marked with arrows. In addition, barrier
height (∆F ‡ ) and the curvature of the unfolded state (kU ) are also shown on the F (R). B. Time
trajectories of simulations starting from the configurations of the transition state ensemble
(shown on the left). Trajectories reaching the folded and unfolded state at 2.0 and 7.5 nm are
colored in blue and red, respectively. In the blue trajectories, a number of recrossing events
can be observed. C. Tensegrity parameters calculated for four DNA hairpins with different
sequences in Ref. [93] are related to Punf old . The DNA hairpin with sequence B is predicted
to have Punf old most proximal to 0.5, which suggests that the free energy profile calculated in
terms of end-to-end distance coordinate most accurately describes the dynamics of this DNA
hairpin.

Figure 6 : A. A sample refolding trajectory of a RNA hairpin starting from the stretched
state. The hairpin was, at first, mechanically unfolded to a fully stretched state and the force
was subsequently quenched to zero at t ≈ 20 µs. The time-dependence of the end-to-end
distance shows that force-quench refolding occurs in steps. B. The deviation of the dihedral
angles from their values in the native state as a function of time shows large departures from
native values of the dihedral angles in loop region (indicated by the red strip). Note that this
strip disappears around t ≈ 300 µs, which coincides with the formation of bonds shown in C. fB
is the fraction of bonds in pink that indicates that the bond is fully formed. D. The histograms
collected from the projections of twelve stretching and force-quench refolding trajectories on the
33

two dimensional plane characterized by the end-to-end distance (R) and the average correctness
of dihedral angles (h1 − cos (φ − φ0 )i) around the loop region (i = 19 − 24). The scale on the
right gives the density of points in the two dimensional projection. This panel shows that the
local dihedral angles are coupled to the end-to-end distance R, and hence extension alone is not
a good reaction coordinate especially in force-quench refolding. The molecular extension x is
related to R by x = R − RN where RN is the distance in the folded state.

34

J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 19 (2007) 113101

T

x=a
x=xts
x=xb

F(x)

x=b

NBA

x

UBA

Figure 1. Caricature of the rough energy landscape of proteins and RNA that fold
FIG.using
1: extension x , the coordinate that is conjugate to force f .
‘two state’ manner
the zero force free energy profile ( F0 (x)) is tilted by f × x and gives rise to the free
F(x). In order to clarify the derivation of equation (8) we have explicitly indicat
location of the relevant parameters.

Following footnote 45 in [8] the overall transit time from the unfolded basin may b
! ∞
2
2
2 2
τU →F ≈ τ (β)
d# eβ# e−# /2# ≈ τ (β)eβ # /2
kB T

where # is the average value of ruggedness, and β = kB1T . The second part of the eq
good at low temperatures. The additional slowing down in the folding time τU →F ,
the second term in equation (1), was derived in an elegant paper by Zwanzig [9] a
obtained in [10] by analysing the dynamics of Derrida’s random energy model [1
‡
small then τU →F ≈ τ0 eβ$F where $F ‡ is the overall folding free energy barrier.
If folding takes place by a diffusive process in a rough energy landscape, suc
in figure 1, then the characteristic scale dependent time for formation of local
structures) and global (tertiary structure) formation may be estimated as
"
τ S S ≈ (10–100) ns
l ≈ (1–2) nm
τ (l) ≈
τU →F
l≈L

where L is the effective contour length of the biomolecule. We have assumed th
on l ≈ (1–2) nm (length scale in which roughness is most prevalent as in figure
−6
−7
2 −1
τ S S ≈ l 2 /D where the diffusion
35 constant is on the order of (10 –10 ) cm s . T
of τ S S is not inconsistent with the time needed to form α -helices or β -hairpin espe
the crude physical picture.

J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 19 (2007) 113101

Topical Review

B

A

C

Figure 3. Dynamic force spectroscopy measurements of single imp-β -RanGppNHp pairs at
different temperatures. A. Distributions
FIG. 2:of measured unbinding forces using AFM for the lower
strength conformation of the complex at different loading rates at 7 and 32 ◦ C. Roughness acts to
increase the separation between the distributions recorded at different temperatures. The histograms
are fitted using Gaussian distributions. The width of the bins represents the thermal noise of the
cantilever. (B) Force spectra used in the analysis. The most probable unbinding forces f ∗ are plotted
as a function of log(r f ). The maximal error is ±10% because of uncertainties in determining the
spring constant of the cantilevers. Statistical significance of the differences between the slopes of the
spectra was confirmed using covariance test. (Images courtesy of Reinat Nevo and Ziv Reich [42]).
(C) Ran-importinβ complex crystal structures (PDB id: 1IBR [86]) in surface (left) and ribbon
(right) representations. In AFM experiments, Ran (yellow) protein complexed to importin β (red)
is pulled until the dissociation of the complex takes place.

is loaded with non-hydrolysable GTP analogue (figure 3(C)). The Ran-imp-β complex was
immobilized on a mica surface and the unbinding forces of complex were measured by pulling
Ran attached to the tip of AFM at three values of r f that varied by nearly three orders of
magnitude. At high values of r f the values of f ∗ increases as T increases. At lower loading
rates (r f ! 2 × 103 pN s−1 ), however, f ∗ decreases as T increases (see figure 3-B). The data
over distinct temperatures were used to extract, for the first time, an estimate of " . The values
of f ∗ at three temperatures (7, 20, 32 ◦ C) and equation (17) were used to obtain " ≈ 5–6kB T .
Nevo et al explicitly showed that the values of " were nearly the same from the nine pairs of
data extracted from the f ∗ versus log r f curves. Interestingly, the estimated value of " is about
0.2#F0‡ where #F0‡ is the major barrier for unbinding of the complex. This shows that, for
this complex, the free energy in terms of a one dimensional coordinate resembles the profile
shown in figure 1. It is worth remarking that the location of the transition state decreases from

36

11

J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 19 (2007) 113101

A

J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 19 (2007)
113101
Topical
Review

Topical Review

B
J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 19 (2007) 113101

C

Topical Review

Hard

Hammond

60

40

40

20

20

0
80

100
0

anti-Hammond

f* [pN]
f* [pN]

80

60

80

60

60

40

40

20
0
-15

Soft

100

80

T=280K
T=290K
T=300K
T=310K
T=320K

20
-10

-5

0

log(rf)

5

10

15

0

-8

-4

0

4

log(rf)

8

12

Figure 6. By tuning the value of ξ (see equation (23)) as a function of temperature, Hammond and
anti-Hammond behaviours emerge in the context of force spectra in the free energy profiles that
show hard and soft responses. The condition for Hammond or anti-Hammond behaviour depends
on α (equation (23)).

decreases as T increases. However, the most probable unbinding force f ∗ at low temperatures
can be larger or smaller than f ∗ at high temperatures depending on the loading rate (see upper
right corner of figure 6). A very similar behaviour has been observed in the forced unbinding
of Ran-impβ complex
(see
also profile
figure 3(B)). Although the model free energy profiles can
5. Dynamic
for soft response
to f using
the f =[42]
0 free
energy
Figure 4. Dynamic force spectroscopy analysis using a modelFigure
free energy
profile force
F0 (x)spectroscopy
=
−1 , ξ = 4 (nm)−1 . (A) Effective free energy
−Vlack
x) with
−V0 |(x + 1)2 − ξ 2 | with V0 = 20 pN nm−1 , ξ = 4 nm, and xF0!(x)0. =The
of(−ξ
change
in V0 = 82.8 pN nm
0 exp
produce
a wide range of behaviour depending on T , f , and r f the challenge is to provide a
xts as f changes shows a hard response under tension. (A) Effective
free energy
( F(x)) atof f . For emphasis structural
as a function
on the soft basis
response
of
the
potential,
the
position
profile
( F(x))profile
for the measurements on biomolecules.

rates.
(C) value
Plot ofisthe
various values of f . (B) Distributions of unbinding forces at different
of loading
TS at each
force
indicated with arrows. (B) Distributions of unbinding forces at varying
most probable unbinding force ( f ∗ ) versus log r f .
loading rates. (C) Plot of most probable unbinding force ( f ∗ ) versus log r f . The slope of the tangent

FIG. 3:

at each loading rate value varies substantially, which suggests the variation in the TS (inset) as r f
8. Multidimensionality of energy landscape coupled to ‘memory’ affect the force
changes.

dynamics

The natural one dimensional reaction coordinate in mechanical unfolding experiments is the
energy
in the
absencecurvature
of force using
plot is almost linear. The slight deviation from linearity
is duepotential
to the force
dependent
extension x of the molecule. However, local rupture events can couple to x , which would
near the bound state (ωb ( f )). From the slope we find that #x ≈ 1 nm which is expected from
F0 (x) = −V0 exp (−ξ−1x)
with x !
0
(23)
require
a multidimensional description.
For example, consider the case of forced unfolding
equation (22). In addition, we obtained from the intercept in figure 4(C) that κ = 1.58 s .
of a nucleic
acid hairpin.
−1
−
1
The value of κ[≡ k( f = 0)] directly computed usingwhere
equation
(10)
= nm
1.49and
s ξ. The
V0 =
82is.8κpN
= 4 two
(nm) . The numerically
computed
P( f ) andThe
[ f ∗opening
, log r f ]of a given base pair is dependent not only on its
strength, which resists unfolding, but also on the increase in the available conformational
values agree quite well. Thus, for brittle response theplots
Bell model
is expected
accurate.
are shown
figure to
5. be
The
slope of the [ f ∗ , log r f ] plot is no longer constant but increases
space which favours unfolding. In this case fluctuations in the collective coordinates, which
Soft response: If the position of the TS sensitively
moves withasforce
the biomolecule
or
continuously
r f increases.
The extrapolated
value of κ to zero f varies greatly depending
describe the local events, are coupled to the global coordinate x . Thus, suitable fluctuations
the complex is soft or plastic. To illustrate the behaviour
of range
soft molecules
weEven
modelinthe
on the
of r f used.
thefree
experimentally accessible
range
of r f there
is to
curvature
in an increase in the extension is observed. Such
in the local
coordinate
r has
occur before
the [ f ∗ , log r f ] plot. Thus, unlike the15parameters (#x ,a κcoupling
) in the example
of a brittle
potential,
between local
coordinates
and global observable arises naturally in many physical
all the extracted parameters from the force profile are situations
strongly dependent
the loading
rate.
[83]. In theon
context
of ligand
binding to myoglobin Zwanzig first proposed such a
model by assuming that reaction (binding) takes place along x coordinate and at the barrier
16
top (x = x ts ) the reactivity is determined by the cross section of bottleneck described by r
coordinate [84]. We adopt a similar picture to describe the modifications when such a process
18

37

The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters
The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters

Perspective
Perspective

A

e Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters

Perspective

B

Figure 3.
(a) Time
end-to-end
distance
(R) of(R)
RNA
at transition
midforce
f m = f14.7
pN (left).
TheThe
corresponding
freefree
energy
proﬁle
Figure
3. (a)trace
Timeoftrace
of end-to-end
distance
of hairpin
RNA hairpin
at transition
midforce
pN (left).
corresponding
energy
proﬁle
m = 14.7
‡ ‡
) and
thethe
in termsinofterms
R, F(R)
The positions
of native,
unfolded,
and transition
statesstates
are marked
with with
arrows.
In addition,
barrier
height
(ΔF(ΔF
) and
of R,(right).
F(R) (right).
The positions
of native,
unfolded,
and transition
are marked
arrows.
In addition,
barrier
height
on theonF(R).
(b) Time
trajectories
of simulations
starting
fromfrom
the the
conﬁgurations
of the
curvature
of the of
unfolded
state (kstate
) areshown
also shown
the F(R).
(b) Time
trajectories
of simulations
starting
conﬁgurations
of the
curvature
the unfolded
(kUalso
U) are
transition
state ensemble
(shown(shown
on theon
left).
reaching
the folded
and unfolded
statestate
at 2.0at and
7.5 nm
are are
colored
in blue
andand
red,red,
transition
state ensemble
the Trajectories
left). Trajectories
reaching
the folded
and unfolded
2.0 and
7.5 nm
colored
in blue
respectively.
In the
blue trajectories,
a number
of recrossing
be observed.
The ﬁgures
are adapted
permission
29 (Copyright
respectively.
In the blue
trajectories,
a number
of recrossing
eventsevents
can becan
observed.
The ﬁgures
are adapted
withwith
permission
fromfrom
refsrefs
29 (Copyright
2005 National
Academy
of Sciences)
30 (Copyright
American
Chemical
Society).
2005 National
Academy
of Sciences)
and 30and
(Copyright
2008 2008
American
Chemical
Society).

C

of attraction
(UBA)
thanthe
near
the tetra-loop
(I,fSLand
, ITSL,ILL
andstates
ILL states
in Figure
τU.15,38,39
Accurate
F(R)
proﬁles
of attraction
(UBA)
τF =ττF U=.15,38,39
than near
tetra-loop
(IfSL, ITSL
in Figure
2b). 2b). basinbasin
Accurate
F(R)
proﬁles
‡ΔF‡ and R , both of
Consequently,
the
pathway
diversity
is
greater
when
hairpin
give
estimates
of
the
free
energy
barrier,
Consequently, the pathway diversity is greater when hairpin
both of
give estimates of the free energy barrier, ΔF and RTS, TS
formation
is initiated
by T-quench
f-quench.
functions
f. The
accuracy
these
estimates
formation
is initiated
by T-quench
ratherrather
than than
f-quench.
The The whichwhich
are are
functions
of f.of The
accuracy
of of
these
estimates
diﬀerences
in
the
folding
mechanism
between
these
two
depends
on
the
assumption
that
R
is
a
good
reaction
diﬀerences in the folding mechanism between these two
depends on the assumption that R is a good reaction
methods
to
trigger
hairpin
formation
are
entirely
due
to
the
coordinate,
no information
is lost
in converting
methods to trigger hairpin formation are entirely due to the
coordinate,
and and
that that
no information
is lost
in converting
thethe
variations
the initial
conformations.
Exploring
the details
(t)
as
a
function
of
measured
folding
trajectories
(R
sys
variations
in the in
initial
conformations.
Exploring
the details
of of measured
to to
folding trajectories (Rsys(t) as a function of t) t)
the
heterogeneous
kinetics
requires
multiple
probes
that
F(R).
the heterogeneous kinetics requires multiple probes that
F(R).
the conformations
the ensemble
of unfolded
There
limitations
prevent
extraction
controlcontrol
the conformations
of theofensemble
of unfolded
states.states. There
are are
two two
limitations
thatthat
prevent
extraction
of of
thethe
Our
studies
also
showed
that
the
complexity
of
energy
complete
shape
of
F(R).
First,
the
probability
P(R
) of
Our studies also showed that the complexity of energy
complete shape of F(R). First, the probability P(RTS)TSof
landscape
observed
in
ribozyme
experiments
is
already
reﬂected
reaching
the
transition
state
is
small,
making
it
diﬃcult
landscape observed in ribozyme experiments is already reﬂected
reaching the transition state is small, making it diﬃcult to to
in the formation of simple RNA hairpins.
obtain data in the neighborhood of RTS. Second, the inferred
in the formation of simple RNA hairpins.
data in the neighborhood of RTS. Second, the inferred
Folding Landscapes f rom Pulling Experiments. Besides yielding obtain
proﬁles
hide the possibility that there is roughness (on the
Folding Landscapes f rom Pulling Experiments. Besides yielding
proﬁles
hide the possibility that there is roughness (on the
stability and hopping rates between various states, singlelength scale corresponding to base pair rupture) superimposed
stability and hopping rates between various states, singlescale corresponding to base pair rupture) superimposed
molecule pulling experiments have been used to obtain one- length
on the smooth F(R). These limitations were recently overcome
molecule
pulling
experiments
have
been
used
to
obtain
oneF(R).
These limitations
were recently
overcome
dimensional
freedistance
energy proﬁles
as aoffunction
of R. Itunder
shouldgradually
be on the
in smooth
ingenious
experiments
on DNA
hairpins
by La of
Porta
and co- is
ure
4. (a)
End-to-end
dynamics
DNA
hairpin
increasing
harmonic
constraint.
Gradual
change
R-dynamics
dimensional
free
energy
proﬁles
as
a
function
of
R.
It
should
be
in
ingenious
experiments
on
DNA
hairpins
by
La
Porta
and co31
that trajectory
the only trajectory.
directly measurable
in LOT by using
who
used
a
harmonic
constraint
to
restrict
R at
tothe
workers,
cted in noted
the folding
Free energyquantities
proﬁle reconstructed
the
harmonic
constraining
method
(umbrella
sampling)
31
noted experiments
that the only
measurable quantities
who
usedfor
a with
harmonic
constraint
toincollect
restrict
to to
FIG.workers,
4:forarbitrary
are directly
the
time-dependent
changesparameters
inintheLOT
distance
sition midforce
is shown
on the
right. (b) Tensegrity
calculated
four DNA
hairpins
sequences
ref 17 excellent
isRrelated
values
longdiﬀerent
enough
times to
experiments
arethe
thebeads,
time-dependent
changes
the
distancemost
arbitrary
for
long
enough
times
toP(R)
collect
between
Rsys(t) (Figure
1b), atinatoﬁxed
is of proximal
B is predicted
havef. PWhat
tovalues
0.5,sowhich
that
the
freeofenergy
proﬁle
calculated
statistics
that suggests
reliable
estimates
couldexcellent
be made in
ld. The DNA hairpin with sequence
unfold
between
the
beads,
R
(t)
(Figure
1b),
at
a
ﬁxed
f.
What
is
of
statistics
that
reliable
estimates
of
P(R)
could
be
made
sys coordinate
interest, however,
is the free most
energy
proﬁle, F(R)
as a the
function
ms of end-to-end
distance
accurately
describes
dynamics
of(Figure
this so
DNA
hairpin.
The
ﬁgure
is
adapted
with
permission
from refs
4a). This method, which is an experimental realization
interest,
is the free
energy
as R
a sys
function
4a).
This
method,
which
is
an
experimental
realization
ofhowever,
R.2006
The American
complicated
problemproﬁle,
of going
from
(t) of
to Science)
P(R), (Figure
Copyright
Association
for
theF(R)
Advancement
andof45
(copyright
2011
American
Physical
Society).
the popular umbrella sampling used in computer simulations
of R. The
problem
of goingis from
Rsys(t)
to P(R),
umbrella sampling
computer
simulations
the complicated
probability that
the extension
between
R and
R + dR by of thetopopular
obtain potentials
of mean used
force,inrevealed
ﬁne
structure in
the
probability
that
the
extension
is
between
R
and
R
+
dR
by
R
∞
accounting
for
ﬂuctuations
of
the
semiﬂexible
polymer
handles
to
obtain
potentials
of
mean
force,
revealed
ﬁne
structure
in on
U The superimposed ﬁne structure
F(R)
for
DNA
hairpins.
ence of handles and beads? Although this question has not 27
1
−1
βF(x)
−βF(y)
38 F(R)k(for
accounting
for ﬂuctuations
ofbeen
the semiﬂexible
polymer
handles
f
)
=
d
x
e
d
y
e
and
bead
motions,
has
solved
using
a
number
of
ad
hoc
DNAinferred
hairpins.
The superimposed
ﬁne
structure
on
previously
smooth
proﬁles perhaps
reﬂects
the rupture
n fully answered, several groups routinely
use the measured
36 a number
DU →smooth
x
(1)
F
and bead
has been solved
using
of adP(R)
hoc27
F R4a),
andmotions,
precise theoretical
methods.
Assuming that
can be previously
inferred
proﬁles
perhaps
reﬂects
the
rupture
of
base
pairs
(Figure
which
manifests
itself
as
“roughness”
36(between the folded and
) and
the
hopping
kinetics
and
precise
theoretical
methods.
Assuming
that
P(R)
can
be
extracted from Rsys(t), the free energy proﬁle can be computed of base
pairs
(Figure 4a), which
manifests
itself this
as “roughness”
in the
folding
importantly,
studyfrom
showed
olded states in the case
of a hairpin) at ﬁnite f to extract
provided
that thelandscape.
diﬀusionMore
coeﬃcient
for transition
U→

∫

∫

kr12

f

λ

kr22

f

FIG. 5:

J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 19 (2007) 113101

Topical Review

Figure 7. (A) A sample refolding trajectory
FIG. 6: of a RNA hairpin starting from the stretched state. The
hairpin was, at first, mechanically unfolded to a fully stretched state and the force was subsequently
quenched to zero at t ≈ 20 µs. The time dependence of the end-to-end distance shows that forcequench refolding occurs in steps. (B) The deviation of the dihedral angles from their values in the
native state as a function of time shows large departures from native values of the dihedral angles
in loop region (indicated by the red strip). Note that this strip disappears around t ≈ 300 µs, which
coincides with the formation of bonds39
shown in (C) f B is the fraction of bonds in pink that indicates
that the bond is fully formed. (D) The histograms collected from the projections of twelve stretching
and force-quench refolding trajectories on the two dimensional plane characterized by the end-to0

