Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Structural Transitions and Energy Landscape for Cowpea Chlorotic Mottle
Virus Capsid mechanics from nanomanipulation in vitro and in silico*
Olga Kononova,†‡ Joost Snijder,§ Melanie Brasch, ¶ Jeroen Cornelissen, ¶ Ruxandra I. Dima, ||
Kenneth A. Marx, † Gijs J. L. Wuite,§ Wouter H. Roos§* and Valeri Barsegov†‡*
†

Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts, Lowell, MA 01854; ‡Moscow Institute
of Physics and Technology, Moscow Region, Russia 141700; §Natuur- en Sterrenkunde and
LaserLab, Vrije Universiteit, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands; ¶Biomoleculaire
Nanotechnology, Universiteit Twente, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands; ||Department of
Chemistry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221.
Running Title: Mechanical properties of CCMV capsid
*

Corresponding authors:
e-mail: Valeri_Barsegov@uml.edu, tel: 978-934-3661, fax: 978-94-3013
e-mail: wroos@few.vu.nl, tel: +31 20 59 83974, fax: +31 20 59 87991
Keywords: Biophysics, GPU computing, Nanoindentation, Proteins, Viral Capsids

ABSTRACT
Physical properties of capsids of plant and animal viruses are important factors in capsid selfassembly, survival of viruses in the extracellular environment, and their cell infectivity. Virus
shells can have applications as nanocontainers and delivery vehicles in biotechnology and
medicine. Combined AFM experiments and computational modeling on sub-second timescales
of the indentation nanomechanics of Cowpea Chlorotic Mottle Virus (CCMV) capsid show that
the capsid’s physical properties are dynamic and local characteristics of the structure, which
depend on the magnitude and geometry of mechanical input. Surprisingly, under large
deformations the CCMV capsid transitions to the collapsed state without substantial local
structural alterations. The enthalpy change in this deformation state ΔH = 11.5 – 12.8 MJ/mol is
mostly due to large-amplitude out-of-plane excitations, which contribute to the capsid bending,
and the entropy change TΔS = 5.1 - 5.8 MJ/mol is mostly due to coherent in-plane
rearrangements of protein chains, which result in the capsid stiffening. Dynamic coupling of
these modes defines the extent of elasticity and reversibility of capsid mechanical deformation.
This emerging picture illuminates how unique physico-chemical properties of protein nanoshells
help define their structure and morphology, and determine their viruses’ biological function.
INTRODUCTION
Hierarchical supramolecular systems that spontaneously assemble, disassemble and self-repair
play fundamental roles in biology. Prime examples are viral capsids, which exhibit pronounced
features such as shape alteration, viscoelasticity, and materials fatigue. Understanding the
microscopic structural origin of the physico-chemical properties of these biological assemblies
1

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

and the mechanisms of their response to controlled mechanical inputs, remains a key research
challenge. Beyond a fundamental understanding of these issues, there is a rapidly increasing
interest in protein nanoshells for applications in biotechnology and nanomedicine. Recently,
single-molecule techniques, such as Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), have become available to
explore physical properties of biological assemblies (1,2). This triggered tremendous research
effort to characterize a variety of protein shells of plant and animal viruses, and bacteriophages.
AFM based mechanical testing of viral capsids has now become the main tool to probe the
physico-chemical and materials properties of viruses (3). For example, AFM deformation
experiments yield information on the particle spring constant, reversibility of deformation, and
forces required to distort capsid structures.
A variety of viruses have been tested by this method including the bacteriophages Φ29, λ
and HK97 (4-6), the human viruses Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Noro Virus, Hepatitis B
Virus, Adeno Virus and Herpes Simplex Virus (7-13) and other eukaryotic cell infecting viruses
like Minute Virus of Mice, Triatoma Virus and Cowpea Chlorotic Mottle Virus (14-16). These
experiments reveal a truly amazing diversity of mechanical properties of viruses. Yet, due to
their high complexity (~104-105 amino acid residues), experimental results are difficult to
interpret without input from theoretical modeling. For biotechnological applications, it is
essential to have full control over structure-based physical properties of virus shells, but in most
instances a detailed knowledge of these properties is lacking.
Viral capsids possess modular architectures, but strong capsomer intermolecular
couplings modulate their properties. Consequently, the properties of the whole system (capsid)
might not be given by the sum of the properties of its structural units (capsomers) (17-20). Under
these circumstances, one cannot reconstruct the mechanical characteristics of the whole system
using only information about the physical properties of its components. Biomolecular
simulations have become indispensable for the theoretical exploration of the important
dynamical properties and states of biological assemblies (21-23). Yet, the large temporal band
width (ms-s) required limits the current theoretical capabilities. Theoretical studies employing
triangulation of spherical surfaces and bead-spring models of stretching and bending have been
used to probe the mechanical deformation and to test the mechanical limits of the shell (24,25).
Yet, questions remain concerning structural details and dynamical aspects of these properties.
How do discrete microscopic transitions give rise to the continuous mechanical response of a
capsid at the macroscopic level? What are the structural rearrangements that govern the capsid’s
transition from the elastic to plastic regime of the mechanical deformation?
To address these questions, alternative detailed simulation approaches are needed. Here
we feature a computational model, which is based upon the notion that the unique features
associated with native topology, rather than atomic details, govern the physico-chemical
properties of virus capsids. Our approach employs a topology based Self Organized Polymer
(SOP) model (26,27), which provides an accurate description of the polypeptide chain (28-30),
and high-performance computing accelerated on Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) (31,32).
Here, we show that by combining AFM-based force measurements with accurate biomolecular
simulations of forced indentation, we can obtain an in-depth understanding of the structural
transitions and mechanisms of the mechanical deformation and the transition to the collapsed
state in virus shells. On the theoretical side, the main challenge is to generate long (0.01 s – 0.1
s) dynamics of a virus particle using experimentally relevant force loads. Here, for the first time,
we directly compare the results of experiments and simulations obtained under similar conditions
2

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

of force application for the Cowpea Chlorotic Mottle Virus (CCMV) used as a model system
(15,33-38).
CCMV is a member of the Bromoviridae, an important family of single stranded RNA
plant viruses distributed worldwide that infect a range of hosts and are the cause of some major
crop epidemics (39). The capsid of CCMV is an icosahedral protein shell (triangulation number
T = 3) with an outer radius R = 13.2 nm and average shell thickness of 2.8 nm (3,40) consisting
of 180 copies of a single 190 amino acid long protein. The shell comprises 60 trimer structural
units and exhibits pentameric symmetry at the 12 vertices (pentamer capsomeres) and hexameric
symmetry at the 20 faces (hexamer capsomeres) of the icosahedron (Fig. 1). The excellent
agreement we demonstrated between experiments and simulations allowed us to describe the
structural properties of the CCMV capsid, devoid of nucleic acids, to unprecedented detail, and
to link the structural transitions in a protein shell with its mechanical properties. The insights into
the dynamics of forced compression and structural collapse of this specific viral capsid provide a
conceptual framework for describing the unique physico-chemical, thermodynamic and material
properties of other virus particles.
MATHERIALS AND METHODS
Protein preparation: Purified capsid preparations of empty CCMV particles were obtained
using the purification procedures described elsewhere (41). Briefly the procedure consists of
isolation of CCMV particles from cowpea plants 13 days after infection (42,43). After UV/Vis
spectroscopy characterization, Fast Protein Liquid Chromatography (FPLC) and running a
sample on SDS-PAGE to determine the size of the monomers, the virions were examined by
transmission electron microscopy. These measurements revealed that the CCMV particles had
the expected size of ~28 nm in diameter. The buffer conditions for the imaging and
nanoindentation experiments were 50 mM sodium acetate and 1 M sodium chloride (pH = 5.0).
Atomic Force Microscopy: Hydrophobic glass slides were treated with an alkylsilane (4).
The viral samples were kept under liquid conditions at all times; all the experiments were
performed at room temperature. Capsid solutions were incubated for ~30 minutes on the
hydrophobic glass slides prior to the indentation experiments. Olympus OMCL-RC800PSA
rectangular, silicon nitride cantilevers (nominal tip radius < 20 nm and spring constant = 0.05
N/m) were calibrated in air yielding a spring constant of κ = 0.0524 ± 0.002 N/m. Viral imaging
(44,45) and nanoindentation (3) were performed on a Nanotec Electronica AFM (Tres Cantos,
Spain). Experimental nanoindentation measurements were carried out using the cantilever
velocity vf = 0.6 and 6.0 μm/s. Additional measurements were performed at vf = 6.0×10-2 and
6.0×10-3 μm/s. The indentation data were analyzed using a home-written Labview program
(National Instruments) as described previously (38).
Self-Organized Polymer (SOP) Model: In the topology-based SOP model, each residue is
described by a single interaction center (Cα-atom). The potential energy function of the protein
conformation USOP specified in terms of the coordinates {ri} = r1, r2,…, rN (N is the total number
of residues) is given by U
. The finite extensible nonlinear elastic
 U
 U
 U
SOP

N 1

(FENE) potential

U

FENE

= 


i= 1

FENE

k
R
2

2
0



log 1 



ATT

REP

NB

NB

r

0

i, i + 1

 r i, i + 1
R

2
0



2






with the spring constant k = 14 N/m

and the tolerance in the change of a covalent bond distance R0 = 2 Å describes the backbone
3

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

chain connectivity. The distance between residues i and i+1, is ri,i+1, and r0i,i+1 is its value in the
native structure. We used the Lennard-Jones potential

U

ATT
NB







n

 r

0
ij

/ r ij



12



0

 2 r ij / r ij



6



ij

to

i, j 1 3

account for the non-covalent interactions that stabilize the native folded state. Here, the
summation is performed over all the native contacts in the PDB structure; we assumed that if the
non-covalently linked residues i and j (|i-j| > 2) are within the cut-off distance RC = 8 Å in the
native state, then ∆ij =1, and is zero otherwise (RC = 8 Å is the cut-off distance for calculating the
non-bonded forces). The value of εn quantifies the strength of the non-bonded interactions. We
used εn = εinter = 1.29 kcal/mol and εn = εintra = 1.05 kcal/mol for the inter-chain contacts and
intra-chain contacts (model parameterization is described in SM). The non-native interactions in
    / r      / r  ( 1   ) were treated as repulsive. Here,
the potential U
6

REP

NB

r

r

6

ij

i, j 1 2

r

r

ij

ij

i, ji 3

the summation is performed over all the non-native contacts with the distance > RC. A constraint
is imposed on the bond angle formed by residues i, i+1, and i+2 by including the repulsive
potential with parameters εr = 1 kcal/mol and σr = 3.8 Å, which determine the strength and the
range of the repulsion. Six independent runs have been carried out for each simulation setup.
Forced indentation simulations: Dynamic force measurements in silico were performed
using the SOP model and Langevin simulations accelerated on a GPU. We used the CCMV virus
capsid, empty of RNA molecules (Protein Data Bank (PDB) code 1CWP) (40), and a spherical
tip of radius Rtip= 5, 10, and 20 nm to compress the capsid along the two-, three-, and five-fold
symmetry axis. The tip-capsid interactions were modeled by the repulsive Lennard-Jones
potential, V(ri) = ε[σ/(ri – Rtip)] 6, where ri are the ith particle coordinates, ε = 4.18 kJ/mol, and σ
=1.0 Å. We constrained the bottom portion of the CCMV by fixing five Cα-atoms along the
perimeter. The tip exerted the time-dependent force f(t) = f(t)n in the direction n perpendicular to
the surface of CCMV shell. The force magnitude f(t) = rft increased linearly in time t (forceramp) with the force-loading rate rf = κvf (vf is the cantilever base velocity and κ is the cantilever
spring constant). In the simulations of “forward indentation”, the spherical tip was moving
towards the capsid with vf = 1.0 µm/s and vf = 25 µm/s (κ = 0.05 N/m). In the simulations of
force-quenched retraction for vf = 1.0 µm/s, we reversed the direction of tip motion. In
simulations, we control the piezo displacement Z (cantilever base), and the cantilever tip position
X. The cantilever base (virtual particle) moves with constant velocity (vf), which ramps up a
force f(t) applied to the capsid through the cantilever tip with the force-loading rate rf. The
resisting force F from the capsid, which corresponds to the experimentally measured indentation
force, can be calculated using the energy output. The capsid spring constant kcap can be obtained
from an FX curve by calculating the slope kcap = dF/dX.
Analysis of simulation output: Analysis of structures: To measure the extent of structural
similarity between a given conformation and a reference state, we used the structure overlap
0
ξ(t) = ( 2 N ( N  1 ))
 Θ( r (t)  r   βr ) . In Θ(x), Heaviside step function, rij(t) and rij are the
inter-particle distances between the i-th and j-th residues in the transient and native structure,
respectively (β = 0.2 is the tolerance for the distance change). Analysis of energies: We analyzed
the potential energy USOP, and utilized Umbrella Sampling simulations (see SM; 46,47) to
estimate the Gibbs energy (ΔG), enthalpy (ΔH), and entropy (ΔS). Normal Mode Analysis was
used to characterize the equilibrium vibrations (see SM) (48). We calculated the Hessian matrix
for centers of mass of amino acid residues (HIJ). The eigenvalues {λI}, and eigenvectors {RI}
1

0

ij

ij

0

ij

4

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

obtained numerically were used to calculate the spectrum of normal frequencies

ω

I



λI

and

normal modes Q =  R q (qI–center-of-mass positions). In the Essential Dynamics approach
(48), implemented in GROMACS (49), collective modes of motion describing the nonequilibrium displacements of amino acids are projected along the direction of global transition X
(indentation depth), characterized by the displacements ΔX(t) = X(t) – X0 from equilibrium X0
(see SM). We diagonalized the covariance matrix C(t) = ΔX(t) ΔX(t)T = TΛTT to compute the
matrix of eigenvalues Λ and the matrix of eigenvectors T. These were used to find the
projections ΔX(t) on each eigenvector tI, PI(t) = tIΔX(t).
I

IJ

I

RESULTS
AFM Indentation Experiments: Before nanoindentation, AFM images of the capsid were
recorded as depicted in Fig. 1A. Next, nanoindentation measurements were performed on the
center of the CCMV capsid particle, and the corresponding force (F)–indentation (Z) curves (FZ
curves) were recorded. The FZ curves quantify the mechanical response of the capsid
(indentation force F) as a function of the piezo displacement (reaction coordinate Z). The FZ
curves (Fig. 2) revealed that mechanical nanoindentation is a complex stochastic process, which
might occur in a single step (“all-or-none” transition with a single force peak) or through
multiple steps (several force peaks).
To characterize the experimental FZ curves, we focused on the common features, which
include an initial linear-like indentation behavior followed by a sharp drop in force (Fig. 2).
Next, we performed a fit of a straight line to the initial region of each FZ curve to determine the
capsid spring constant kcap, which quantifies the elastic compliance of the capsid, using the
relationship 1/K = 1/κ + 1/kcap for the cantilever plus capsid setup. Here, K is the slope in the FZ
curve (Fig. 2), and κ is the cantilever spring constant (see Materials and Methods). We found that
the average spring constant of CCMV is kcap= 0.17 N/m at a loading rate vf = 0.6 μm/s and kcap=
0.14 N/m at vf = 6.0 μm/s (Table I). Additional experiments showed that kcap does not change
much over four decades of vf (Fig. 3A) (38).
The indentation force, where the linear-like regime in the FZ curve ends, corresponds to
the critical force at which the mechanical failure of the capsid occurs. We analyzed the critical
forces (F*) by extracting peak forces observed in the FZ curves, and the corresponding transition
distances (Z*). The average critical force was determined to be F* = 0.71 and 0.72 nN for vf = 0.6
μm/s and vf = 6.0 μm/s, respectively, showing that critical force is not affected by loading rate in
the regime of vf used (38). These experiments also showed a good agreement with previously
published results (15), where it was found that kcap ≈ 0.15 N/m and F* ≈ 0.6 nN for comparable
loading rates (0.02 µm/s – 2 µm/s range).
Next, we considered whether mechanical deformation was reversible. We performed
measurements for small forward indentation followed by backward movement of the AFM tip,
which we refer to as “force-quenched retraction”. An example of such measurements clearly
shows that there is a considerable difference between the mechanical response of the CCMV
particle observed for small and large deformations (Fig. 3B). Whereas for large piezo
displacements (Z > 35 nm) the deformation was irreversible with large hysteresis, for small
displacements (Z < 10 nm) the deformation was completely reversible with almost no hysteresis.
These results also agree with our previous findings (15).
5

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Forced Indentation in silico: We performed indentation simulations using a spherical tip of
radius Rtip = 20 nm. The 250-fold computational acceleration on a GPU has enabled us to use
experimentally relevant vf = 0.5 and 1.0 µm/s (κ= 0.05 N/m) and span the experimental 0.1–0.2 s
timescale. To provide the basis for comparison of the results of experiments and simulations, we
analyzed the indentation force F as a function of the piezo displacement Z (FZ curves; see
Materials and Methods). The theoretical FZ curves (Fig. 2C and 2D) compare well with the
experimental FZ profiles (Fig. 2A and 2B). The simulated FZ curves also exhibit single-step and
multi-step transitions. The average values of kcap, F*, and Z* compare well with their
experimental counterparts (Table I). We also analyzed the dependence of kcap on vf (including
additionally vf = 5 and 25 µm/s) and found that as in experiment, kcap was insensitive to the
variation of vf (Fig. 3A). Next, we performed simulations of force-quenched retraction, where we
used the CCMV structures generated in the forward deformation runs for Z = 15, 25, 28, and 32
nm as initial conditions. Our simulations (Fig. 3C) agreed with experiments (Fig. 3B) in that
indentation is fully reversible for small Z = 15 nm displacement but irreversible beyond the
critical distance, Z > 25 nm.
To summarize, we have obtained an almost quantitative agreement between the results of
dynamic force measurements in vitro and in silico (Fig. 2), including our findings regarding the
weak sensitivity of the capsid spring constant kcap on changes in the cantilever velocity vf (Fig.
3A) and our results of force-quenched retraction (Fig. 3B and 3C). Hence, the SOP model of
CCMV provides an accurate description of the capsid mechanical properties, which validates our
approach. The good agreement between the results of experiments and simulations allowed us to
probe features of CCMV shell that are not accessible experimentally.
Mechanical properties of CCMV depend on local symmetry: Next, we performed
simulations of indentation under slow (vf = 1.0 µm/s) and fast (vf = 25 µm/s) force loading (Rtip =
20 nm). The capsid was indented at different points on its surface: at the symmetry axes of the
hexamer capsomeres (three-fold symmetry), the pentamer capsomeres (five-fold symmetry), and
at the interface between two hexamers (two-fold symmetry) as described in Fig. S1 in the
Supporting Material (SM). The FX profiles for the two-fold symmetry axes are displayed in Fig.
4. The FX curves for three- and five-fold symmetry are presented in Fig. S2 and S3, respectively.
In agreement with experiment (Fig. 2B), the mechanical reaction of the capsid is elastic up to X ≈
3-5 nm (Z ≈ 8-10 nm; linear regime) and quasi-elastic up to X ≈ 8-11 nm (Z ≈ 22 - 25 nm; linearlike regime), regardless of the capsid orientation (panel A in Fig. 4, S2, and S3). The FX curves
generated under fast force loading (vf = 25 µm/s) showed a slightly steeper slope. Fitting a
straight line to the initial portion of FX curves (X < 3 nm) taken at vf = 1.0 µm/s yielded the
spring constant kcap ≈ 0.11 N/m, 0.10 N/m, and 0.12 N/m for two-, three-, and five-fold
symmetry, respectively (Table II).
A more detailed analysis showed that kcap is significantly varying during simulated
particle deformation: kcap varies from 0.06 - 0.14 N/m, 0.05 - 0.10 N/m, and 0.04 - 0.12 N/m for
the two-, three-, and five-fold symmetry axes, respectively in the initial deformation regime.
Fluctuations in kcap show systematic differences for the icosahedral symmetry axes (Fig. 4, S2,
and S3). When probing along the two- and five-fold axes, the curves of kcap versus X show two
maxima: the first maximum is at X ≈ 2-3 nm (for two- and five-fold symmetry), and the second
maximum is at X ≈ 5-6 nm (two-fold symmetry) and 11-12 nm (five-fold symmetry). For the
three-fold symmetry, kcap shows one broad skewed peak centered at X ≈ 5 nm. To explain this
effect, we performed structural analysis of CCMV conformations, and found that at various
6

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

stages of mechanical deformation different types (pentamers and hexamers) and number of
capsomers cooperate to withstand the mechanical stress (Fig. S1).
The collapse transition occurs in the 11 - 15 nm range (Fig. 4, S2, and S3). For vf = 1.0
µm/s, the average critical forces from experiments and simulations agreed (F* = 0.71 nN; see
Fig. 2 and Tables I and II). Here, the bottom portion of the shell becomes increasingly more flat
(see snapshots in panel C in Fig. 4, S2, and S3), and the capsid undergoes a spontaneous shape
change from a roughly spherical state to a non-spherical collapsed state, which is reflected in the
sudden force drop and decrease of kcap to zero (panel B in Fig. 4, S2, and S3). Under fast loading
(vf = 25 µm/s), force peaks were not detected (panel A in Fig. 4, S2, and S3). To quantify the
extent of the structural collapse, we monitored the structure overlap ξ. In the transition regime, ξ
decreased from ξ = 1 (native state) to ξ = 0.65 (collapsed state) for all symmetry types (panel C
in Fig. 4, S2, and S3). Hence, notwithstanding the large scale transition, the capsid structure
remained 65% similar to the native state. For faster vf = 25 µm/s, ξ decreased by <10%,
indicating that fast force loading leaves the local arrangements of capsomers unaffected. At X >
15 nm, CCMV entered the post-collapse, second linear-like regime (panels A and B in Fig. 4, S2,
and S3). Here, as the tip approached the solid surface, kcap increased sharply.
Next, we reversed the direction of tip motion using the structures for the collapsed state
obtained for Z = 15, 25, 28, and 32 nm (X = 5, 11, 15, and 19 nm) as initial conditions. In
agreement with AFM data (Fig. 3B), the theoretical force-retraction curves for vf = 1.0 µm/s
showed that the mechanical compression of CCMV was fully reversible in the elastic regime for
X = 5 nm (no hysteresis), nearly reversible in the quasi-elastic regime for X = 11 nm (small
hysteresis), but irreversible after the transition had occurred (X = 15 and 19 nm; panel A in Fig.
4, S2, and S3). We also analyzed the progress of CCMV shell restructuring by monitoring ξ as a
function of time (panel C in Fig. 4, S2, and S3), and found that the CCMV shell recovered its
original shape (ξ = 1) in the millisecond timescale.
Thermodynamics of CCMV indentation: We evaluated the total work of indentation w by
integrating the area under the FX curves. We repeated this procedure for the retraction curves to
evaluate the reversible work wrev. Estimation of the relative difference (w - wrev)/w showed that in
the elastic and quasi-elastic regime (X < 11 nm; Z < 25 nm) ~12% of w was dissipated. This
agrees with the experimental finding that the fraction of energy returned upon retraction is ~90%
(15). In the transition range (11 nm ≤ X ≤ 15 nm; 25 nm ≤ Z ≤ 30 nm), where the retraction
curves showed large hysteresis especially for the three-fold symmetry, (w - wrev)/w ≈ 75%.
Because wrev is equal to the Gibbs energy change, i.e., wrev = ΔG = ΔH - TΔS, where ΔH
and ΔS are the enthalpy change and entropy change, we estimated ΔH and TΔS. The results for
ΔH and TΔS for indentation along the two-, three-, and five-fold symmetry axes (Rtip = 20 nm; vf
= 1.0 µm/s) are displayed, respectively, in Fig. 4, S2, and S3. In the linear regime and linear-like
regime (X < 10-11 nm), ΔH and TΔS display a parabolic dependence on X and ΔH ≈ TΔS; in the
(11-15 nm) transition range and in the post-collapse regime (X > 15 nm), ΔH and TΔS level off,
each attaining a plateau, and ΔH > TΔS. The dependence of ΔH on X under fast force-loading
conditions is more monotonic. The curves of ΔG, ΔH, and TΔS attain some constant values ΔGind,
ΔHind, and TΔSind at X = 20 nm, which correspond to the Gibbs energy, enthalpy, and entropy of
indentation (Table II). We also mapped the equilibrium energy landscape ΔG using the Umbrella
Sampling simulations (see Experimental Procedures) and resolved the profiles of ΔH and TΔS
(the inset in panel D in Fig. 4, S2, and S3). The equilibrium values of ΔGind, ΔHind, and TΔSind are
accumulated in Table II. The thermodynamic functions indicate that mechanical compression of
7

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

the CCMV shell requires a considerable investment of energy, and that ΔGind, ΔHind, and TΔSind
vary with the local symmetry under the tip.
Mechanical response of CCMV depends on geometry of force application: We
performed simulations of the nanoindentation of CCMV along the two-fold symmetry axis using
a tip of smaller radius Rtip = 10 and 5 nm. The FX profiles, spring constant kcap, structure overlap
ξ, and thermodynamic functions obtained for Rtip = 10 nm (Fig. S4) can be compared with the
same quantities obtained for Rtip = 20 nm (Fig. 4). We present our findings for Rtip = 10 nm;
results for Rtip = 5 nm show a similar tendency (data not shown). The FX curves for vf = 1.0 (and
25 µm/s) shows a less steep kcap, the collapse transition is less pronounced and starts sooner (X* ≈
9 nm), and the critical force is lower (F* ≈ 0.6 nN) for indentation with a smaller tip (panels A
and B in Fig. S4). The kcap versus X dependence shows two peaks, but the second peak at X ≈ 6
nm is weaker (compared to the results for Rtip = 20 nm). The overlap ξ decreased to 0.75,
implying that in the collapsed state the CCMV shell remained ≈75% similar to the native state
(panel C in Fig. S4). ΔH and TΔS show a familiar parabolic dependence on X (as for Rtip = 20
nm), but these level off at somewhat lower values (panel D in Fig. S4). Numerical estimates of
kcap, ΔGind, ΔHind, and TΔSind obtained for Rtip = 10 and 5 nm (Table III) are directly proportional
to the tip size as kcap, ΔGind, ΔHind, and ΔSind all decrease with Rtip. We also performed
simulations using 10 and 5 nm tip but for the three- and five-fold symmetry axes, and arrived at
the same conclusions (data not shown).
Equilibrium and non-equilibrium dynamics of CCMV: To resolve the dynamic
determinants underlying the mechanical response of CCMV, we first analyzed equilibrium
properties of the capsid using Normal Mode Analysis (see Material and Methods and SM). We
calculated the spectra of normal modes for Cα-atoms for a single hexamer, single pentamer, and
for the whole CCMV particle (Fig. S5). Because the spectra for a pentamer and hexamer were
identical, we only display the spectrum for a hexamer, which practically overlaps with the
spectrum for the CCMV shell, implying that normal displacements of the CCMV shell and its
constituents are similar, especially in the 50-500 cm-1-range of frequencies. Analysis of
structures revealed that the more global modes of motion in the low-frequency part of the
spectrum (≤ 50 cm-1) involve the “out-of-plane” expansion-contraction excitations and the “inplane” concerted displacements of capsomers. The more local modes (100-250 cm-1 range) are
small-amplitude displacements of the secondary structure elements. The high frequency 300-450
cm-1 end of the spectrum is dominated by the local vibrations of amino acids (Fig. S5).
To describe the far-from-equilibrium mechanical response of CCMV, we employed the
Essential Dynamics approach (see Materials and Methods and SM), which helps to single out the
most important types of motion, showing the largest contribution in the direction of global
transition (indentation depth X). Importantly, the essential dynamics modes should not be
confused with the equilibrium normal modes or instantaneous normal modes. We examined
separately the elastic regime (X ≤ 5 nm) and the transition regime (11 nm ≤ X ≤ 15 nm) using the
simulation output for the two-fold symmetry (Fig. 4). We resolved the principal coordinates
PI(t), collective variables describing the non-equilibrium dynamics of the system, and analyzed
the relative displacement for each I-th mode given by the ratio  X  X  /   X  X 
2

I

of the average squared displacement
 X

I

 X

I0



2

X

I

 X

I0



2

I0

2

I

I0

to the total squared displacement

. It turns out that the first two modes account for ~85% of dynamics of CCMV
8

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

(“essential subspace”); the remaining modes are negligible in terms of the displacement
amplitude.
The CCMV dynamics in the essential subspace is displayed in Fig. 5. We characterized
large-amplitude non-equilibrium displacements, which contribute the most to the mechanical
compression of CCMV. In the elastic regime, the first mode (mode 1: 77% of dynamics)
corresponds to the large-amplitude out-of-plane compression, which results in the capsid
bending. Here, the top and bottom portions of the capsid become flat, while the capsid sides
expand outward (Fig. 5A). The second mode (mode 2: 8% of dynamics) represents direct
coupling of the in-plane displacements of capsomers and the out-of-plane capsid bending, for
which the in-plane displacements and the out-of-plane bending occur at the same time. Here we
observe that the arrangement of capsomers on the spherical surface change from the more
ordered to the less ordered, and the capsid structure loses its near-spherical symmetry (Fig. 5A).
In the transition regime, the in-plane and out-of-plane displacements are strongly coupled. That
is, these displacements are neither purely in-plane nor out-of-plane excitations. The first mode
(mode 1) represents the collapse transition, which is accompanied by the lateral translocation of
the capsomers towards the tip-surface contact area (Fig. 5B). The second mode (mode 2) is
dominated by the lateral translocation and twisting motions of hexamers and pentamers in the
clock-wise and counter clock-wise direction around their symmetry axes, respectively (Fig. 5B).
DISCUSSION
By coupling dynamic force measurements in vitro and in silico, here we have directly compared,
for the first time, the experimental data with simulation data for CCMV shell obtained under
identical conditions of the mechanical force load. Excellent agreement between the experimental
and simulation results validated our theoretical approach. Larger variation in the experimental
FZ profiles are due to the fact that in experiments not only three different icosahedral
orientations were probed (two-, three-, and five-fold symmetry) by the AFM tip, but also various
intermediate orientations. This undertaking had enabled us to interpret the experimental forced
indentation patterns in unprecedented detail with regards to the structural and thermodynamic
changes in the CCMV capsid in response to external mechanical deformation.
The main results are: 1) The physical properties of the CCMV shell are dynamic but local
characteristics of the structure, and the mechanical response of the capsid depends not only on
the symmetry of the local capsomer arrangement under the tip, but also on the indentation depth.
2) The mechanical characteristics of CCMV - the critical force and transition distance - depend
on how rapidly the compressive force is increased. 3) The physical properties of the CCMV
particle depend on the geometry of mechanical perturbation, as the mechanical response changes
with tip size. 4) The extent to which the mechanical deformation of the CCMV shell can be
retraced back reversibly depends on the indentation depth. 5) In the elastic regime of
deformation, the “out-of-plane” excitations dominate the near-equilibrium displacements of
capsomers, but these and “in-plane” modes are strongly coupled in the far-from-equilibrium
transition range. 6) The entropic and enthalpic contributions are almost equally important for the
capsid stiffening, whereas the capsid softening and transition to the collapsed state is driven
mainly by the enthalpy change.
Our conclusion about the local nature of physical properties also fits with previous
modeling of Hepatitis B Virus, which showed that permanent deformation of the shell was due to
9

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

local rearrangements of the capsid proteins (21). That the CCMV shell displays multiple modes
of mechanical resistance, which depends on the indentation depth, agrees well with recent
studies, which showed two dynamic regimes to be responsible for the CCMV capsid stiffening
and softening (34). The existence of multiple modes is reflected in the non-monotonic
dependence and maxima of kcap as a function of X. The periods of mechanical resistance
(stiffening), during which an increasingly larger portion of protein chains find themselves in the
tip-shell contact area, are interrupted by the periods when the capsid yields to force (softening).
The first peak of kcap at X ≈ 2-3 nm (Fig. 4 and S3), agrees with the previous results from finite
element analysis (34). The second peak at X ≈ 6 nm and X ≈ 11 nm for the two-fold and five-fold
symmetry described here correspond to the capsid softening beyond X ≈ 10 nm (34).
The weak dependence of CCMV mechanical properties on the rate of change of
compressive force is not unexpected, because the positions of transition states and barrier heights
on the energy landscape depend upon how force is applied to the system. Under fast force
loading (vf = 25 μm/s), the energy pumped into the system is more than sufficient to overcome
the energy barrier, and the transition to the collapsed state is not well-pronounced (no force-drop
in the FX curves in Fig. 4, S2, and S3). The force peaks are observed under slow loading (vf =
0.5 – 6 μm/s) because the amount of energy is comparable to the energy barrier for the collapse
transition. The FZ curves for the CCMV capsid obtained using the finite element analysis (34)
agree with our result for vf = 25 μm/s. This indicates that conditions of force application used in
the finite element analysis correspond to the fast indentation case. The FZ profiles from the finite
element analysis and our own results also agree in that, under fast force loading, differences in
the mechanical response of CCMV for different symmetries disappear.
In single-molecule manipulation on virus particles, mechanical force requires a physical
contact between a system and a probe. Hence, their shape, size difference, and the direction of
force become important factors. When a virus is indented by a plane (Rtip>> R – radius of a virus
shell), all residues in the tip-capsid contact area are pushed in the same direction; when a virus is
indented by a small sphere (Rtip≈ R), different residues are displaced in different directions. Our
results show that the mechanical characteristics - FX profile, spring constant, critical force, and
indentation depth (Fig. S4) - all change with probe size, and that ΔGind, ΔHind, and TΔSind are
directly proportional to Rtip (Table III). A smaller tip means a smaller tip-capsid contact area,
and, hence, weaker mechanical response and lower associated energy costs.
In the elastic regime, quasi-elastic regime, and transition regime (Fig. 4, S2, and S3), the
deformation is reversible for short X and almost reversible for longer X. In the post-collapse
regime, the mechanical compression is irreversible. In fact, these same findings can be
rationalized using our results from Essential Dynamics (Fig. 5). In the elastic regime and quasielastic regime, the first mode is dominated by the out-of-plane displacements of pentamers and
hexamers. Hence, when a compressive force is quenched, as in the retraction experiments, the
first mode provides a mechanism for capsid reshaping, and the amount of energy dissipated is
small. In the transition range, the two most important modes represent strongly coupled out-ofplane and in-plane displacements. Here, the capsid is capable of restoring its original shape, but
capsid restructuring comes at a cost of exciting additional degrees of freedom and, hence, a
larger amount of dissipated energy.
The question exists whether the property of a whole system can be represented by a sum
of the properties of its structural elements (50). For the CCMV capsid dynamics at equilibrium,
our results from Normal Mode analysis (37,51) provide the affirmative answer. The spectra of
10

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

eigenmodes for an isolated single pentamer or hexamer and for the whole capsid show only
small differences at low frequencies (<50 cm-1), due to icosahedrally symmetric modes present in
the full capsid, but practically overlap with that for the whole shell in the 50 – 500 cm-1-range
(Fig. S5). This result is not surprising. The differences in the small-amplitude equilibrium
fluctuations of residue positions for local modes are negligible for the penton, hexon, and full
capsid. Of course, these modes represent collective motions, which correspond to penton, hexon,
and full capsid decompositions; yet, when compared at the whole shell level, these motions in
the penton and hexon units, and in the full capsid are nearly identical (Fig. S5). Hence, domain
and capsomer interactions have little effect on equilibrium properties of CCMV.
Under non-equilibrium conditions of mechanical deformation, the near-spherical
symmetry of the capsid is broken and different capsomers start playing different roles. In this
regime, we can no longer use a concept of equilibrium normal modes. We employed the
Essential Dynamics approach to characterize large-amplitude displacements of capsomers under
far-from-equilibrium conditions. Although in the linear regime the main mode of collective
motions is dominated by the “out-of-plane” displacements, there are no pure “out-of-plane” and
“in-plane” modes either in the elastic regime or in the transition range (Fig. 5). These coupled
non-equilibrium essential modes of motion, which accompany the CCMV transition to the
collapsed state, cannot be reconstructed using “a linear combination” of the out-of-plane modes
and the in-plane modes. The concerted in-plane displacements mediate rearrangements of
pentamers and hexamers on the CCMV surface, which leads to capsid stiffening reflected in the
non-monotonic dependence of kcap (Figs. 4, S2, S3, and S4). These are exact results, i.e. we have
arrived at these conclusions by analyzing the output from Essential Dynamics calculations.
Similar findings have been reported by other research groups (52).
We mapped the energy landscape for the mechanical deformation of the CCMV capsid
(Fig. 4, S2, and S3). The similarity of non-equilibrium estimates of ΔGind, ΔHind, and ΔSind (from
FX curves) and their equilibrium counterparts (from Umbrella Sampling) implies that slow force
loading (vf = 1.0 µm/s) corresponds to near-equilibrium conditions of force application. Both the
entropic and enthalpic contributions to ΔG (6.5-6.9 MJ/mol) are important: the entropy change
TΔSind (5.1-5.8 MJ/mol) is roughly half the enthalpy change ΔHind (11.5-12.8 MJ/mol) for all
three symmetry types (Table II). There are variations in the values of ΔGind, ΔHind, and TΔSind for
different symmetries: these functions for five-fold symmetry differ by ~10% from the same
functions for two- and three-fold symmetry (Table II). Hence, our findings stress the importance
of any particular capsid’s discrete nature and local protein subunit(s)/capsomer symmetry when
virus shells are tested mechanically.
The potential energy of protein chains (USOP) sharply increases in the transition range
where the capsid alters its shape from the convex to the concave (tip-indented convex down).
These shape alterations are captured by the enthalpy change ΔH (Fig. 4). Compared to the elastic
regime of CCMV deformation (X < 3-5 nm), where ΔH increases by ~3 MJ/mol, in the transition
region (11 nm < X < 15 nm) ΔH increases three-fold to ~10 MJ/mol (Fig. 4D). Here, the largeamplitude out-of-plane displacements mediate the capsid bending inward. Hence, in the quasielastic regime before the collapse transition occurs the out-of-plane collective modes contribute
mainly to the enthalpy change ΔH. Although small-amplitude in-plane displacements are coupled
to the out-of-plane modes, the main effect from in-plane displacements is concerted transitions displacements, translocations, and twisting, from the more ordered to the less ordered phase
formed by protein chains (Fig. 5). Hence, the in-plane modes contribute mainly to the entropy
11

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

change TΔS, which increases two-fold from ~3 MJ/mol in the elastic regime to ~6 MJ/mol in the
transition range (Fig. 4). The map of local potential energy for protein chains forming capsomers
shows that there is more energy stored in pentamers than in hexamers in the elastic regime and in
quasi-elastic regime (Fig. S6). This correlates well with the inhomogeneous stress distribution in
CCMV capsid found earlier using other methods (53). However, this picture is more mixed in
the transition range. Hence, under tension, the same protein chains forming capsomers play
different roles in the energy distribution, which changes with the indentation depth.
When the capsid is undergoing the global transition to the collapsed state, the average
structure of the protein chains forming capsomers is affected, but to a limited extent. This is
reflected in the small decrease of the structure overlap to ξ ≈ 0.6 for the slow force loading (vf =
1 μm/s). Under fast loading (vf = 25 μm/s), or for smaller tip (Rtip = 10 nm), the decrease in ξ is
even smaller (Fig. 4, S2, and S3, and S4). This stands in contrast to mechanical protein unfolding
where transitioning to the globally unfolded state occurs concomitant with the disruption of
native interactions stabilizing the tertiary and secondary structures of the native fold. Hence, in
the context of mechanical deformation of a capsid, force-induced spontaneous shape changing
does not imply substantial structural transitions on the local scale.
We have advanced a conceptual understanding of the unique physical properties of
capsids - their dynamic and local structural features, and their dependence on the rate of change
and geometry of external physical stimulus. We have resolved the origin of multiple modes of
elastic compliance leading to mechanical stiffening and softening effects, and have characterized
(ir)reversibility of the mechanical deformation of virions. We have described specific roles
played by the in-plane and out-of plane non-equilibrium collective modes of the capsomers’
displacements and their connection to the thermodynamic functions. Because these properties are
likely to be shared among different virion classes, the results of these studies are important to
understand the nanomechanics of other protein shells. Furthermore, profiling the structural,
dynamic, and thermodynamic characteristics of capsids can illuminate different aspects of their
biological properties and function. Also, biotechnological applications of protein nanocontainers
range from catalysis in constrained environments in organic synthesis to transport and delivery
of substrates into cells in nanomedicine, and to building blocks in nanotechnology (54,55). Our
combined in vitro and in silico techniques may become a widely used approach to reveal the
structure-dynamics relationship for biologically derived nanoparticles.
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the Russian Ministry of Education and
Science (Grant 14.A18.21.1239 to VB), by the “Physics of the genome” program grant from
Fundamenteel Onderzoek der Materie (FOM) (to GJLW), and by the National Science
Foundation (grant MCB-0845002 to RID).
SUPPORTING CITATIONS:
References (56,57) appear in the Supporting Material.
REFERENCES:
1.

Kasas, S., and G. Dietler. 2008. Probing nanomechanical properties from biomolecules to
living cells. Pflug. Arch. Eur. J. Phys. 456:13-27.
12

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

2.

Engel, A., and D. J. Müller. 2000. Observing single biomolecules at work with the atomic
force microscope. Nat. Struct. Biol. 7:715–718.

3.

Roos, W. H., R. Bruinsma, and G. J. L. Wuite. 2010. Physical virology. Nat. Phys. 6:733743.

4.

Ivanovska, I. L., P. J. de Pablo, B. Ibarra, G. Sgalari, F. C. MacKintosh, J. L. Carrascosa,
C. F. Schmidt, and G. J. L. Wuite. 2004. Bacteriophage capsids: Tough nanoshells with
complex elastic properties. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101:7600-7605.

5.

Ivanovska, I. L., G. J. L. Wuite, B. Jönsson, and A. Evilevitch. 2007. Internal DNA
pressure modifies stability of WT phage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104:9603-9608.

6.

Roos, W. H., I. Gertsman, E. R. May, C. L. Brooks 3rd, J. E. Johnson, and G. J. L. Wuite.
2012. Mechanics of bacteriophage maturation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109:2342-2347.

7.

Kol, M., Y. Shi, M. Tsvitov, D. Barlam, R. Z. Shneck, M. S. Kay, I. Rousso. 2007. A
stiffness switch in human immunodeficiency virus. Biophys. J. 92:1777-1783.

8.

Baclayon, M., G. K. Shoemaker, C. Uetrecht, S. E. Crawford, M. K. Estes, B. V. Prasad, A.
J. R. Heck, G. J. L. Wuite, and W. H. Roos. 2011. Prestress strengthens the shell of
Norwalk virus nanoparticles. Nano Lett. 11:4865-4869.

9.

Liashkovich, I., W. Hafezi, J. E. Kühn, H. Oberleithner, A. Kramer, and V. Shahin. 2008.
Exceptional mechanical and structural stability of HSV-1 unveiled with fluid atomic force
microscopy. J. Cell. Sci. 121:2287-2292.

10.

Pérez-BernÁ, A. J., A. Ortega-Esteban, R. Menendez-Conejero, D. C. Winkler, M.
Menendez, A. C. Steven, S. J. Flint, P. J. de Pablo, and C. San Martin. 2012. The role of
capsid maturation on adenovirus priming for sequential uncoating. J. Biol. Chem.,
287:31582–31595.

11.

Roos, W. H., K. Radtke, E. Kniesmeijer, H. Geertsema, B. Sodeik, and G. J. L. Wuite.
2009. Scaffold expulsion and genome packaging trigger stabilization of herpes simplex
virus capsid. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106:9673-9678.

12.

Roos, W. H., M. M. Gibbons, A. Arkhipov, C. Uetrecht, N. R. Watts, P. T. Wingfield, A.
C. Steven, A. J. R. Heck, K. Schulten, W. S. Klug, and G. J. L. Wuite. 2010. Squeezing
protein shells: how continuum elastic models, molecular dynamics simulation and
experiments coalesce at the nanoscale. Biophys. J. 99:1175-1181.

13.

Snijder, J., V. S. Reddy, E. R. May, W. H. Roos, G. R. Nemerow, and G. J. L. Wuite. 2013.
Integrin and defensin modulate the mechanical properties of adenovirus. J. Virol. 87:2756.

14.

Carrasco, C., A. Carreira, I. A. T. Schaap, P. A. Serena, J. Gómez-Herrero, M. G. Mateu,
and P. J. de Pablo. 2006. DNA-mediated anisotropic mechanical reinforcement of a virus.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103:13706-13711.

13

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

15.

Michel, J. P., I. L. Ivanovska, M. M. Gibbons, W. S. Klug, C. M. Knobler, G. J. L. Wuite,
and C. F. Schmidt. 2006. Nanoindentation studies of full and empty viral capsids and the
effects of capsid protein mutations on elasticity and strength. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
103:6184-6189.

16.

Snijder, J., C. Uetrecht, R. Rose, R. Sanchez, G. Marti, J. Agirre, D. M. Guérin, G. J. L.
Wuite, A. J. R. Heck, and W. H. Roos. 2013. Probing the biophysical interplay between a
viral genome and its capsid. Nature Chemistry, 5:502-509.

17.

Berendsen H. J. C. and S. Hayward. 2000. Collective dynamics in relation to function.
Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 10:165-169

18.

Bura, E., D. K. Klimov, and V. Barsegov. 2008. Analyzing forced unfolding of protein
tandems by ordered variates, 2:Dependent unfolding times. Biophys. J. 94:2516-2528.

19.

Joshi, H., F. Momin, K. E. Haines, and R. I. Dima. 2010. Exploring the contribution of
collective motions to the dynamics of forced-unfolding in tubulin. Biophys. J. 98:657-666.

20.

Lange, O. F. and H. Grubmüller H. 2008. Full correlation analysis of conformational
protein dynamics. Proteins 70:1294-1312.

21.

Arkhipov, A., W. H. Roos, G. J. L. Wuite, and K. Schulten. 2009. Elucidating the
mechanism behind irreversible deformation of viral capsids. Biophys. J. 97:2061-2069.

22.

Phelps, D. K., B. Speelman, and C. B. Post. 2000. Theoretical studies of viral capsid
proteins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 10:170–173.

23.

Zink, M., and H. Grubmüller. 2009. Mechanical properties of the icosahedral shell of
southern bean mosaic virus: A molecular dynamics study. Biophys. J. 96:1350–1363.

24.

Vliegenthart, G. A. and G. Gompper. 2006. Mechanical deformation of spherical viruses
with icosahedral symmetry. Biophys. J. 91:834-841.

25.

Buenemann, M. and P. Lenz. 2007. Mechanical limits of viral capsids. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 104:9925-9930.

26.

Hyeon, C., R. I. Dima, and D. Thirumalai. 2006. Pathway and kinetic barriers in
mechanical unfolding and refolding of RNA and proteins. Structure 14:1633-1645.

27.

Mickler, M., R. I. Dima, H. Dietz, C. Hyeon, D. Thirumalai, and M. Rief. 2007. Revealing
the bifurcation in the unfolding pathways of GFP by using single-molecule experiments
and simulations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104:20268-20273.

28.

Dima, R. I., and H. Joshi. 2008. Probing the origin of tubuline rigidity with molecular
simulations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105:15743-15748.

29.

Lin, J. C., and D. Thirumalai. 2008. Relative stability of helices determines the folding
landscape of adenine riboswitch aptamers. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130:14080-14084.
14

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

30.

Zhmurov, A., A. E. X. Brown, R. I. Litvinov, R. I. Dima, J. W. Weisel, and V. Barsegov.
2011. Mechanism of fibrin(ogen) forced unfolding. Structure 19:1615-1624.

31.

Zhmurov, A., R. I. Dima, Y. Kholodov, and V. Barsegov. 2010. SOP-GPU: accelerating
biomolecular simulations in the centisecond timescale using graphic processors. Proteins
78:2984-2999.

32.

Zhmurov, A., K. Rybnikov, Y. Kholodov, and V. Barsegov, V. 2011. Generation of
random numbers on graphics processors: forced indentation in silico of the bacteriophage
HK97. J. Phys. Chem. B 115:5278-5288.

33.

Cieplak, M., and M. O. Robbins. 2010. Nanoindentation of virus capsids in a molecular
model. J. Chem. Phys. 132:015101.

34.

Gibbons, M. M., and W. S. Klug. 2008. Influence of nonuniform geometry on
nanoindentation of viral capsid. Biophys. J. 95:3640-3649.

35.

Johnson, J.E., and J. A. Speir. 1997. Quasi-equivalent viruses: a paradigm for protein
assemblies. J. Mol. Biol. 269:665-675.

36.

Johnson, J. M., J. Tang, Y. Nyame, D. Willits, M. J. Young, and A. Zlotnick. 2005.
Regulating self-assembly of spherical oligomers. Nano Lett. 5:765-770.

37.

May, E. R., A. Aggarwal, W. S. Klug, and C. L. Brooks 3rd. 2011. Viral capsid equilibrium
dynamics reveals nonuniform elastic properties. Biophys. J. 100:L59-61.

38.

Snijder, J., I. L. Ivanovska, M. Baclayon, W. H. Roos, and G. J. L. Wuite. 2012. Probing
the impact of loading rate on the mechanical properties of viral nanoparticles. Micron
43:1343-1350.

39.

Scott, S.W. 2006. Bromoviridae and allies. In: Encyclopedia of Life Sciences, John Wiley
and Sons, Chichester.

40.

Speir, J. A., S. Munshi, G. Wang, T. S. Baker, and J. E. Johnson. 1995. Structures of the
native and swollen forms of cowpea chlorotic mottle virus determined by X-ray
crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy. Structure 3:68-78.

41.

Comellas-Aragonès, M., H. Engelkamp, V. I. Claessen, N. A. J. M. Sommerdijk, A. E.
Rowan, P. C. M. Christianen, J. C. Maan, B. J. M. Verduin, J. J. L. M. Cornelissen, and R.
J. M. Nolte. 2007. A virus-based single-enzyme nanoreactor. Nat. Nanotechnol. 10:635639.

42.

Verduin, B. J. M. 1974. The preparation of CCMV-protein in connection with its
association into a spherical-particle. FEBS Lett. 45:50-54.

43.

Verduin, B. J. M. 1978. Degradation of cowpea chlorotic mottle virus ribonucleic acid in
situ. J. Gen. Virol. 39:131-147.

15

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

44.

Baclayon, M., G. J. L. Wuite, and W. H. Roos, 2010. Imaging and manipulation of single
viruses by atomic force microscopy. Soft Matter 6:5273-5285.

45.

Kuznetsov, Y. G., and A. McPherson. 2011. Atomic force microscopy in imaging of
viruses and virus-infected cells. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 75:268-285.

46.

Buch, I., S. Kashif Sadiq, and G. De Fabritiis. 2011. Optimized potential of mean force
calculations for standard binding free energies. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 7:1765-1772.

47.

Kumar, S., J. M. Rosenberg, D. Bouzida, R. H. Swendsen, and P. A. Kollman. 1992. The
weighted histogram analysis method for free-energy calculations on biomolecules. I. The
method. J. Comp. Chem. 13:1011–1021.

48.

Hayward, S., and B. L. de Groot. 2008. Normal modes and Essential dynamics. Meth. Mol.
Biol. 443:89-106.

49.

Lindahl, E., B. Hess, and D. van der Spoel. 2001. GROMACS 3.0: a package for molecular
simulation and trajectory analysis. J. Mol. Model. 7:306-317.

50.

Zhmurov, A., R. I. Dima, and V. Barsegov. 2010. Order Statistics theory of unfolding of
multimeric proteins. Biophys. J. 99:1959-1268.

51.

Tama, F., and C. L. Brooks 3rd. 2005. Diversity and identity of mechanical properties of
icosahedral viral capsids studied with elastic network normal mode analysis. J. Mol. Biol.
345:299-314.

52.

Yang, L., G. Song, and R. L. Jernigan. 2007. How well can we understand large-scale
protein motions using normal modes of elastic network models? Biophys. J. 93:920-929.

53.

Zandi, R., and D. Reguera. 2005. Mechanical properties of viral capsids. Phys. Rev. E
72:021917.

54.

Fischlechner, M., and E. Donath. 2007. Viruses as building blocks for materials and
devices. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 46:3184–3193.

55.

Ma, Y., R. J. Nolte, and J. J. Cornelissen. 2012 Virus-based nanocarriers for drug delivery.
Adv. Drug. Deliv. Rev. 64:811-825.

56.

Ferrara, P., J. Apostolakis, and A. Caflisch. 2002. Evaluation of a fast implicit solvent
model for molecular dynamics simulations. Proteins 46:24-33.

57.

Amadei, A., A. B. M. Linssen, and H. J. C. Berendsen. 1993. Essential Dynamics of
proteins. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 17:412-425.

16

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Figure 1. The CCMV capsid: Panel A: AFM image of a CCMV capsid (zmax = 30 nm, scale bar
= 20 nm). Panel B: Structure of CCMV (PDB entry: 1CWP); protein domains forming pentamers
are colored in blue, while the same protein domains in hexamers are shown in red and orange.
Figure 2. Mechanical indentation of the CCMV capsid in vitro (panels A and B) and in silico
along two-, three-, and five-fold symmetry axes (panels C and D). Show in different color are the
most representative trajectories of forced indentation. The force (F)-distance (Z) profiles (FZ
curves) obtained from experimental AFM measurements for vf = 0.6 and 6.0 µm/s are compared
with the theoretical FZ curves obtained for vf = 0.5 and 1.0 µm/s (Rtip= 20 nm). The black dashdotted control lines correspond to the cantilever deforming against the glass surface. The insets
to panels C and D show the corresponding FX profiles. Due to the stochastic nature of the
mechanical indentation, the values of critical force (F*, force peaks), transition distance (Z*) and
indentation depth (X*) are varying. The FZ curves with a single (several) force peak represent
single-step (multi-step) indentation transitions.
Figure 3. Panel A: Log-linear plot of the spring constant of CCMV capsid kcap versus the
cantilever velocity vf. The experimental data are compared with the results of simulations. Panel
B and C: Reversible and irreversible deformation of the CCMV capsid obtained experimentally
for vf = 6.0 µm/s (panel B), and theoretically for vf = 1.0 µm/s (panel C). Deforming the capsid
with a small force of ~0.3 nN (experiment) and ~0.5 nN (simulations) resulted in the reversible
mechanical deformation with no hysteresis. Increasing the force beyond ~0.5 nN led to the
irreversible deformation - the forward indentation (solid curves) and backward retraction (dotted
curves) do not follow the same path (hysteresis). Color denotation is presented in the graphs.
Figure 4. Mechanical indentation in silico of CCMV capsid along the two-fold symmetry axis
(see panel D and Fig. S1). Show in read and blue color are the two trajectories. The cantilever tip
(Rtip= 20 nm) indents the capsid in the direction perpendicular to the capsid surface (vf = 1.0
µm/s). Results for the forward deformation and backward retraction are represented by the solid
and dotted curves, respectively; results obtained for vf = 25 µm/s are shown for comparison
(dashed black curve). Panel A: The FX curves. The grey line corresponds to the linear fit of
initial elastic regime, i.e. X < 3-5 nm. Panel B: Capsid spring constant, kcap versus X. Panel C:
Structure overlap ξ versus X: the inset shows the time-dependence of ξ for the backward
retraction, which quantifies the progress of capsid restructuring. Panel D: The enthalpy change
ΔH and entropy change TΔS from the FX curves generated for vf = 1.0 µm/s (the dashed curve of
ΔH generated for vf = 25 µm/s is presented for comparison). The inset shows equilibrium energy
change ΔG along the reaction coordinate X from Umbrella Sampling calculations. Also shown
are the CCMV capsid structures (top view and profile) for different extents of indentation. The
tip-capsid surface contact area shown in red color (see also Fig. S1).
Figure 5. Dynamics of the CCMV shell in terms of the non-equilibrium displacement of
pentamers (shown in blue) and hexamers (shown in red color). Displayed are the structures for
the first two modes of the collective excitations (black arrows), projected along the reaction
coordinate (large arrow) in the elastic regime (panel A) and transition regime (panel B) of
mechanical compression. For each mode, the upper structure is the reference state. In the lower
structure, we showed the type and amplitude of displacement by juxtaposing the representative
conformation with the reference state (shown in gray color).
17

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Figure 6. Surface map of the potential energy (color scale for USOP is in the graph) for three
representative structures of the CCMV shell (top view) observed in the course of deformation in
silico at Z = 3 nm (panel A), 18 nm (panel B), and 27 nm (panel C). The direction of motion of
the tip is perpendicular to the CCMV surface as indicated. The map shows a gradual increase in
the potential energy of proteins forming pentamers and hexamers as changes to the global
structure occur.
Table I: Mechanical properties of the CCMV capsid from indentation measurements in vitro and
in silico: the average spring constant kcap, average critical force F*, and average transition
distance Z*. These quantities were calculated by averaging over all FZ curves (all symmetry
types). Experimental measurements were performed using the cantilever velocity vf = 0.6 µm/s
and 6.0 µm/s; simulations were carried out using vf = 0.5 µm/s and 1.0 µm/s (Fig. 2). The
experimental results for vf = 6.0 µm/s and simulation results for vf = 1.0 µm/s are shown in
parenthesis.
Indentation
in vitro
in silico

kcap,N/m
0.17±0.01(0.14±0.02)
0.11±0.01(0.11±0.02)

F*, nN
0.71±0.08(0.72±0.07)
0.77±0.03(0.71±0.02)

Z*, nm
21.0±3.6(20.8±1.7)
24.7±2.1(25.5±0.9)

Table II: Mechanical and thermodynamic properties of the CCMV capsid from indentation
measurements in silico performed along the two-fold, three-fold, and five-fold symmetry axes
(Fig. S1): critical force F*, indentation depth X*, spring constant kcap, and thermodynamic
functions - Gibbs energy change ΔG, enthalpy change ΔH, and entropy change TΔS. Theoretical
estimates of these quantities were obtained by averaging the results of 3 trajectories, using Rtip =
20 nm and vf = 1.0 µm/s (see also Fig. 4, and Figs. S2 and S3). The values of ΔG, ΔH, and TΔS
correspond to the total change in these quantities observed at X = 20 nm (Z = 30 nm)
indentation. The range of variation of kcap (from Figs. 4, S2, and S3) and the equilibrium
estimates of ΔG, ΔH, and TΔS (from Umbrella Sampling calculations) are shown in parentheses.
Symmetry
two-fold
three-fold
five-fold

F*,
X*,
kcap,
nN
nm
N/m
0.71±0.02 9.1±1.0 0.11 (0.06-0.14)
0.68±0.02 11.9±0.5 0.10 (0.05-0.10)
0.69±0.02 14.2±0.5 0.12 (0.04-0.12)

ΔGind,
MJ/mol
4.5(6.9)
5.1(6.8)
4.1(6.5)

ΔHind,
MJ/mol
11.5(12.8)
11.7(12.6)
12.5(11.5)

TΔSind,
MJ/mol
7.0 (5.8)
6.6(5.8)
8.4(5.1)

Table III: Mechanical and thermodynamic properties of the CCMV capsid from indentation
measurements in silico performed at vf = 1.0 µm/s, along the two-fold symmetry axis (Fig. S1) spring constant kcap, and Gibbs energy change ΔGind, enthalpy change ΔHind, and entropy change
ΔSind - are compared for the spherical tips of different radius Rtip = 20 nm, 10 nm, and 5 nm. The
estimates of kcap, ΔGind, ΔHind, and TΔSind are obtained from a single FX curve for each different
Rtip and correspond to the total change in these quantities observed at X = 20 nm (Z = 30 nm)
indentation. Simulation data for Rtip = 20 nm and 10 nm are shown in Fig. 4 and S4, respectively.
Rtip, nm
20

kcap, N/m
0.090

ΔGind, MJ/mol ΔHind, MJ/mol
4.5
11.5
18

TΔSind, MJ/mol
7.0

Kononova et al.

10
5

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

0.075
0.069

3.9
1.8

9.6
4.9

19

5.7
2.2

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Figure 1 (Kononova, Snijder, Brasch, Cornelissen, Dima, Marx, Wuite, Roos, Barsegov)

20

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Figure 2 (Kononova, Snijder, Brasch, Cornelissen, Dima, Marx, Wuite, Roos, Barsegov)
21

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Figure 3 (Kononova, Snijder, Brasch, Cornelissen, Dima, Marx, Wuite, Roos, Barsegov)

22

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Figure 4 (Kononova, Snijder, Brasch, Cornelissen, Dima, Marx, Wuite, Roos, Barsegov)

23

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Figure 5 (Kononova, Snijder, Brasch, Cornelissen, Dima, Marx, Wuite, Roos, Barsegov)

24

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Structural Transitions and Energy Landscape for Cowpea Chlorotic Mottle Virus
Capsid mechanics from nanomanipulation in vitro and in silico*
Olga Kononova,†‡ Joost Snijder,§ Melanie Brasch, ¶ Jeroen Cornelissen, ¶ Ruxandra I. Dima, ||
Kenneth A. Marx, † Gijs J. L. Wuite,§ Wouter H. Roos§* and Valeri Barsegov†‡*
†

Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts, Lowell, MA 01854; ‡Moscow Institute
of Physics and Technology, Moscow Region, Russia 141700; §Natuur- en Sterrenkunde and
LaserLab, Vrije Universiteit, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands; ¶Biomoleculaire
Nanotechnology, Universiteit Twente, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands; ||Department of
Chemistry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221.

Supporting Material
*

Corresponding authors:
e-mail: Valeri_Barsegov@uml.edu, tel: 978-934-3661, fax: 978-94-3013
e-mail: wroos@few.vu.nl, tel: +31 20 59 83974, fax: +31 20 59 87991
Running Title: Mechanical properties of CCMV capsid

25

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Self-Organized Polymer (SOP) Model Parametrization: Numerical values of εn were
determined from equilibrium all-atom Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations in implicit water
for the CCMV shell at T=300 K (CHARMM19 force field) (1). We employed the Solvent
Accessible Surface Area (SASA) model of implicit solvation (2). We used the CCMV structure
from PDB (PDB code: 1CWP) to carry out a 5 ns equilibrium simulation run for the entire
capsid. First, we calculated the number of native contacts, which stabilize the native state of the
capsid, based on a standard cut-off distance RC=8 Å between the Cα-atoms. The native contacts
were divided into the inter-chain contacts and intra-chain contacts. There were Nintra ≈ 20,554
intra-chain contacts in the capsid proteins, and Ninter ≈ 3,405 inter-chain contacts at their
interfaces (due to the van-der-Waals and Coulomb interactions). Next, we calculated the total
energy of non-covalent interactions for each contact group. We found Eintra = 25,898 kcal/mol
for the intra-chain contacts and Einter = 3,746 kcal/mol for the inter-chain contacts. Finally, we
divided the total energy by the number of contacts for each group of contacts. We obtained εintra
= Eintra/Nintra = 1.26 kcal/mol for the intra-chain energy, and εinter = Einter/Ninter = 1.1 kcal/mol for
the inter-chain energy. These parameters of the SOP force field were used in the simulations of
mechanical indentation of CCMV.
Langevin simulations of CCMV indentation: The indentation dynamics were obtained by
integrating the Langevin equations for each particle position ri in the over-damped limit, ηdri/dt
= -∂U/∂ri + gi(t). Here, U is the total potential energy, which accounts for the contribution from
the capsid conformation USOP and for the interaction of the i-th particle with the spherical tip
Utip(ri) (see Materials and Methods in the main text). Also, gi(t) is the Gaussian distributed
random force and η is the friction coefficient. The Langevin equations were propagated with the
time step Δt = 0.08τH = 20 ps, where τH = ζεhτL/kBT. Here, τL = (ma2/εh)1/2 = 3 ps, ζ = 50.0 is the
dimensionless friction constant for a residue in water (η = ζm/ τL ), and m ≈ 3×10-22 g is the
residue mass (3,4). Simulations of mechanical indentation were carried out at room temperature
using the bulk water viscosity, which corresponds to the friction coefficient η = 7.0×105 pN
ps/nm.
Umbrella Sampling Method: We calculated the potential of mean force U as a function of
indentation depth X for the process of mechanical compression of CCMV particle. In this
approach, the potential energy of the system depends on X (reaction coordinate), which gradually
changes during the simulation, and one accumulates  U /  X at several values of X (<…>
denotes the ensemble averaging). The potential of mean force can then be estimated as
  U /  λ d λ (5,6). Because the indentation depth X is the distance travelled by the cantilever
tip,  U /  X corresponds to the indentation force (F), i.e. the force exerted on the tip by the virus
particle. Since F = κdX, where κ is the cantilever spring constant and dX is the tip displacement,
the measurements of F can be used to estimate  U /  X and to calculate U. We performed one
simulation run to collect 280 data points. In each step, the cantilever (base) was moved by 0.1
nm; next, the system was equilibrated for 0.2 ms, and then the values of the tip position were
sampled for 0.2 ms to calculate F   U /  X . We used the cantilever spring constant κ= 1.4
N/m.

26

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Normal Mode Analysis: In the NMA, the potential energy is expanded in a Taylor series in
terms of the mass-weighted coordinates q = m Δx , where Δxi is the displacement of the i-th
particle from the energy minimum and mi is its mass. The Hessian matrix of second derivatives
H with the matrix elements H =  V /  q  q (i,j=1,2,…,3N) carries information about
equilibrium dynamics of the system in question. The NMA involves the following three steps: 1)
minimization of the potential energy, 2) calculation of the Hessian matrix, and 3) diagonalization
of the Hessian matrix (7). The energy minimization was performed using the steepest descent
algorithm. Each residue was represented by its center of mass. The numerical calculation of the
Hessian
matrix
was
carried
out
using
atomic
forces f =  V /  q ,
i.e.
is the unit vector in the direction of
H =   f  q + h e   f ( q  h e )  / 2 , where q  { q } , e
atom j, and h is the displacement along this direction. We used the transformation
to obtain the Hessian matrix for the centers of mass HIJ from the
H
= (1 / M M
) H
Hessian matrix for atomic displacements Hij. Here, MI and MJ are the reduced mass of residue I
and J, where I, J=1,2,…,N and N is the total number of residues. To build the Hessian matrix for
the displacements of the centers of mass of amino acids, and to solve numerically the eigenvalue
problem HR=ΛR, we used an algorithm implemented in the GROMACS package (8). We
determined the I-th eigenvalue, λI, and the I-th eigenvector RI. Each eigenvector specifies a
normal mode coordinate QI, i.e. Q =  R q , which oscillates with the characteristic
i

i

i

2

ij

i

j

i

ij

i

j

IJ

I

i

J

j

ω

I

=

j

i

ij

I

frequency

i

λI

IJ

I

. The spectrum of eigenvalues {λI} was used to construct the spectrum of

eigen-frequencies in the center-of-mass representation



I

 (1 / 2  c )



I

(c is the speed of light).

Essential Dynamics: In the Essential Dynamics approach, one assumes that the most important
displacements reside in a subspace of a few degrees of freedom, whereas the remaining degrees
of freedom represent less important fluctuations (9). Dynamic correlations between particle
positions at time t, X(t)={X1(t), X2(t),…, XN(t)}, and the position in the reference (equilibrium
average) structure X0={X1(0), X2(0),…, XN(0)} can be expressed through the covariance matrix
C(t) = <(X(t) – X0)(X(t) – X0)T>, where <…> denotes the ensemble averaging and the
superscript T represents the transposed matrix. By construction, C is a symmetric matrix, which
can be diagonalized by an orthogonal transformation T, C = TLTT, where L is the diagonal
matrix of eigenvalues and T is the matrix of eigenvectors of C. In the three-dimensional space,
there are 3N-6 eigenvectors with non-zero eigenvalues for a system of N particles (excluding
translations and rotations). The eigenvalue lI in the center-of-mass representation (I =1,2,…,N) is
the amplitude of displacement X(t) – X0 along the I-th eigenvector tI. The principal coordinates
PI(t) are obtained by projecting X(t) – X0 onto each eigenvector PI(t) = tI(X(t) – X0). In the
Cartesian basis, these projections are given by X(t) = PI(t) tI + X0 (4,6).
.

27

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Figure S1. The CCMV shell: Forced indentation of CCMV along the two-fold, three-fold, and
five-fold symmetry axis. The top structures show the top view of symmetry (filled black circle).
Pentamers and hexamers are shown, respectively, in blue and red color. The grey structures show
the tip-capsid contact area (in red) for different values of Z = 3 nm, 10 nm, 20 nm, and 25 nm
and for different symmetry.

28

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Figure S2. Forced indentation in silico of the CCMV capsid along the three-fold symmetry axis
(see Fig. S1). Shown are the same quantities as in Fig. 4 in the main text, obtained using Rtip= 20
nm, vf = 1.0 µm/s (red and blue curves) and vf = 25 µm/s (dashed black curves), but for a different
symmetry type (the top view of symmetry is shown in panel D). These results should be
compared with the results of indentation along the two-fold symmetry axis (Fig. 4 in main text),
and five-fold symmetry axis (Fig. S3). Also shown are the snapshots of CCMV shell (top view
and profiles). The growing with indentation depth tip-capsid contact area is shown in red color
(see also Fig. S1).

29

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Figure S3. Forced indentation in silico of the CCMV capsid along the five-fold symmetry axis
(see Fig. S1). Shown are the same quantities as in Fig. 4 in the main text, obtained using Rtip= 20
nm, vf = 1.0 µm/s (red and blue curves) and vf = 25 µm/s (dashed black curves), but for a different
symmetry type (the top view of symmetry is shown in panel D). These results should be
compared with the results of indentation along the two-fold symmetry axis (Fig. 4 in main text),
and three-fold symmetry axis (Fig. S2). Also shown are the snapshots of CCMV shell (top view
and profiles). The growing with indentation depth tip-capsid contact area is shown in red color
(see also Fig. S1).

30

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Figure S4. Forced indentation in silico of the CCMV capsid along the two-fold symmetry axis
type (shown in panel D). Shown are the same quantities as in Fig. 4 in the main text but for a
smaller tip of radius Rtip= 10 nm. The force peaks in the FX curves (panel A) are lower (~0.6
nN) compared to the results for Rtip= 20 nm, and the spring constant kcap now varies between
0.03 and 0.11 N/m (panel B). The X-dependence of kcap is still bimodal, as for Rtip= 20 nm, but
the second peak at F ≈ 15 nm is now weaker. The structure overlap ξ shows that the CCMV
particle in the collapsed state remains ~70-75% similar to the native (un-indented) state (panel
C). The associated enthalpy change ΔHind 10 MJ/mol is slightly lower, and the entropy change
ΔSind  6 MJ/mol is roughly the same as for the case of Rtip= 20 nm (panel D). Also shown are
the snapshots of CCMV shell (top view and profiles). The growing with indentation depth tipcapsid contact area is shown in red color (see also Fig. S1).

31

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Figure S5. Equilibrium modes of motion of CCMV particle. The spectrum of normal eigenfrequences (histogram) for isolated single hexamers (shown by gray bars) is compared with the
spectrum of eigen-frequences for the entire CCMV shell (blue bars). Structures display the scale
of normal displacements from the global modes, which include displacements of chains and
entire capsomers (lefthand structure) to local modes of motion of secondary structure elements
(α-helices and β-strands, middle structure), and to more localized modes (vibrations of amino
acid residues, righthand structure).

32

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

Figure S6. Surface map of the potential energy (color scale for USOP is in the graph) for three
representative structures of the CCMV shell (top view) observed in the course of deformation in
silico at Z = 3 nm (panel A), 18 nm (panel B), and 27 nm (panel C). The direction of motion of
the tip is perpendicular to the CCMV surface as indicated. The map shows a gradual increase in
33

Kononova et al.

Mechanical Properties of CCMV Capsid

the potential energy of proteins forming pentamers and hexamers as changes to the global
structure occur.
Movie S1. Mechanical nanoindentation in silico of CCMV shell along 2-fold symmetry axis.
The light blue sphere represents cantilever tip of radius Rtip = 20 nm, moving along -z direction
with constant velocity υf = 1.0 μm/s against a mica-surface (not shown).
Supporting References:
1. MacKerell, A. D., D. Bashford, M. Bellott, R. L. Dunbrack, J. D. Evanseck, M. J. Field, S.
Fischer, J. Gao, H. Guo, S. Ha, D. Joseph-McCarthy, D. T. Nguyen, B. Prodhom, W. E.
Reiher, III, B. Roux, M. Schlenkrich, J. C. Smith, R. Stote, J. Straub, M. Watanabe, J.
Wiorkiewicz-Kuczera, D. Yin, and M. Karplus. 1998. All-atom empirical potential for
molecular modeling and dynamics studies of proteins. J. Phys. Chem. B. 102:3586–3616.
2. Ferrara, P., J. Apostolakis, and A. Caflisch. 2002. Evaluation of a fast implicit solvent model
for molecular dynamics simulations. Proteins 46:24-33.
3. Barsegov, V., D. Klimov, and D. Thirumalai. 2006. Mapping the energy landscape of
biomolecules using single molecule force correlation spectroscopy (FCS): Theory and
applications, Biophys. J. 90:3827-3841.
4. Kononova, O., L. Jones, and V. Barsegov. 2013. Order statistics inference for describing
topological coupling and mechanical symmetry breaking in multidomain proteins. J. Chem.
Phys. 139: 121913-121925.
5. Buch, I., S. Kashif Sadiq, and G. De Fabritiis. 2011. Optimized potential of mean force
calculations for standard binding free energies. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 7:1765-1772.
6. Kumar, S., J. M. Rosenberg, D. Bouzida, R. H. Swendsen, and P. A. Kollman. 1992. The
weighted histogram analysis method for free-energy calculations on biomolecules. I. The
method. J. Comput. Chem. 13:1011–1021.
7. Hayward, S., and B. L. de Groot. 2008. Normal modes and Essential Dynamics. Methods Mol.
Biol. 443:89-106.
8. Lindahl, E., B. Hess, and D. van der Spoel. 2001. GROMACS 3.0: a package for molecular
simulation and trajectory analysis. J. Mol. Model. 7:306-317.
9. Amadei, A., A. B. M. Linssen, and H. J. C. Berendsen. 1993. Essential Dynamics of proteins.
Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 17:412-425.

34

