Gabora, L. (2011). How a Generation Was Misled About Natural Selection. Psychology Today
(online). http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/mindbloggling

How a Generation Was Misled About
Natural Selection
Subtitle: Natural Selection: How it Works, How it Applies to Culture

Liane Gabora
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
Okanagan Campus, Arts Building, 333 University Way, Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, CANADA

For 'Mindbloggling' column, Psychology Today

Abstract
This article explains how natural selection works and how it has
been inappropriately applied to the description of cultural change. It
proposes an alternative evolutionary explanation for cultural
evolution that describes it in terms of communal exchange.

When science is explained to the general public it is necessary to simplify.
Inevitably details get left out, details that some consider important, and the
‘sexy' parts of the story get played up. But so long as the overall picture is
more or less right, scientists generally appreciate the efforts of popular
science writers, the press, and in some cases their fellow colleagues, to
make their work accessible to a wider audience. The public in turn benefits
from the opportunity to see the world they live in from a new perspective,
and consider questions they might not otherwise have considered.
Sometimes, though, the baby gets thrown out with the bathwater. The
‘babyless' version of a scientific story may be a hit nonetheless. Unless
one has advanced training in a highly specialized area of a scientific
discipline, it may appear to make sense. In most cases, the
1
	  

misrepresentation of science doesn't make much difference; life goes on
as normal. In some cases however, it changes the course of history.
Such is the case with Richard Dawkins' (1976) portrayal of evolution.
Dawkins is as successful a popularizer of science as the world has seen.
He enchanted a generation with his lucid portrayal of evolution as
competition amongst ‘selfish genes' and survival of the fittest. His books
sparked applications of the theory of natural selection across the social
sciences, yielding new sub-disciplines ranging from evolutionary
economics, to Darwinian theories of culture and creativity, to neural
Darwinism. The allure is understandable. Darwinism is a conceptual
framework with considerable explanatory power. Were it possible to root
these disciplines in a Darwinian framework, we might arguably have
achieved the first step toward a unification of the social sciences
comparable with Darwin's unification of the life sciences. But applications
of Darwinian thinking outside of biology remain on the fringe of academic
inquiry three and a half decades after publication of The Selfish Gene. The
story of how applications of Darwinism in the social sciences flourished
and wilted, and Dawkins' role in this, is one of the most fascinating stories
in the history of science.
How Natural Selection Works
Let's take a brief look at how evolution works, and then at how Dawkins
portrayed it. What necessitated Darwin's theory of how species evolve
through natural selection is that traits that are acquired by an organism
over its lifetime are not transmitted to offspring, and thus not passed down
through time. Thus, whereas a rock that smashes stays smashed, a rat
whose tail is cut off does not give birth to rats with cut-off tails; the rat
lineage loses this trait. So the paradox faced by Darwin and his
contemporaries was the following: how do species accumulate change
when traits acquired over each organism's lifetime are obliterated?
Darwin's genius was to explain how species adapt over time despite that
new modifications keep getting discarded, by looking from the level of the
individual to the level of the population of interbreeding individuals. He
proposed that part of an organism is retained (the part we now call DNA). It
is responsible for traits shared by relatives, and it undergoes random
change from one generation to the next. Darwin realized that individuals
who are better equipped to survive in their given environment leave more
offspring (are ‘selected'). Thus, although their acquired traits are discarded,
their inherited traits (often the traits they were born with) are not. Since
random changes to inherited traits that are beneficial cause their bearers to
2
	  

have more offspring, over generations, such traits proliferate at the
expense of detrimental ones. Over generations this can lead to substantial
change in the distribution of traits across the population as a whole.
We now know that the reason that acquired traits are discarded is that
organisms replicate not by mere self-copying, but self-copying using a set
of genetic instructions made of DNA. In his 1966 book Theory of SelfReproducing Automata, John von Neumann, one of the most brilliant
mathematicians who ever lived, studied the work of early geneticists and
worked out the minimal algorithmic structure capable of evolving through
natural selection. The result is the gold in the innermost chamber of one of
the most fascinating intellectual puzzles in the world. Those who seek to
understand natural selection or to apply Darwinian thinking to disciplines
outside of biology without ever grasping von Neumann's basic insights are
susceptible to all manner of pseudoscientific misadventures.
What von Neumann (1966) showed is that DNA forms a self-assembly
code that gets used in two distinct ways. One way it is used involves
actively deciphering the instructions to construct a highly self-similar
‘variant'. In this case, the code functions as interpreted information. The
second way is as a self-description that is passively copied to the replicant
to ensure that it can reproduce. In this case, the self-assembly instructions
function as un-interpreted information. (To put it more loosely, the
interpreting of the code can be thought of as ‘now we make a body', and
the un-interpreted use of the code as ‘now we make something that can
itself make a body'.) Von Neumann refers to a structure that evolves
through natural selection as a self-replicating automaton.
Von Neumann's book had a profound influence on John Holland, and led
to Holland's invention of the genetic algorithm, or GA: a computer
algorithm that embodies the abstract structure of natural selection (Holland,
1975). The GA solves complex problems by randomly generating variant
solutions and selectively ‘mating' the best for multiple ‘generations' until a
satisfactory solution is found. In his 1975 book where the GA was
introduced, titled Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems, Holland
proposed three fundamental principles of natural selection. Since biological
evolution is the evolutionary process we know the most about, and the
process that inspired this analysis, it is easiest to explain these principles
in terms of how they apply to biology. The idea, however, is that they apply
to any system -- biological or otherwise -- that undergoes Darwinian
evolution.
The first is sequestration of inherited information. The self-assembly code
3
	  

is copied -- without interpretation -- to produce sex cells or gametes during
meiosis. If gametes unite to form a germ cell, their DNA is decodedinterpreted-to synthesize the proteins necessary to assemble a body. The
process by which this unfolds is referred to as development. The DNA selfassembly code, i.e. the information that gets inherited, is said to be
sequestered because it is encoded in self-assembly instructions and
shielded from environmental influence.
The distinction between these two ways of using a self-assembly code,
one enabling gamete production and the other enabling development,
leads to the second principle: a distinction between genotype and
phenotype. The genotype of an organism is its genetic constitution: the set
of genes it inherited from its parents. The phenotype of an organism is its
observable characteristics or traits, including morphological, developmental,
biochemical, physiological, and behavioral traits. Phenotypes result
through the expression of an organism's inherited genotype in the context
of its environment. Phenotypes are altered -- they acquire traits -- through
interaction with an environment, while genotypes generally do not.
This leads to Holland's third principle: natural selection incorporates not
just a means by which inherited variation is passed on (e.g., you may have
inherited your mother's blue eyes), but also a means by which variation
acquired over a lifetime is discarded (e.g., you did not inherit your mother's
tattoo). What gets transmitted from parent to offspring is sets of selfassembly instructions, and these instruction sets have not changed since
they were formed. So traits acquired by parents during their lives, including
learned behavior and knowledge, are not inherited by offspring. Since
acquired change can accumulate orders of magnitude faster than inherited
change, if it is not getting regularly discarded, it quickly overwhelms the
population-level mechanism of change identified by Darwin; it ‘swamps the
phylogenetic signal'. Thus natural selection only works as an explanation
when acquired change is negligible.
In sum, building on von Neumann's pioneering insights, Holland identified
three basic principle of natural selection: (1) sequestration of inherited
information, (2) a clear-cut distinction between genotype and phenotype,
and (3) no transmission of acquired traits. Chris Langton, who initiated the
field of artificial life, points to the same three principles (Langton, 1992).
The ‘Selfish Gene' View of Evolution
At the same time as Holland was writing his book, Dawkins was writing
The Selfish Gene (Dawkins, 1976). In it he took the gene-centric view of
4
	  

evolution developed by George C. Williams, W. D. Hamilton, and John
Maynard-Smith, and reformulated it in a way as that sparked the
imagination of the general public.
The basic idea is that biology is best understood by looking at the level of
not the organism, nor the group, but the gene. A gene, according to
Dawkins, is a replicator, which Dawkins defines as "any entity in the
universe which interacts with its world, including other replicators, in such a
way that copies of itself are made" (Dawkins, 1976; p. 17). A replicator is
said to have the following properties:
• Longevity - it survives long enough to replicate, or make copies of
itself.
• Fecundity - at least one version of it can replicate.
• Fidelity - even after several generations of replication, it is still almost
identical to the original.
Replicators cause the entities that bear them to act in ways that make
them proliferate. For example, our genes cause us to act altruistically
toward others such as close relatives who share those genes.
That's pretty much it. Note that none of the three basic principles of natural
selection identified by Holland play any role in the replicator concept. Note
that the replicator concept, unlike the concept of a self-replicating
automaton, does not explain why acquired traits (such as your mother's
tattoo) are not passed on, but inherited traits (such as your mother's blue
eyes) are. Note that the replicator concept does not address the paradox
that caused Darwin to come up with the theory of natural selection in the
first place: the paradox of how species become increasingly adapted to
their environment despite that changes acquired by an organism during its
lifetime are not transmitted to offspring.
Dawkins suggested that replicators appear not just in biology but also in
culture, and he christened these cultural replicators memes. Memes, like
genes, are said to evolve through a Darwinian process. Dawkins writes:
"Just as genes propagate themselves in the gene pool by leaping from
body to body via sperm or eggs, so memes propagate themselves in the
meme pool by leaping from brain to brain."
Reaction of Biologists
5
	  

Other than those who profited from Dawkins' popularization of their ideas,
most leading evolutionary biologists, particularly Stephen Jay Gould, Niles
Eldredge, Richard Lewontin, Ernst Mayr, Carl Woese, Freeman Dyson,
and Stuart Kauffman, were unreceptive to Dawkins' ideas (Dyson, 1999;
Fracchia & Lewontin, 1999; Kauffman, 1999; Mayr, 1996; Sterelny, 2007;
Temkin & Eldredge, 2007; Woese, 2004). Ernst Mayr, one of the foremost
evolutionary biologists of the 20th century, claimed that the replicator
notion is "in complete conflict with the basics of Darwinian thought". I once
had the interesting experience of driving Ernst Mayr, who was almost 100
years old at the time, from UCLA to a place an hour and a half away. He
was charming, but the mere mention of Dawkins unsettled him so much
that I thereafter avoided discussion of anything related to him. Stuart
Kauffman describes Dawkins' ideas as "impoverished", and claims that the
replicator concept does not capture the essential features of the kind of
structure that evolves through natural selection.
Incredibly, although theoretical biologists appear to find Dawkins so wrong
that his ideas are almost unworthy of scientific scrutiny, many social
scientists believe him to be so right that his ideas don't need scrutiny!
Though leading biologists such as Lewontin and Eldredge published
papers on the misapplication of Darwinism to culture, by the time they did
so the floodgates had already opened, and cultural Darwinism was
flourishing (Aunger, 2000; Blackmore, 1999). Social scientists of all stripes
were tantalized by the prospect that Darwinism would turn their discipline
into a ‘real science'. Dawkins also revived interest in evolutionary
epistemology, a subfield of philosophy based on the idea that knowledge
evolves through a process of conjecture and refutation.
Memes and the Darwinian Theory of Culture
Let us now examine the idea of analyzing culture in terms of memes and
natural selection. Culture involves the social transmission of novel behavior,
such as gestures, songs, or tool-making skills, amongst individuals who
are generally members of the same species. Elements of culture spread
both vertically, from one generation to another, and horizontally amongst
members of a generation. Thus two key components of culture are a
means of generating novel behavior, and a means of spreading it, such as
imitation and other forms of social learning.
It has been argued that culture constitutes a second evolutionary process,
one which, though it grew out of biological evolution, exhibits an
evolutionary dynamic in its own right that cannot be reduced to biology.
Some of what is considered cultural behavior can be explained by biology.
6
	  

However most would probably concede that, much as principles of physics
do not go far toward an explanation of, say, the vertebrate body plan
(though things like gravity play some role), biology does not go far toward
an explanation of, say, the form and content of a sonnet (though factors
like selective pressure for intelligence play some role). Most would
concede that to explain how and why such forms arise, accumulate, and
adapt over time, one must look to culture. Not only does culture
accumulate over time, but it adapts, diversifies, becomes increasingly
complex, and exhibits phenomena observed in biological evolution such as
niches, and punctuated equilibrium. Like biological evolution, culture is
open-ended; there is no apparent limit to the variety of new forms it can
give rise to.
So the notion that culture evolves appears to make sense. But the
Darwinian approach to culture, and in particular the application of Dawkins'
replicator concept, is problematic. The problem is that a Darwinian
explanation only works when acquired change is negligible. Otherwise, as
explained above, acquired change, which can operate strategically and
instantaneously, quickly drowns out inherited change, which operates
randomly and only operates at the transition between one generation and
the next. Since the theory of natural selection assumes that variation is
randomly generated and acquired change is not transmitted, to the extent
that transmission is biased from random, and ideas acquire change
between transmission events as we contemplate them, a Darwinian
framework is inappropriate. (Some apply the term 'Lamarckian' to culture,
but having seen that different people interpret this term differently I have
come to avoid it.) The only way to maintain a Darwinian perspective on
culture that is consistent with the algorithmic structure of natural selection
is to view humans as passive imitators and transmitters of prepackaged
units of culture, which evolve as separate lineages. To the extent that
these lineages ‘contaminate one another' -- that is, to the extent that we
actively transform elements of culture in ways that reflect our own internal
models of the world, altering or combining them to suit our needs,
perspectives, or aesthetic sensibilities -- natural selection cannot explain
cultural change (Gabora, 2004, 2008, 2011). In order for something to stick
in memory we first relate it to what else we know, make it our own, but a
Darwinian framework for culture is incompatible with this.
Dual inheritance theory is a version of the Darwinian view that posits that
humans have two inheritance systems, biological and cultural (Boyd &
Richerson, 1985). Proponents of this theory go even further than Dawkins
and the 'memeticists'; they say that natural selection does not even require
self-replication. They not only throw the baby out with the bathwater, they
7
	  

scour away any of the baby's dead skin cells clinging in the soap scum.
Dual inheritance theorists focus on processes that bias the transmission of
cultural information, such as the tendency to preferentially imitate high
prestige individuals. But since natural selection assumes that variation is
randomly generated, to the extent that transmission is biased from random,
it is not due to selection, the mechanism Darwin identified; therefore a
Darwinian approach actually gives a distorted model. The use of the term
dual inheritance to refer to both what is transmitted genetically and what is
transmitted culturally is technically incorrect and misleading. That which is
transmitted through culture falls under the category of acquired change,
not inherited change. Advocates of dual inheritance theory apply
phylogenetic methods, developed for classifying biological organisms into
lineages, to cultural artifacts. This works well for highly conserved
assemblages, but falsely classifies similarity due to horizontal exchange of
ideas as similarity originating from a common ancestor.
The limitations of the applications of Darwinism to the social sciences that
were inspired by Dawkins' picture of evolution can be seen most clearly by
returning to what necessitated the theory of natural selection in the first
place. Natural selection, a theory of population-level change, was put
forward to account for the paradox that acquired traits are (with few
exceptions) not inherited from parent to offspring. Note how exceptional
this is. In most domains of human inquiry, change is retained, and
successive changes accumulate. If an asteroid crashes into a planet, the
planet cannot revert to the state of having not had the asteroid crash into it.
But in the biological domain where, if a rat loses its tail the rat's offspring
are not born tail-less, how does one explain how change is retained and
accumulates? That was the extraordinary paradox Darwin faced, the
paradox for which natural selection provided a solution. An analogous
paradox does not exist with respect to culture.
So How Does Culture Evolve?
Dawkins has gone out of his way to emphasize that (1) by ‘selfish' he didn't
mean that genes are really selfish, they just act as if they were, (2) humans
can transcend their ‘genetic selfishness'. Nevertheless, using natural
selection, a theory based on competition and survival of the fittest, to
explain not just biology but also culture is not a promising route to
explaining many aspects of human behavior such as cooperation.
It turns out, however, that there is an evolutionary theory that is better
equipped to explain these aspects. I will leave detailed discussion of this
for another blog, but mention briefly that this other theory of cultural
8
	  

evolution is inspired by recent efforts to understand the structure of the
very earliest entities that could be said to have been alive (Gabora, 2006;
Vetsigian, Woese, & Goldenfeld, 2007). These earliest life forms were not
self-replicating automata. One could say they were replicators, but they did
not have genes (selfish or otherwise). They were self-organized metabolic
networks that evolved through a sloppy non-Darwinian process involving
transmission of acquired traits, referred to National Medal of Science
winner Carl Woese and his colleagues as communal exchange.
It has been proposed that, like these earliest life forms, culture evolves
through a non-Darwinian process of communal exchange. What evolves
through culture is worldviews, the integrated webs of ideas, beliefs, and so
forth, that constitute our internal models of the world, and they evolve, as
did early life, not through competition and survival of the fittest but through
communal transformation of all (Gabora, 1998, 1999, 2000, Gabora &
Aerts, 2009). In other words, the assemblage of human worldviews
changes over time not because some replicate at the expense of others,
as in natural selection, but because of ongoing mutual interaction and
modification. Elements of culture such as rituals, customs, and artifacts
reflect the states of the worldviews that generate them. The theory is
consistent with network-based approaches to modeling trade, artifact
lineages, and the social exchange of knowledge and beliefs, as well as
with the unexpectedly high degree of cooperativity in human culture.
A cultural Darwinist recently asked me if it were not possible that two
processes are operating interactively: the non-Darwinian process that I
have focused on, and another process that, even if they are not strictly
Darwinian, operate through a selection-like mechanism. The answer is a
highly qualified yes, for given that the non-Darwinian process works
strategically at the speed of thought, and selection works on randomly
generated variation over generations, the first will render the second
negligible. In fact many factors in the universe work together to give the
patterns of culture we observe, everything from day length to microbes to
weather. Science involves isolating a little piece of reality that you think is
important to the explanation of a particular phenomenon. The scientific
process has a deductive part, which takes smarts but it's pretty
straightforward, and an inductive part, which some say takes intuition and
creativity. Deciding which aspects of reality to include and leave out of your
model is a matter of induction. How one goes about this reveals how
thoroughly one has thought through the myriad factors related to the
phenomenon being modeled. One could indeed decide to include
selection-like processes in a model of culture, and this might produce a
more nuanced model. But since selection-like processes operate without
9
	  

strategy, orders of magnitude slower than strategic thinking and communal
exchange, this is not a reasonable place to start building a model of culture.
I expect one would get more bang for their buck by incorporating weather
patterns.
Concluding Thoughts
Given that Dawkins introduced the replicator notion after von Neumann
introduced the self-replicating automaton, and given that the replicator is a
rather misleading cartoon of the original, how did it become so much better
known? We will never know, but perhaps it's partly a matter of presentation.
The replicator concept is simple, and if you don't think too deeply about it,
it appears to have considerable explanatory power. Even the word
‘replicator' itself is catchy; the phrase ‘self-replicating automaton' seems
clunky by comparison.
Personality may have something to do with it too. I once met Dawkins at a
conference at Cambridge and spent several hours sitting across the table
from him discussing science. In the company of scientists he came across
as arrogant, defensive, and unsure of himself. In the media, however, he
comes across as quite the opposite: astute, charismatic, and completely
believable in his role as an ‘Oxford scientist'. I imagine that in such
situations he is surrounded by people whose concern is not his science so
much as his public image as a scientist. He plays the role to perfection,
and has successfully increased public awareness of, and perhaps even
passion for, science. By comparison, von Neumann's book on selfreplicating automata was written for a mathematical audience, and
published posthumously, and von Neumann was more concerned with
political ramifications of science than with public awareness of science.
Perhaps also, his role in the development of the atomic bomb deters some
from probing more deeply into his life and ideas.
Dawkins' latest book, The God Delusion, has made even more of a stir
than his books on evolution. I find it unfortunate that attention is diverted
from the purely scientific arguments to the rather fruitless (in my opinion)
debate about science versus creationism. I haven't read the new book, but
it came up now and then at a biweekly meeting of some of the world's top
scientists and theologians on creativity in the mind, the universe, and
nature at Harvard Divinity School, that I was part of in 2009. The
impression I got from both scientists and theologians is that he has again
crafted a good read, but it is told through a lens that filters out key pieces
of the story that would have given it quite another shape. I suppose that
once his sights became set on reaching a popular audience, coming up
10
	  

with simple, satisfying stories about how science works became his job. He
does what he can, and leaves it to future generations of science writers to
scour untapped realms of meme-space and rescue forgotten babies
floating in their bathwater.
Acknowledgments
The author is grateful for funding from the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada.
References

Aunger, R. (2000). Darwinizing culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Blackmore, S. J. (1999). The meme machine. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. (1985). Culture and the evolutionary process.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Dawkins, R. (1976). The selfish gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dyson, F. (1999). Origins of life. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fracchia, J., & Lewontin, R. C. (1999). Does culture evolve? History and
Theory, 38, 52-78.

Gabora, L. (1998). Autocatalytic closure in a cognitive system: A
tentative scenario for the origin of culture. Psycoloquy, 9(67).
Gabora, L. (1999). Weaving, bending, patching, mending the fabric of
reality: A cognitive science perspective on worldview
inconsistency. Foundations of Science, 3(2), 395-428.
Gabora, L. (2000). Conceptual closure: Weaving memories into an
interconnected worldview.Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,
901, 42-53.
Gabora, L. (2006). Self-other organization: Why early life did not evolve
through natural selection. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 241, 443-450.
Gabora, L. (2008). The cultural evolution of socially situated cognition.
Cognitive Systems Research, 9, 104-113.
11
	  

Gabora, L., & Aerts, D. (2009). A model of the emergence and evolution
of integrated worldviews. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 53, 434451.
Gabora, L. (2011). Five clarifications about cultural evolution. Journal of
Cognition and Culture, 11, 61-83.
Holland, J. (1975). Adaptation in natural and artificial systems. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Kauffman, S. (1999). Darwinism, neoDarwinism, and the autocatalytic
model of culture: Commentary on Origin of Culture, Psycoloquy, 10(22),
1−4.
Langton, C.G. (1992). Life at the edge of chaos. In C. G. Langton, C.
Taylor, J. D. Farmer & S. Rasmussen (Eds.) Artificial life II. Boston:
Addison-Wesley.
Mayr, E. (1996). What is a species, and what is not? Philosophy of Science,
63, 262-277.
Sterelny, Kim (2007), Dawkins vs. Gould: Survival of the Fittest,
Cambridge, U.K.: Icon Books.
Temkin, I. & Eldredge, N. (2007). Phylogenetics and material cultural
evolution. Current Anthropology, 48, 146-153.
Vetsigian, K., Woese, C., & Goldenfeld, N. (2006). Collective evolution and
the genetic code. Proceedings of the New York Academy of Science USA,
103, 10696-10701.
Von Neumann, J. (1966). The theory of self-reproducing automata.
University of Illinois Press, Chicago.
Woese, C. R. (2004). A New Biology for a New Century. Microbiology and
Molecular Biology Reviews, 68, 173-186.

12
	  

