Applications of Information Theory to Analysis of
Neural Data

	  
Simon	  R.	  Schultz1,	  Robin	  A.A.	  Ince2	  and	  Stefano	  Panzeri2,3	  
1

	  Department	  of	  Bioengineering,	  Imperial	  College	  London,	  South	  Kensington,	  London	  SW7	  2AZ,	  UK	  

2

	  Institute	  of	  Neuroscience	  and	  Psychology,	  58	  Hillhead	  Street,	  University	  of	  Glasgow,	  Glasgow	  G12	  8QB,	  UK	  

3

	   Center	   For	   Neuroscience	   and	   Cognitive	   Systems,	   Italian	   Institute	   of	   Technology,	   Corso	   Bettini	   31	   –	   38068	   Rovereto	  

(Tn)	  Italy	  

	  
8	  pages	  2638	  words.	  

Definition
Information	  theory	  is	  a	  practical	  and	  theoretical	  framework	  developed	  for	  the	  study	  of	  communication	  over	  
noisy	  channels.	  Its	  probabilistic	  basis	  and	  capacity	  to	  relate	  statistical	  structure	  to	  function	  make	  it	  ideally	  
suited	   for	   studying	   information	   flow	   in	   the	   nervous	   system.	   It	   has	   a	   number	   of	   useful	   properties:	   it	   is	   a	  
general	  measure	  sensitive	  to	  any	  relationship,	  not	  only	  linear	  effects;	  it	  has	  meaningful	  units	  which	  in	  many	  
cases	   allow	   direct	   comparison	   between	   different	   experiments;	   and	   it	   can	   be	   used	   to	   study	   how	   much	  
information	   can	   be	   gained	   by	   observing	   neural	   responses	   in	   single	   trials,	   rather	   than	   in	   averages	   over	  
multiple	   trials.	   A	   variety	   of	   information	   theoretic	   quantities	   are	   commonly	   used	   in	   neuroscience	   –	   (see	  
entry	   “Definitions	   of	   Information-­‐Theoretic	   Quantities”).	   In	   this	   entry	   we	   review	   some	   applications	   of	  
information	  theory	  in	  neuroscience	  to	  study	  encoding	  of	  information	  in	  both	  single	  neurons	  and	  neuronal	  
populations.	  

Detailed Description
Information	  analysis	  of	  spike	  trains	  to	  investigate	  the	  role	  of	  spike	  times	  in	  sensory	  
coding	  
Mutual	   information	   is	   a	   widely	   used	   tool	   to	   study	   how	   spike	   trains	   encode	   sensory	   variables.	   	   A	   typical	  
application	  of	  mutual	  information	  to	  spike	  train	  analysis	  is	  to	  use	  it	  to	  compare	  the	  information	   content	  of	  
different	  representations	  of	  neural	  responses	  that	  can	  be	  extracted	  from	  spike	  trains.	  The	  neural	  code	  used	  
by	   a	   neuron	   is	   often	   defined	   operationally	   as	   the	   smallest	   set	   of	   response	   variables	   that	   carries	   all	   (or	  
almost	   all)	   the	   information	   contained	   in	   the	   spike	   train	   of	   the	   neuron.	   	   Mutual	   information	   is	   used	   to	  
quantify	  the	  information	  content	  of	  increasingly	  complex	  representations	  of	  the	  neural	  response,	  and	  the	  
simplest	  representation	  that	  carries	  the	  most	  information	  is	  chosen	  as	  the	  putative	  neural	  code.	  	  
An	   example	   of	   this	   general	   approach	   is	   the	   investigation	   of	   the	   role	   of	   spike	   times	   in	   encoding	   information.	  
The	   most	   established	   hypothesis	   on	   how	   sensory	   information	   is	   represented	   in	   the	   brain	   is	   the	   spike	   count	  
coding	   hypothesis	   (Adrian,	   1928)	   which	   suggests	   that	   neurons	   represent	   information	   by	   the	   number	   of	  
spikes	   discharged	   over	   some	   relevant	   time	   window.	   Another	   hypothesis	   is	   the	   spike	   timing	   encoding	  
hypothesis,	  which	  suggests	  that	  the	  timing	  of	  spikes	  may	  add	  important	  information	  to	  that	  already	  carried	  
by	   spike	   counts	   (Rieke	   et	   al.,	   1997;	   Panzeri	   et	   al.,	   2001).	   Information	   theory	   can	   be	   used	   to	   understand	   the	  
role	   of	   spike	   times	   in	   carrying	   sensory	   information,	   by	   using	   it	   to	   characterize	   the	   temporal	   resolution	  
needed	  to	  read	  out	  the	  information	  carried	  by	  spike	  trains.	  This	  can	  be	  performed	  by	  sampling	  the	  spike	  
train	   at	   different	   temporal	   precisions,	   Δt,	   (Fig.	   1A)	   and	   computing	   the	   information	   parametrically	   as	   a	  
function	  of	  Δt	  (de	  Ruyter	  van	  Steveninck	  et	  al.,	  1997).	  The	  temporal	  precision	  required	  to	  read	  the	  temporal	  
code	   then	   can	   be	   defined	   as	   the	   largest	   Δt	   that	   still	   provides	   the	   full	   information	   obtained	   at	   higher	  
resolutions.	   If	   this	   precision	   is	   equal	   to	   the	   overall	   length	   of	   the	   window	   over	   which	   neurons	   carry	  
information,	  then	  information	  is	  carried	  only	  by	  the	  number	  of	  spikes.	  As	  an	  example,	  we	  carried	  out	  this	  
type	  of	  analysis	  on	  the	  responses	  of	  neurons	  from	  the	  VPm	  thalamic	  nucleus	  of	  rats	  whose	  whiskers	  were	  
stimulated	  by	  fast	  white	  noise	  deflections	  (Montemurro	  et	  al.,	  2007).	  We	  found	  that	  the	  temporal	  precision	  
Δt	   at	   which	   neurons	   transmitted	   information	   about	   whisker	   deflections	   was	   finer	   than	   1	   ms	   (Fig	   1B),	  
suggesting	  that	  these	  neurons	  use	  high	  precision	  spike	  timing	  to	  carry	  information.	  	  

Information	  analysis	  of	  local	  field	  potentials	  to	  examine	  the	  information	  content	  of	  
network	  oscillations	  
Information	  analysis	  in	  neuroscience	  is	  not	  limited	  only	  to	  spike	  train	  analysis,	  but	  it	  has	  been	  used	  also	  to	  
study	  measured	  of	  massed	  population	   activity,	   such	   as	   Local	   Field	   Potentials	   (LFPs)	  (Buzsáki	  et	  al.,	  2012).	  
LFPs	  are	  operationally	  defined	  as	  the	  low	  pass	  filtered	  extracellular	  potential	  measured	  by	  an	  extracellular	  
intracranial	  electrode.	  There	  are	  at	  least	  three	  reasons	  why	  LFPs	  are	  widely	  used	  in	  neuroscience.	  The	  first	  
is	  that	  they	  are	  they	  are	  more	  easily	  and	  stably	  recorded	  in	  chronic	  settings	  than	  is	  the	  spiking	  activity	  of	  
individual	  neurons.	  The	  second	  is	  that	  the	  LFP	  captures	  key	  integrative	  synaptic	  processes	  and	  aspects	  of	  
subthreshold	   neural	   activity	   that	   cannot	   be	   measured	   by	   observing	   the	   spiking	   activity	   of	   a	   few	   neurons	  
alone	  (Einevoll	  et	  al.,	  2013).	  The	  third	  is	  that	  LFPs	  are	  more	  sensitive	  to	  network	  oscillations	  than	  measures	  
of	   spiking	   activity	   from	   small	   populations.	   LFPs	   from	   a	   sensory	   area	   typically	   show	   a	   power	   spectrum	  
containing	   fluctuations	   over	   a	   wide	   range	   of	   frequencies,	   from	   <1	   Hz	   to	   100	   Hz	   or	   so.	   Given	   that	   the	   power	  
of	  oscillatory	  activity	  typically	  increases	  during	  the	  presentation	  of	  a	  sensory	  stimulus,	  many	  authors	  have	  

speculated	   that	   this	   oscillatory	   activity	   plays	   a	   role	   in	   brain	   communication	   and	   in	   particular	   in	   sensory-­‐
related	  computations.	  However,	  understanding	  the	  function	  of	  these	  oscillations	  has	  remained	  elusive	  and	  
controversial.	   To	   gain	   insights	   into	   the	   function	   of	   oscillations	   in	   sensory	   encoding,	   it	   is	   important	   to	  
understand	  how	  they	  contribute	  to	  the	  representation	  of	  the	  natural	  sensory	  environment.	  	  
This	   problem	   can	   be	   addressed	   by	   quantifying	   the	   oscillation	   power	   in	   any	   given	   trial	   in	   response	   to	  
different	  stimuli,	  and	  then	  computing	  the	  information	  gained	  by	  the	  power	  at	  each	  frequency.	  	  Since	  the	  
power	  is	  a	  continuous	  variable,	  the	  computation	  of	  its	  information	  is	  potentially	  more	  difficult	  than	  the	  one	  
based	  on	  discrete	  variables	  like	  the	  spike	  train	  ones	  described	  above.	  There	  are	  at	  least	  two	  ways	  to	  solve	  
this	   problem.	   The	   first	   is	   to	   discretize	   the	   power	   in	   a	   number	   of	   equi-­‐populated	   bins,	   and	   to	   use	   bias	  
corrections	   to	   eliminate	   the	   bias.	   The	   second	   is	   to	   fit	   the	   data	   to	   a	   parametric	   distribution.	   In	   this	   case,	   it	   is	  
worth	  reminding	  that	  the	  power	  computed	  with	  most	  spectral	  methods	  follows	  a	  chi-­‐square	  distribution,	  
and	   thus	   its	   square	   or	   third	   can	   reasonable	   well	   approximated	   by	   a	   Gaussian	   distribution	   (Magri	   et	   al.,	  
2009).	  This	  makes	  the	  computation	  of	  information	  relatively	  straightforward.	  The	  third	  potential	  approach	  
is	  to	  use	  binless	  methods	  such	  as	  Nearest	  Neighbors	  approaches	  (Kraskov	  et	  al.,	  2004).	  We	  tried	  out	  these	  
methods	  extensively	  on	  computation	  of	  information	  in	  power	  of	  LFPs,	  obtaining	  very	  similar	  results	  with	  all	  
approaches	  (see	  e.g.	  Magri	  et	  al.,	  2009).	  	  
We	   applied	   this	   method	   to	   recordings	   from	   primary	   visual	   cortex	   of	   anaesthetised	   macaques	   during	  
stimulation	  with	  naturalistic	  colour	  movies	  (Belitski	  et	  al.,	  2008;	  Magri	  et	  al.,	  2012a).	  This	  revealed,	  for	  the	  
first	   time,	   how	   information	   about	   the	   naturalistic	   sensory	   environment	   is	   spread	   over	   the	   wide	   range	   of	  
frequencies	   expressed	   by	   cortical	   activity.	   Although	   the	   broad-­‐band	   nature	   of	   the	   spectrum	   suggests	   a	  
contribution	  to	  coding	  from	  many	  frequency	  regions,	  we	  found	  that	  only	  two	  separate	  frequency	  regions	  
contribute	  to	  coding:	  the	  low	  frequency	  range	  and	  the	  gamma	  range	  (Belitski	  et	  al.,	  2008,	  see	  Fig.	  2	  below).	  
Interestingly,	  low	  and	  high	  frequency	  ranges	  act	  as	  perfectly	  complementary	  or	  “orthogonal”	  information	  
channels:	  they	  share	  neither	  signal	  (i.e.,	  stimulus	  information)	  nor	  “noise”	  (i.e.,	  trial	  to	  trial	  variability	  for	  a	  
fixed	  stimulus).	  This	  finding	  has	  several	  implications.	  First,	  it	  shows	  that,	  despite	  the	  broadband	  spectrum,	  
only	   a	   small	   number	   of	   privileged	   frequency	   scales	   are	   involved	   in	   stimulus	   coding.	   Second,	   it	   suggests	   that	  
high-­‐frequency	   and	   low-­‐frequency	   oscillations	   are	   generated	   by	   different	   stimulus-­‐processing	   neural	  
pathways.	   Third,	   the	   finding	   that	   different	   frequency	   bands	   code	   different	   sensory	   features	   in	   separate,	  
truly	   independent	   information	   channels	   reinforces	   the	   concept	   of	   “cortical	   multiplexing”	   that	   we	   proposed	  
above.	  

Information	  analysis	  of	  imaging	  data	  to	  study	  neural	  population	  coding	  or	  coupling	  
between	  different	  neural	  signals	  
The	   analysis	   tools	   that	   we	   have	   described	   above	   have,	   to	   date,	   largely	   been	   applied	   to	   spike	   train	   and	   time	  
series	   data	   recorded	   using	   electrophysiological	   techniques.	   However,	   in	   recent	   years,	   imaging	   technologies	  
have	   been	   developed	   which	   are	   capable	   of	   resolving	   neural	   signaling	   at	   systems,	   cellular	   and	   subcellular	  
resolution	  on	  a	  single	  trial	  basis	  (Denk	  et	  al.,	  1990,	  1994;	  Stosiek	  et	  al.,	  2003;	  Chen	  et	  al.,	  2013).	  One	  way	  to	  
apply	   information-­‐theoretic	   tools	   to	   the	   analysis	   of	   such	   imaging	   data	   is	   to	   convert	   the	   data	   to	   a	   “spike	  
train”,	  for	  instance	  by	  applying	  an	  algorithm	  for	  the	  detection	  of	  action	  potential	  evoked	  calcium	  transients	  
to	   calcium	   imaging	   data	   (Oñativia	   et	   al.,	   2013).	   Such	   an	   approach	   has	   been	   used	   to	   perform	   information	  
theoretic	   analysis	   of	   simultaneously	   recorded	   populations	   of	   cerebellar	   Purkinje	   cell	   complex	   spikes	  
extracted	  from	   in	  vivo	  calcium	  imaging	  movies	   (Schultz	  et	  al.,	  2009).	  However,	  the	  use	  of	  imaging	  data	  may	  

also	   allow	   a	   wider	   set	   of	   questions	   to	   be	   approached	   than	   can	   be	   examined	   electrophysiologically,	   by	  
directly	  examining	  patterns	  of	  pixel	  intensities.	  	  
Another	   interesting	   application	   of	   information	   theory	   to	   neuroimaging	   data	   regards	   its	   use	   for	  
understanding	   the	   nature	   of	   the	   coupling	   between	   neural	   activity	   and	   fMRI	   responses.	   In	   fact,	   although	  
there	  is	  evidence	  that	  fMRI	  BOLD	  responses	  reflect	  neural	  activity,	  it	  is	  not	  clear	  whether	  the	  BOLD	  signal	  
reflects	   only	   the	   total	   power	   of	   massed	   neural	   activity,	   or	   only	   the	   power	   in	   a	   given	   band,	   or	   rather	   the	  
relationships	   between	   powers	   of	   neural	   activity	   in	   different	   frequency	   bands.	   This	   problem	   can	   be	   cast	  
theoretically	   into	   quantifying	   whether	   more	   information	   about	   BOLD	   can	   be	   gained	   from	   simultaneously	  
observing	  the	  power	  of	  neural	  activity	  in	  two	  or	  more	  bands	  of	  neural	  activity,	  than	  the	  information	  gained	  
by	   observing	   either	   band	   alone.	   Because	   mutual	   information	   captures	   all	   the	   ways	   a	   signal	   may	   statistically	  
relate	  to	  another,	  finding	  that	  another	  signal	  carries	  extra	  information	  demonstrates	  that	  this	  signal	  truly	  
provides	  some	  information	  that	  cannot	  be	  possibly	  obtained	  from	  the	  first	  one.	  This	  does	  not	  necessarily	  
hold	   when	   using	   methods	   that	   capture	   only	   specific	   relationships	   between	   signals.	   For	   example,	   an	  
increase	  in	  predictability	  based	  on	  linear	  models	  may	  reflect	  both	  additional	  information	  from	  the	  second	  
regressor	  as	  well	  as	  information	  that	  was	  already	  present	  in	  the	  first	  regressor	  but	  was	  not	  captured	  by	  the	  
linear	   assumption.	   Application	   of	   this	   idea	   to	   simultaneous	   recording	   of	   LFPs	   and	   fMRI	   BOLD	   in	   primary	  
visual	  cortex	  showed	  that	  the	  beta	  and	  alpha	  band	  carry	  information	  about	  BOLD	  that	  complements	  that	  
carried	  by	  the	  gamma	  band,	  the	  band	  that	  most	  correlates	  to	  the	  BOLD	  signal	  (Magri	  et	  al.,	  2012b).	  	  
Since	   imaging	   signals	   such	   as	   fMRI	   have	   an	   analogue	   rather	   than	   discrete	   nature,	   the	   practicality	   of	  
application	  of	  information	  theory	  to	  analogue	  brain	  signals	  is	  crucially	  dependent	  upon	  the	  development	  of	  
appropriate	   regularization	   and	   dimensionality	   reduction	   algorithms.	   These	   might	   stem	   from	   simple	   yet	  
efficient	   discretization	   algorithms	   (Belitski	   et	   al.,	   2008;	   Magri	   et	   al.,	   2009),	   nearest	   neighbors	   regularization	  
algorithms	   (Kraskov	   et	   al.,	   2004),	   the	   use	   of	   manifold	   learning	   techniques	   for	   nonlinear	   dimensionality	  
reduction	  (Roweis	  and	  Saul,	  2000;	  Seung	  and	  Lee,	  2000;	  Gan,	  2006),	  and/or	  the	  evaluation	  of	  information	  
through	  a	  decoding	  step	  (Quian	  Quiroga	  and	  Panzeri,	  2009).	  	  	  	  	  

Acknowledgements	  
Research	   supported	   	  by	   the	   SI-­‐CODE	   (FET-­‐Open,	   FP7-­‐284533)	   project	   and	   by	   the	   	  ABC	   and	   NETT	   (People	  
Programme	   	  Marie	  	   Curie	  	   Actions	  PITN-­‐GA-­‐2011-­‐290011	   and	   PITN-­‐GA-­‐2011-­‐289146)	  	   projects	  
of	  	  the	  	  European	  	  Union's	  Seventh	  Framework	  	  Programme	  	  FP7	  2007-­‐2013.	  

References	  
Adrian	   ED	   (1928)	   The	   basis	   of	   sensation.	   New	   York,	   NY,	   USA:	   Norton	   &	   Co.	   Available	   at:	  
http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/1928-­‐01753-­‐000	  [Accessed	  January	  17,	  2014].	  
Belitski	   A,	   Gretton	   A,	   Magri	   C,	   Marayama	   Y,	   Montemurro	   MA,	   Logothetis	   NK,	   Panzeri	   S	   (2008)	   Low-­‐
Frequency	   Local	   Field	   Potentials	   and	   Spikes	   in	   Primary	   Visual	   Cortex	   Convey	   Independent	   Visual	  
Information.	  J	  Neurosci	  28:5696–5709.	  
Buzsáki	  G,	  Anastassiou	  CA,	  Koch	  C	  (2012)	  The	  origin	  of	  extracellular	  fields	  and	  currents	  —	  EEG,	  ECoG,	  LFP	  
and	  spikes.	  Nat	  Rev	  Neurosci	  13:407–420.	  

Chen	  T-­‐W,	  Wardill	  TJ,	  Sun	  Y,	  Pulver	  SR,	  Renninger	  SL,	  Baohan	  A,	  Schreiter	  ER,	  Kerr	  RA,	  Orger	  MB,	  Jayaraman	  
V,	   Looger	   LL,	   Svoboda	   K,	   Kim	   DS	   (2013)	   Ultrasensitive	   fluorescent	   proteins	   for	   imaging	   neuronal	  
activity.	  Nature	  499:295–300.	  
De	   Ruyter	   van	   Steveninck	   RR,	   Lewen	   GD,	   Strong	   SP,	   Koberle	   R,	   Bialek	   W	   (1997)	   Reproducibility	   and	  
Variability	  in	  Neural	  Spike	  Trains.	  Science	  275:1805–1808.	  
Denk	   W,	   Delaney	   KR,	   Gelperin	   A,	   Kleinfeld	   D,	   Strowbridge	   BW,	   Tank	   DW,	   Yuste	   R	   (1994)	   Anatomical	   and	  
functional	   imaging	   of	   neurons	   using	   2-­‐photon	   laser	   scanning	   microscopy.	   J	   Neurosci	   Methods	  
54:151–162.	  
Denk	   W,	   Strickler	   JH,	   Webb	   WW	   (1990)	   Two-­‐photon	   laser	   scanning	   fluorescence	   microscopy.	   Science	  
248:73–76.	  
Einevoll	   GT,	   Kayser	   C,	   Logothetis	   NK,	   Panzeri	   S	   (2013)	   Modelling	   and	   analysis	   of	   local	   field	   potentials	   for	  
studying	  the	  function	  of	  cortical	  circuits.	  Nat	  Rev	  Neurosci	  14:770–785.	  
Gan	   JQ	   (2006)	   Feature	   dimensionality	   reduction	   by	   manifold	   learning	   in	   brain-­‐computer	   interface	   design.	  
In:	   3rd	   International	   Workshop	   on	   Brain-­‐Computer	   Interfaces,	   Graz,	   Austria,	   pp	   28–29	   Available	   at:	  
http://cswww.essex.ac.uk/Research/BCIs/BCI06_GAN1.pdf	  [Accessed	  January	  17,	  2014].	  
Ince	  RAA,	  Mazzoni	  A,	  Petersen	  RS,	  Panzeri	  S	  (2010)	  Open	  source	  tools	  for	  the	  information	  theoretic	  analysis	  
of	  neural	  data.	  Front	  Neurosci	  4:62–70.	  
Kraskov	  A,	  St\ögbauer	  H,	  Grassberger	  P	  (2004)	  Estimating	  mutual	  information.	  Phys	  Rev	  E	  69:66138.	  
Magri	   C,	   Mazzoni	   A,	   Logothetis	   NK,	   Panzeri	   S	   (2012a)	   Optimal	   band	   separation	   of	   extracellular	   field	  
potentials.	  J	  Neurosci	  Methods	  210:66–78.	  
Magri	   C,	   Schridde	   U,	   Murayama	   Y,	   Panzeri	   S,	   Logothetis	   NK	   (2012b)	   The	   Amplitude	   and	   Timing	   of	   the	   BOLD	  
Signal	   Reflects	   the	   Relationship	   between	   Local	   Field	   Potential	   Power	   at	   Different	   Frequencies.	   J	  
Neurosci	  32:1395–1407.	  
Magri	  C,	  Whittingstall	  K,	  Singh	  V,	  Logothetis	  NK,	  Panzeri	  S	  (2009)	  A	  toolbox	  for	  the	  fast	  information	  analysis	  
of	  multiple-­‐site	  LFP,	  EEG	  and	  spike	  train	  recordings.	  BMC	  Neurosci	  10:81.	  
Montemurro	   MA,	   Panzeri	   S,	   Maravall	   M,	   Alenda	   A,	   Bale	   MR,	   Brambilla	   M,	   Petersen	   RS	   (2007)	   Role	   of	  
Precise	   Spike	   Timing	   in	   Coding	   of	   Dynamic	   Vibrissa	   Stimuli	   in	   Somatosensory	   Thalamus.	   J	  
Neurophysiol	  98:1871–1882.	  
Oñativia	  J,	  Schultz	  SR,	  Dragotti	  PL	  (2013)	  A	  finite	  rate	  of	  innovation	  algorithm	  for	  fast	  and	  accurate	  spike	  
detection	  from	  two-­‐photon	  calcium	  imaging.	  J	  Neural	  Eng	  10:046017.	  
Panzeri	  S,	  Petersen	  RS,	  Schultz	  SR,	  Lebedev	  M,	  Diamond	  ME	  (2001)	  The	  Role	  of	  Spike	  Timing	  in	  the	  Coding	  
of	  Stimulus	  Location	  in	  Rat	  Somatosensory	  Cortex.	  Neuron	  29:769–777.	  
Quian	   Quiroga	   R,	   Panzeri	   S	   (2009)	   Extracting	   information	   from	   neuronal	   populations:	   information	   theory	  
and	  decoding	  approaches.	  Nat	  Rev	  Neurosci	  10:173–185.	  
Rieke	   F,	   Bialek	   W,	   Warland	   D,	   de	   Ruyter	   van	   Steveninck	   RR	   (1997)	   Spikes:	   Exploring	   the	   Neural	   Code.	  
Bradford	  Book.	  

Roweis	   ST,	   Saul	   LK	   (2000)	   Nonlinear	   Dimensionality	   Reduction	   by	   Locally	   Linear	   Embedding.	   Science	  
290:2323–2326.	  
Schultz	   SR,	   Kitamura	   K,	   Post-­‐Uiterweer	   A,	   Krupic	   J,	   Häusser	   M	   (2009)	   Spatial	   Pattern	   Coding	   of	   Sensory	  
Information	   by	   Climbing	   Fiber-­‐Evoked	   Calcium	   Signals	   in	   Networks	   of	   Neighboring	   Cerebellar	  
Purkinje	  Cells.	  J	  Neurosci	  29:8005–8015.	  
Seung	  HS,	  Lee	  DD	  (2000)	  The	  Manifold	  Ways	  of	  Perception.	  Science	  290:2268–2269.	  
Stosiek	   C,	   Garaschuk	   O,	   Holthoff	   K,	   Konnerth	   A	   (2003)	   In	   vivo	   two-­‐photon	   calcium	   imaging	   of	   neuronal	  
networks.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  100:7319–7324.	  
	  
	  

	  

Figures	  and	  Figure	  Captions	  
	  

	  
	  
Figure	   1:	   Effect	   of	   temporal	   resolution	   of	   spike	   times	   on	   information.	   (A):	   The	   response	   of	   a	   neuron	   is	  
initially	   recorded	   as	   a	   series	   of	   spike	   times.	   To	   investigate	   the	   temporal	   resolution	   at	   which	   spike	   times	  
carry	   information,	   the	   spike	   train	   is	   binned	   at	   a	   variety	   of	   different	   time	   resolutions,	   by	   labeling	   the	  
response	   at	   each	   time	   with	   the	   number	   of	   spikes	   occurring	   within	   that	   bin,	   thereby	   transforming	   the	  
response	   into	   a	   discrete	   integer	   sequence.	   (B):	   The	   information	   rate	   (information	   per	   unit	   time)	   about	  
whisker	   deflections	   carried	   by	   VPm	   thalamic	   neurons	   as	   a	   function	   of	   bin	   width,	   Δt,	   used	   to	   bin	   neural	  
responses.	   Information	   rate	   increased	   with	   bin	   resolution	   up	   to	   0.5ms,	   the	   limit	   of	   the	   experimental	   setup.	  
This	   shows	   that	   a	   very	   fine	   temporal	   resolution	   is	   needed	   to	   read	   out	   the	   sensory	   messages	   carried	   by	  
these	  thalamic	  spike	  trains.	  Figure	  reprinted	  with	  permission	  from	  (Ince	  et	  al.,	  2010).	  
	  
	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
	  
Fig.	   2:	   The	  visual	  information	  carried	  by	  LFP	  power	  at	  different	  frequencies.	  A)	  LFP	  power	  spectrum	  of	  V1	  
recordings	  anaesthetized	  macaques	  during	  either	  spontaneous	  activity	  in	  the	  dark	  (dashed	  line)	  or	  during	  
the	   presentation	   of	   a	   color	   movie	   stimulus	   (solid	   line).	   (B)	   Information	   about	   the	   movie	   stimulus	   carried	   by	  
LFP	  power	  at	  different	  frequencies.	  The	  area	  indicates	  the	  SEM.	  Reproduced	  from	  (Magri	  et	  al.,	  2012a).	  
	  
	  

