RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
Title	  
The	  paradoxical	  relationship	  of	  difficulty	  and	  lateral	  frontal	  cortex	  activity.	  
	  
Authors	  
Christopher	  H.	  Chatham1,	  Nicole	  M.	  Long2,	  and	  David	  Badre3,4	  	  
	  
Affiliations	  
	  
1Clinical	  &	  Translational	  Imaging,	  Pfizer	  Worldwide	  Research	  &	  Development	  
2Department	  of	  Psychology,	  University	  of	  Pennsylvania	  
3Cognitive,	  Linguistic,	  and	  Psychological	  Sciences,	  Brown	  University	  
4Brown	  Institute	  for	  Brain	  Science,	  Brown	  University	  
	  
Competing	  financial	  interests	  	  
The	  authors	  declare	  no	  competing	  financial	  interests.	  	  
	  
Corresponding	  authors	  
Christopher	  Chatham	  (chathach@gmail.com)	  
David	  Badre	  (david_badre@brown.edu)	  
	  
Running	  Title	  
Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
	  
Abstract	  
	  
Task	  difficulty	  is	  widely	  cited	  in	  current	  theory	  regarding	  cognitive	  control	  and	  
fronto-­‐parietal	  function.	  Ongoing	  debate	  surrounds	  the	  extent	  to	  which	  global	  
difficulty	  across	  multiple	  cognitive	  demands	  is	  the	  main	  driver	  of	  lateral	  frontal	  
activity.	  Here,	  we	  examine	  a	  commonly	  cited	  behavioral	  marker	  of	  difficulty	  in	  these	  
accounts:	  time-­‐on-­‐task	  (ToT),	  as	  assessed	  by	  response	  time.	  Specifically,	  we	  
investigate	  the	  task-­‐dependent	  scaling	  of	  frontal	  BOLD	  responses	  with	  ToT	  during	  
hierarchical	  cognitive	  control.	  We	  observe	  a	  paradoxical	  relationship,	  whereby	  
rostral	  regions	  show	  greater	  scaling	  with	  ToT	  on	  a	  first-­‐order	  task,	  despite	  showing	  
greater	  recruitment	  on	  a	  second-­‐order	  task;	  caudal	  regions	  show	  the	  converse	  
relationships.	  Together,	  these	  results	  demonstrate	  that	  ToT	  does	  not	  reflect	  a	  single	  
dimension	  of	  difficulty	  that	  uniformly	  drives	  lateral	  frontal	  activity.	  	  Rather,	  this	  
discrepancy	  in	  the	  mean	  and	  scaling	  of	  BOLD	  requires	  that	  multiple,	  distinct	  
processes	  are	  instantiated	  across	  these	  fronto-­‐parietal	  regions	  in	  the	  service	  of	  
cognitive	  control	  function.	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

1	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
Main	  Text	  	  
	  
Cognitive	  control	  refers	  to	  the	  array	  of	  mechanisms	  enabling	  goal-­‐directed	  behavior	  
when	  habits	  prove	  insufficient.	  Difficult	  tasks	  often	  require	  deliberative,	  strategic,	  
and	  goal-­‐directed	  processing.	  Therefore,	  cognitive	  control	  is	  generally	  more	  
necessary	  as	  tasks	  become	  more	  difficult.	  Most	  prior	  research	  in	  cognitive	  control	  
has	  sought	  to	  fractionate	  difficulty	  into	  subtypes	  relying	  on	  dissociable	  
neurocognitive	  mechanisms.	  Some	  of	  the	  posited	  subtypes	  pertain	  to	  the	  
multifaceted	  origins	  of	  task	  difficulty,	  such	  as	  stimulus-­‐	  vs.	  response-­‐related	  
conflict1	  or	  temporal	  or	  rule	  abstraction2-­‐5.	  Orthogonal	  characterizations	  involve	  the	  
temporal	  dynamics	  by	  which	  such	  difficulties	  are	  addressed,	  e.g.,	  via	  proactive	  vs.	  
reactive6-­‐7	  or	  serial	  vs.	  parallel	  decision	  making8-­‐10.	  Yet	  another	  approach	  involves	  
dissociating	  closely	  intertwined	  sources	  of	  individual	  differences	  in	  batteries	  of	  
difficult	  tasks,	  such	  as	  between	  shifting	  vs.	  updating	  abilities11-­‐13.	  	  
	  
However,	  recent	  evidence	  suggests	  that	  a	  unitary	  construct	  of	  task	  difficulty	  may	  
also	  play	  an	  important	  role	  in	  the	  mechanisms	  of	  cognitive	  control.	  This	  proposal	  is	  
motivated	  by	  three	  diverse	  sources	  of	  evidence.	  First,	  a	  large	  network	  of	  
frontoparietal	  regions	  –	  sometimes	  referred	  to	  as	  the	  “multiple	  demand”	  or	  
“frontoparietal	  control”	  network	  –	  responds	  with	  surprising	  uniformity	  during	  
difficult	  tasks,	  despite	  the	  heterogenous	  subcomponents	  of	  task	  difficulty	  
enumerated	  above	  and	  the	  anatomical	  heterogeneity	  in	  the	  frontoparietal	  network	  
itself14-­‐15.	  Second,	  task	  difficulty	  itself	  might	  require	  a	  unified	  cognitive	  
representation,	  to	  permit	  the	  evaluation	  of	  whether	  a	  task	  is	  too	  demanding	  to	  be	  
worth	  performing16-­‐17.	  Third,	  there	  are	  quite	  general	  demands	  imposed	  by	  all	  
cognitive	  control	  tasks,	  to	  which	  individuals	  respond	  in	  highly	  characteristic	  and	  
even	  heritable	  ways12.	  This	  global	  ability	  to	  perform	  well	  on	  difficult	  tasks	  may	  be	  at	  
the	  basis	  of	  fluid	  intelligence15.	  Thus,	  there	  are	  a	  variety	  of	  empirical	  and	  normative	  
reasons	  to	  expect	  that	  task	  difficulty	  may	  not	  be	  entirely	  reducible	  to	  separable	  
neurocognitive	  subcomponents.	  
	  
To	  test	  a	  unitary	  construct	  of	  difficulty,	  difficulty	  must	  be	  measured	  in	  multiple	  
ways.	  This	  requirement	  stems	  from	  the	  fact	  that	  even	  perfect	  double-­‐dissociations	  
in	  a	  single	  dependent	  variable	  can	  be	  explained	  by	  single-­‐process	  models18-­‐21.	  	  By	  
contrast,	  the	  use	  of	  multiple	  dependent	  variables	  enables	  a	  more	  constrained	  test:	  
any	  mapping	  from	  a	  single	  latent	  process	  to	  two	  (or	  more)	  dependent	  variables	  also	  
implicitly	  determines	  a	  mapping	  between	  the	  dependent	  variables	  themselves.	  For	  
example,	  if	  task	  difficulty	  is	  assessed	  in	  more	  ways	  than	  mere	  “time-­‐on-­‐task”	  (i.e.,	  
reaction	  time;	  RT)	  –	  e.g.,	  if	  it	  is	  also	  assessed	  in	  terms	  of	  the	  frontoparietal	  BOLD	  
response	  –	  then	  a	  mapping	  from	  BOLD	  to	  RT	  is	  also	  thereby	  posited	  (Figure	  1A).	  
This	  mapping	  can	  then	  be	  used	  to	  test,	  and	  potentially	  reject,	  a	  large	  class	  of	  single-­‐
process	  models	  that	  relate	  difficulty	  to	  both	  time-­‐on-­‐task	  and	  frontoparietal	  
recruitment	  (Figure	  1B-­‐C).	  Thus,	  the	  delineation	  of	  relationships	  among	  dependent	  
variables,	  and	  in	  particular	  that	  between	  RT	  and	  BOLD,	  is	  crucial	  for	  testing	  what	  a	  
unitary	  difficulty	  construct	  alone	  can	  explain	  in	  the	  domain	  of	  cognitive	  control.	  
	  
	  

2	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  

	  

Figure	  1	  –	  Multiple	  dependent	  variables	  render	  single-­‐process	  models	  falsifiable.	  Classical	  dissociation	  
logic	  and	  more	  recent	  state-­‐trace	  methods	  cannot	  distinguish	  single	  from	  multiple	  process	  models	  on	  the	  basis	  
of	  a	  single	  dependent	  measure18-­‐21	  However,	  the	  use	  of	  multiple	  dependent	  measures	  can	  allow	  for	  the	  rejection	  
of	  certain	  single-­‐process	  models.	  A.	  If	  the	  difference	  between	  two	  tasks	  in	  two	  dependent	  variables	  (here,	  BOLD	  
and	  RT)	  is	  to	  be	  explained	  on	  the	  basis	  of	  a	  latent	  single	  process	  (here,	  “difficulty”),	  then	  one	  must	  specify	  two	  
mappings:	  the	  mapping	  between	  difficulty	  and	  BOLD,	  and	  between	  difficulty	  and	  RT.	  However,	  these	  mappings	  
by	  necessity	  also	  make	  a	  prediction	  for	  the	  relationship	  between	  the	  dependent	  measures	  themselves.	  	  B.	  To	  
illustrate,	  consider	  tasks	  with	  partially-­‐overlapping	  ranges	  of	  difficulty:	  “Task	  A”,	  which	  is	  generally	  somewhat	  
less	  difficult	  (blue	  range),	  and	  “Task	  B”,	  which	  is	  generally	  somewhat	  more	  difficult	  (red	  range).	  Any	  differences	  
in	  BOLD	  and	  RT	  between	  two	  tasks	  can	  always	  be	  explained	  by	  drawing	  arbitrarily	  complex	  curves	  relating	  
difficulty	  to	  them	  (black	  lines).	  Implicitly,	  however,	  this	  also	  specifies	  a	  predicted	  relationship	  of	  BOLD	  to	  RT	  	  
that	  can	  be	  tested	  empirically	  (C).	  For	  example,	  the	  RT/BOLD	  relationship	  should	  be	  identical	  across	  tasks	  that	  
are	  matched	  for	  RT	  (purple	  region),	  if	  RT	  is	  a	  monotonic	  function	  of	  difficulty,	  regardless	  of	  monotonicity	  in	  the	  
mapping	  from	  difficulty	  to	  BOLD.	  	  

This	  agenda	  is	  complicated	  by	  a	  host	  of	  rarely-­‐mentioned	  methodological	  issues.	  
These	  issues	  generally	  derive	  from	  the	  fact	  that	  RT	  is	  itself	  a	  dependent	  measure,	  
and	  hence	  cannot	  be	  treated	  the	  same	  as	  other	  explanatory	  variables	  in	  a	  general	  
linear	  model	  (GLM).	  First,	  while	  the	  GLM	  returns	  unbiased	  parameter	  estimates	  
despite	  errors	  in	  dependent	  variables,	  it	  is	  biased	  by	  errors	  in	  the	  independent	  
variables	  (via	  regression	  dilution22).	  While	  experimental	  factors	  can	  be	  imposed	  
without	  error	  by	  an	  experimenter,	  RT	  does	  contain	  measurement	  error.	  As	  a	  result,	  
RT	  effects	  are	  uniquely	  subject	  to	  regression	  dilution	  when	  used	  in	  a	  traditional	  
GLM	  for	  fMRI.	  Second,	  whereas	  experimental	  effects	  are	  typically	  optimized	  by	  
design	  to	  yield	  frequency	  spectra	  where	  the	  BOLD	  signal	  is	  most	  sensitive,	  RTs	  
intrinsically	  vary	  with	  the	  1/f	  spectrum	  dominated	  by	  MR	  noise23.	  As	  a	  result,	  
RT/BOLD	  mappings	  may	  vary	  between	  tasks	  due	  to	  differences	  in	  the	  frequency	  
spectra	  of	  the	  RTs	  they	  elicit,	  rather	  than	  true	  differences	  in	  the	  underlying	  mapping	  
from	  RT	  to	  neural	  activity.	  Finally,	  differences	  in	  the	  observed	  range	  of	  RTs	  in	  
different	  conditions	  may	  produce	  artifactual	  differences	  in	  RT/BOLD	  mappings	  
across	  those	  conditions,	  if	  the	  actual	  RT/BOLD	  mapping	  is	  nonlinear	  (e.g.,	  Fig	  1C).	  
To	  our	  knowledge,	  none	  of	  these	  issues	  has	  been	  addressed	  in	  prior	  investigations	  
of	  RT/BOLD	  relationships,	  despite	  the	  widespread	  use	  of	  “brain-­‐behavior”	  
correlations	  in	  cognitive	  neuroscience,	  and	  the	  ongoing	  debate	  regarding	  the	  kind	  
	  

3	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
and	  number	  of	  latent	  constructs	  necessary	  to	  explain	  cognitive	  control-­‐related	  
effects	  in	  RT	  and	  BOLD24-­‐29.	  
	  
Here,	  we	  address	  these	  challenges	  to	  examine	  whether	  a	  global	  “difficulty”	  
construct,	  as	  reflected	  in	  RT,	  can	  explain	  frontal	  BOLD	  responses	  typically	  
associated	  with	  cognitive	  control.	  Specifically,	  we	  administered	  to	  subjects	  a	  
concrete,	  first-­‐order	  task	  (a	  so-­‐called	  “1D”	  task	  involving	  only	  one	  conditionality,	  of	  
the	  form	  “if	  shape	  A,	  then	  button	  X;	  if	  shape	  B,	  then	  button	  Y”;	  see	  Figure	  2A)	  as	  well	  
as	  a	  more	  abstract,	  second-­‐order	  task	  (a	  “2D”	  task	  involving	  a	  second	  level	  of	  
conditionality,	  of	  the	  form:	  “if	  color	  1,	  then	  respond	  according	  to	  the	  shape	  rules;	  if	  
color	  2,	  then	  respond	  according	  to	  the	  texture	  rules”;	  see	  Figure	  2B).	  Multiple	  prior	  
studies	  show	  that	  more	  abstract,	  higher	  order	  tasks,	  like	  the	  2D	  task,	  drive	  the	  
recruitment	  of	  more	  rostral	  regions	  in	  prefrontal	  cortex2-­‐5,	  but	  task	  difficulty	  has	  
also	  been	  offered	  as	  an	  alternative	  explanation	  for	  these	  results14;	  c.f.	  30.	  Our	  results	  
will	  show	  a	  paradoxical	  relationship	  between	  RT	  and	  BOLD	  in	  fronto-­‐parietal	  cortex	  
suggesting	  that	  task	  difficulty	  alone	  cannot	  be	  considered	  a	  unitary	  explanation	  of	  
heterogeneity	  in	  the	  frontal	  lobe	  BOLD	  response	  to	  demands	  on	  cognitive	  control.	  
	  	  
A.#1D#Task#

B.#2D#Task#

16s$

2)8ss$

2)8ss$
2s$
!me$

2s$

2)8ss$

2s$

…$

	  

Figure	  2.	  Task	  Design.	  Following	  an	  instructed	  training	  phase	  in	  which	  subjects	  learned	  to	  respond	  with	  one	  of	  
four	  fingers	  to	  each	  of	  four	  shapes	  and	  textures	  (not	  illustrated;	  see	  Methods),	  subjects	  completed	  interleaved	  
blocks	  of	  two	  tasks	  while	  undergoing	  fMRI.	  (A)	  In	  blocks	  of	  the	  1D	  task,	  subjects	  were	  first	  cued	  as	  to	  which	  of	  
the	  dimension	  rules	  they	  had	  practiced	  (shape	  vs.	  texture)	  would	  be	  relevant	  for	  that	  block.	  Color	  was	  thus	  
entirely	  irrelevant.	  (B)	  In	  blocks	  of	  the	  2D	  task,	  subjects	  were	  cued	  as	  to	  which	  colors	  mapped	  to	  which	  
dimension.	  Subjects	  therefore	  had	  to	  use	  color	  as	  a	  context	  for	  adjudicating	  between	  two	  policies	  –	  responding	  
on	  the	  basis	  of	  shape,	  vs.	  responding	  on	  the	  basis	  of	  color.	  

	  
Results	  
	  
Behavioral	  Results	  –	  Error	  Rates.	  By	  the	  final	  block	  of	  training,	  subjects	  performed	  
with	  a	  mean	  error	  rate	  (ER)	  of	  4.1%	  (range	  0-­‐11%),	  indicating	  they	  understood	  the	  
rules	  and	  had	  memorized	  the	  feature-­‐to-­‐response	  mappings.	  Overall	  accuracy	  
during	  the	  experimental	  phase	  was	  likewise	  excellent	  (mean	  ER	  7%;	  range:	  0-­‐13%).	  

	  

4	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
A	  2	  (task:	  1D	  vs.	  2D)	  x	  2	  (frequency:	  high	  vs.	  low)	  repeated	  measures	  analysis	  of	  
variance	  (RM-­‐ANOVA)	  on	  ER	  revealed	  increased	  errors	  in	  the	  2D	  task	  
(F(1,21)=100.87,	  p<.001;	  Figure	  3A).	  	  
	  
Behavioral	  Results	  –	  RT.	  The	  D1	  and	  D2	  tasks	  elicited	  several	  changes	  in	  the	  
distribution	  of	  reaction	  time.	  Correct	  trial	  RT	  was	  tested	  using	  a	  2	  (task:	  1D	  vs.	  2D)	  x	  
2	  (frequency:	  high	  vs.	  low)	  RM-­‐ANOVA.	  RT	  was	  increased	  on	  the	  2D	  task	  
(F(1,21)=1033.34,	  p<.001;	  Figure	  3B).	  Further	  effects	  of	  task	  on	  the	  RT	  distribution	  
were	  revealed	  by	  plotting	  the	  mean	  RT	  within	  each	  decile	  of	  the	  condition-­‐specific	  
RT	  distribution	  (Figure	  3C),	  and	  subjected	  to	  statistical	  analysis	  using	  within-­‐subject	  
measures	  of	  RT	  standard	  deviation,	  skew,	  and	  kurtosis.	  In	  particular,	  RT’s	  standard	  
deviation	  (Figure	  3D)	  was	  increased	  in	  the	  2D	  condition	  (F(1,21)=53.70,	  p<.001).	  
The	  2D	  task	  was	  also	  less	  positively	  skewed	  than	  the	  1D	  task	  (F(1,21)=182.83,	  
p<.001;	  Figure	  3E)	  and	  showed	  reduced	  kurtosis	  (F(1,21)=48.67,	  p<.001;	  Figure	  
3F).	  In	  summary,	  the	  1D	  and	  2D	  tasks	  are	  characterized	  by	  an	  array	  of	  differences	  in	  
the	  RT	  distribution,	  with	  significant	  task	  effects	  present	  in	  each	  of	  its	  first	  four	  
moments.	  
	  

B"
1200"

0.12"

1100"

0.1"
0.08"
0.06"
0.04"

Mean$RT$within$Decile$(ms)$

C"

0.14"

RT$(mean;$ms)$

1000"
900"
800"
700"

0.02"
0"
1D"

600"

2D"

1D"

Task$

D"

E"

350"
250"

RT$(skew)$

RT$(stdev;$ms)$

300"
200"
150"
100"

1700"

0"

1100"

2D"
Task$

900"
700"
500"
1" 2" 3" 4" 5" 6" 7" 8" 9" 10"

2D"

Decile$of$Task$RT$Distribu>on$

Task$

F"

2"

5"
4"

1.5"
1"

3"
2"
1"
0"
.1"

0"
1D"

2D"

1300"

0.5"

50"

1D"

1500"

RT$(Kurtosis)$

Error$Rate$

A"

.2"
1D"

2D"
Task$

1D"

2D"
Task$

	  

Figure	  3.	  Task-­‐related	  differences	  in	  behavior.	  Performance	  of	  the	  2D	  task	  differed	  from	  the	  1D	  task	  in	  
several	  ways,	  including	  elevated	  error	  rates	  (A),	  increases	  in	  mean	  RT	  (B),	  and	  several	  further	  alterations	  to	  the	  
RT	  distribution,	  as	  displayed	  in	  the	  decile	  plot	  of	  (C).	  In	  particular,	  the	  2D	  task	  was	  associated	  with	  increased	  RT	  
variability	  (as	  assessed	  by	  the	  within-­‐subject	  standard	  deviation	  of	  RT;	  D),	  decreased	  skew	  (E),	  and	  reduced	  
kurtosis	  (F).	  	  

	  
	  

5	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
Imaging	  Results	  –	  Main	  Effects	  of	  Task.	  The	  1D	  and	  2D	  tasks	  were	  both	  associated	  
with	  significant	  BOLD	  change,	  relative	  to	  fixation,	  in	  a	  wide	  set	  of	  frontoparietal	  
regions	  (Figure	  4A;	  black	  outlined	  regions).	  Further,	  an	  overlapping	  set	  of	  frontal,	  
parietal,	  and	  occipital	  sites	  showed	  a	  significantly	  greater	  BOLD	  response	  to	  2D	  task	  
events	  than	  1D	  task	  events	  (Figure	  4A;	  orange	  regions).	  Conversely,	  regions	  
typically	  associated	  with	  the	  “default	  mode”	  network	  were	  less	  deactivated	  by	  1D	  
task	  events,	  and	  hence	  showed	  greater	  BOLD	  during	  1D	  than	  2D	  task	  events,	  
including	  the	  medial	  prefrontal	  cortex,	  middle	  temporal	  lobe,	  and	  the	  
temporoparietal	  junction	  (Figure	  4;	  blue	  regions).	  
	  

A

2D Task events > 1D Task events
(z>+/-2.58, p<.05 corrected; black is conjunction of Task>null)

z=6

z = -6

B

1D Time on Task Effect > 2D Time On Task Effect
(Blue regions: 1D Time on Task; Red regions: 2D Time on Task; all p<.05 corrected)

z = 2.58

z=4

	  

Figure	  4.	  Mean	  frontoparietal	  BOLD	  to	  1D	  and	  2D	  tasks	  (A)	  and	  its	  scaling	  with	  RT	  (B).	  A.	  Though	  the	  1D	  
and	  2D	  task	  alike	  yielded	  reliable	  activation	  in	  the	  variety	  of	  frontal,	  parietal,	  occipital	  and	  subcortical	  sites	  
typical	  of	  demands	  on	  cognitive	  control	  (black	  outlined	  regions	  represent	  the	  conjunction	  across	  tasks),	  the	  2D	  
task	  was	  nonetheless	  associated	  with	  a	  significantly	  greater	  BOLD	  response	  in	  most	  of	  these	  areas	  (orange	  
regions).	  The	  1D	  task	  was	  associated	  with	  a	  significantly	  greater	  BOLD	  response	  in	  a	  more	  restricted	  set	  of	  
areas,	  including	  temporo-­‐parietal,	  posterior	  insula,	  middle	  temporal,	  and	  both	  anterior	  medial	  and	  midline	  
prefrontal	  regions.	  B.	  Blue	  outlines	  show	  regions	  exhibiting	  a	  significant	  parametric	  response	  as	  a	  function	  of	  
time	  spent	  on	  the	  1D	  task;	  red	  outlines	  show	  regions	  with	  a	  significant	  parametric	  response	  to	  time	  spent	  on	  the	  
2D	  task.	  These	  time-­‐on-­‐task	  effects	  were	  significantly	  stronger	  in	  the	  1D	  task	  in	  specific	  foci	  within	  rostrolateral	  
prefrontal	  cortex,	  inferior	  frontal	  sulcus,	  and	  the	  dorsal	  pre-­‐premotor	  cortex,	  along	  with	  a	  broad	  swath	  of	  the	  
intraparietal	  sulcus,	  its	  dorsal	  bank,	  and	  the	  superior	  parietal	  lobule.	  No	  regions	  showed	  a	  significantly	  greater	  
scaling	  with	  time	  on	  the	  2D	  task	  after	  correction	  for	  multiple	  comparisons.	  

	  

6	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
	  
Imaging	  Results	  –	  Effects	  of	  Time-­‐on-­‐task.	  To	  assess	  the	  hemodynamic	  consequences	  
of	  the	  different	  reaction	  times	  observed	  in	  the	  1D	  and	  2D	  tasks	  (see	  Figure	  3),	  we	  
added	  two	  variable-­‐epoch	  regressors	  to	  the	  GLM,	  corresponding	  to	  correct	  RTs	  in	  
the	  1D	  and	  2D	  tasks	  respectively.	  As	  can	  be	  seen	  in	  Figure	  5,	  time-­‐on-­‐task	  effects	  in	  
a	  variety	  of	  frontoparietal	  regions	  were	  reliably	  stronger	  within	  the	  1D	  task,	  relative	  
to	  the	  2D	  task	  (orange	  regions	  of	  Figure	  4B).	  Indeed,	  time	  on	  the	  1D	  task	  related	  to	  
activity	  in	  a	  large	  set	  of	  frontal,	  parietal	  and	  occipital	  regions	  (blue	  outlines	  of	  Figure	  
4B)	  whereas	  BOLD	  scaled	  with	  time	  on	  the	  2D	  task	  solely	  in	  midline	  prefrontal	  
regions	  generally	  associated	  with	  the	  default	  mode.	  
	  
As	  introduced	  above,	  differences	  in	  RT/BOLD	  scaling	  between	  conditions	  can	  arise	  
from	  a	  number	  of	  sources.	  For	  example,	  differences	  in	  parameter	  estimates	  can	  arise	  
from	  the	  use	  of	  independent	  variables	  with	  variable	  error	  (via	  regression	  
dilution22).	  However,	  the	  split-­‐half	  reliability	  of	  RT	  was	  excellent	  on	  both	  tasks	  
(Cronbach’s	  Alpha	  of	  .946	  and	  	  .935	  for	  odd	  vs.	  even	  RTs	  in	  the	  1D	  and	  2D	  tasks,	  
respectively;	  Fig	  5A),	  indicating	  that	  regression	  dilution	  could	  not	  explain	  the	  
present	  results.	  Alternatively,	  differences	  in	  our	  parameter	  estimates	  might	  have	  
arisen	  due	  to	  differences	  in	  the	  frequency	  spectrum	  of	  our	  regressors.	  For	  example,	  
any	  regressor	  whose	  spectral	  power	  lies	  within	  the	  frequency	  bands	  typically	  
removed	  from	  the	  BOLD	  timeseries	  (such	  as	  through	  high-­‐pass	  filtering)	  would	  
appear	  to	  be	  associated	  with	  less	  BOLD	  signal	  change.	  However,	  the	  convolved	  RT	  
regressor	  of	  the	  2D	  task	  actually	  had	  greater	  power	  across	  all	  frequency	  bands	  
relevant	  to	  the	  BOLD	  response	  than	  the	  1D	  task.	  In	  particular,	  the	  power	  of	  the	  2D	  
task’s	  RT	  regressor	  peaked	  at	  roughly	  the	  same	  frequency	  as	  the	  BOLD	  response,	  
implying	  that	  if	  differences	  in	  spectral	  profile	  were	  the	  only	  factor	  driving	  the	  
relation	  to	  RT,	  then	  the	  2D	  task	  should	  actually	  have	  been	  associated	  with	  greater	  
BOLD/RT	  scaling	  than	  the	  1D	  task,	  not	  less	  (Figure	  5B).	  
1D"Trials"

B

2D"Trials"

Hemodynamic"Response"

1D"Trials"

2D"Trials"

1500"
Power%

Even%Trial%RT%(ms)%

A
1000"
500"
0"
0"

500"
1000"
Odd%Trial%RT%(ms)%

1500"

0.01"

0.1"
Temporal%Frequency%(Hz)%

	  

Figure	  5.	  Task	  differences	  in	  the	  RT/BOLD	  mapping	  cannot	  be	  explained	  by	  regression	  dilution	  (A)	  or	  
differences	  in	  filter-­‐matching	  with	  the	  BOLD	  response	  (B).	  A.	  In	  the	  GLM,	  parameter	  estimates	  are	  biased	  in	  
proportion	  to	  error	  in	  explanatory	  variables.	  However,	  the	  split	  half	  reliability	  of	  the	  tasks	  was	  excellent,	  
suggesting	  that	  differences	  in	  measurement	  error	  could	  not	  explain	  the	  differential	  effects	  of	  time-­‐on-­‐task	  
between	  1D	  and	  2D	  tasks.	  B.	  Though	  experimental	  factors	  are	  typically	  optimized	  to	  match	  the	  spectrum	  of	  the	  
BOLD	  response	  (black	  line),	  RT	  is	  not	  under	  direct	  experimental	  control.	  As	  a	  result,	  artifactual	  differences	  in	  the	  
BOLD	  correlates	  of	  RT	  could	  reflect	  differences	  in	  the	  spectral	  power.	  However,	  we	  find	  that	  the	  2D	  task	  is	  
associated	  with	  greater	  power	  across	  the	  spectrum	  relevant	  to	  the	  BOLD	  response,	  with	  a	  prominent	  peak	  in	  the	  

	  

7	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
vicinity	  of	  the	  peak	  power	  of	  the	  canonical	  hemodynamic	  response	  itself.	  Thus,	  all	  else	  being	  equal,	  the	  2D	  task	  
should	  have	  been	  associated	  with	  greater	  measured	  BOLD	  change	  –	  contrary	  to	  observation.	  

	  
We	  next	  used	  a	  multivariate	  matching	  algorithm	  to	  subsample	  the	  1D	  and	  2D	  task	  
RT	  distributions	  so	  as	  to	  construct	  two	  sets	  of	  task	  events	  that	  were	  matched	  not	  
only	  in	  terms	  of	  RT,	  but	  also	  all	  experimental	  variables	  other	  than	  task	  itself	  (see	  
Methods).	  Despite	  the	  multifaceted	  differences	  in	  the	  original	  RT	  distribution	  across	  
the	  two	  tasks	  (left	  subpanel	  of	  Figure	  6A),	  our	  procedure	  generated	  a	  set	  of	  trials	  
matched	  in	  the	  first	  four	  moments	  of	  the	  distribution	  both	  at	  the	  aggregate	  (right	  
subpanel	  of	  Figure	  7A)	  and	  individual	  subject	  levels	  (Figure	  6B).	  Variable-­‐epoch	  
regressors	  were	  then	  constructed	  on	  the	  basis	  of	  these	  matched	  RTs.	  Despite	  this	  
close	  matching	  of	  RT,	  frontoparietal	  regions	  continued	  to	  show	  a	  stronger	  scaling	  
with	  RT	  in	  the	  1D,	  as	  compared	  to	  2D	  task	  (Figure	  7C,	  orange	  regions).	  A	  greater	  
scaling	  of	  BOLD	  with	  RT	  in	  the	  1D,	  as	  compared	  to	  2D	  task	  was	  limited	  to	  regions	  
that	  showed	  a	  significant	  scaling	  with	  matched	  RTs	  in	  the	  1D	  task	  (blue	  outlines	  in	  
Figure	  6C),	  and	  not	  the	  2D	  task	  (red	  outlines	  in	  Figure	  6C).	  	  

A

1600#

B
D1#Trials#
D2#Trials#

1400#
1200#
1000#
800#
600#

3#
2D#Measure#(z)#

RT#Within#Decile#(ms)#

1800#

Original

Matched

400#
1# 2# 3# 4# 5# 6# 7# 8# 9# 10#

1# 2# 3# 4# 5# 6# 7# 8# 9# 10#

Decile#

Decile#

2#
1#

Mean#

0#

St.#Dev#

31#

Skew#

32#

Kurtosis#

33#
33#

31#
1#
1D#Measure#(z)#

3#

C

z = 2.58

z=5

Matched Trials: 1D Time on Task Effect > 2D Time On Task Effect
(Blue regions show a 1D Time on Task Effect, red show a 2D Time on Task Effect; all p<.05 corrected)

Figure	  6.	  The	  temporal	  scaling	  of	  the	  frontoparietal	  BOLD	  response	  was	  significantly	  greater	  in	  the	  1D	  
task	  even	  when	  RT	  and	  other	  trial	  characteristics	  were	  precisely	  matched	  across	  tasks.	  A.	  A	  genetic	  
multivariate	  matching	  algorithm	  was	  used	  to	  subsample	  the	  task-­‐specific	  RT	  distributions	  and	  to	  construct	  a	  
subset	  of	  trials	  that	  were	  precisely	  balanced	  across	  tasks	  (see	  Methods).	  	  B.	  This	  matching	  algorithm	  yielded	  RT	  
distributions	  matched	  across	  tasks	  for	  each	  individual	  separately,	  in	  terms	  of	  the	  first	  four	  moments	  of	  the	  RT	  
distribution.	  To	  illustrate	  the	  success	  of	  this	  approach,	  we	  standardized	  the	  mean,	  standard	  deviation,	  skew	  and	  

	  

	  

8	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
kurtosis	  of	  each	  individual’s	  1D	  and	  2D	  task	  RT	  distributions	  with	  respect	  to	  the	  other	  instances	  of	  that	  same	  
measure	  across	  all	  other	  individuals	  and	  tasks.	  Thus,	  not	  only	  was	  the	  RT	  distribution	  matched	  in	  aggregate	  
across	  tasks,	  but	  individual	  differences	  in	  each	  aspect	  of	  the	  distributions	  were	  also	  matched	  across	  tasks.	  C.	  
Outlined	  blue	  regions	  show	  bilateral	  prePMd	  and	  parietal	  cortex	  as	  well	  as	  left	  RLPFC	  and	  IFS	  regions	  scale	  with	  
1D	  task	  RTs,	  whereas	  2D	  task	  RTs	  yield	  a	  significant	  BOLD	  response	  in	  middle	  temporal	  cortex.	  Left	  prePMd/IFS	  
and	  bilateral	  parietal	  regions	  showed	  a	  prominently	  increased	  response	  to	  time	  spent	  on	  the	  1D	  task,	  relative	  to	  
matched	  periods	  of	  time	  spent	  on	  the	  2D	  task.	  

Next,	  we	  constructed	  a	  “maximal	  model”	  controlling	  for	  other	  experimental	  factors	  
that	  might	  differ	  by	  task.	  This	  model	  controls	  for	  the	  effects	  of	  stimulus	  congruency,	  
of	  cue	  and	  response	  switching,	  and	  of	  sustained	  block-­‐related	  effects.	  The	  
differential	  scaling	  of	  BOLD	  with	  RT	  during	  the	  1D	  task	  remained	  significant	  in	  
select	  bilateral	  frontoparietal	  regions	  across	  all	  trials,	  including	  those	  previously	  
associated	  with	  hierarchical	  control3	  (RLPFC,	  white	  region,	  MNI:	  +/-­‐36,	  50,	  8;	  IFS,	  
blue	  region,	  MNI:	  +/-­‐	  52,	  24,	  24;	  and	  PrePMd,	  green	  region;	  PMd	  is	  also	  shown,	  in	  
red,	  MNI:	  +/-­‐32,	  -­‐12,	  66;	  Figure	  7A).	  At	  the	  whole-­‐brain	  level	  the	  left	  Pre-­‐PMd	  (and	  
adjacent	  IFS)	  continued	  to	  show	  a	  significantly	  greater	  scaling	  of	  BOLD	  with	  
matched	  trials	  in	  the	  1D,	  relative	  to	  2D	  task	  in	  this	  “maximal”	  model	  (Figure	  7B;	  see	  
also	  Table	  S1).	  	  
	  
A	  region-­‐of-­‐interest	  analysis	  of	  the	  a	  priori	  Pre-­‐PMd	  confirmed	  that	  the	  scaling	  of	  
bilateral	  Pre-­‐PMd	  BOLD	  with	  RT	  was	  larger	  during	  matched	  1D	  trials	  (as	  compared	  
to	  2D;	  F(1,21)=4.57,	  p=.04).	  Conversely,	  the	  mean	  BOLD	  response	  in	  this	  area	  was	  
nevertheless	  larger	  on	  average	  during	  matched	  2D	  trials	  (as	  compared	  to	  1D;	  
F(1,21)=4.83,	  p<.04).	  These	  two	  patterns	  were	  significantly	  different	  from	  one	  
another	  (F(1,21)=9.78,	  p=.005),	  and	  were	  unlike	  those	  observed	  in	  the	  more	  caudal	  
PMd	  (task	  [1D	  vs.	  2D]	  x	  measure	  [height	  of	  constant	  duration	  vs.	  height	  of	  variable-­‐
epoch	  regressor]	  x	  area	  [Pre-­‐PMd	  vs.	  PMd]	  interaction:	  F(1,21)=5.17,	  p=.03).	  
	  
We	  next	  sought	  to	  characterize	  task	  differences	  in	  how	  RT/BOLD	  scaling	  influences	  
the	  shape	  of	  the	  hemodynamic	  response	  using	  a	  finite	  impulse	  response	  (FIR)	  model	  
in	  each	  of	  the	  frontal	  ROIs	  previously	  associated	  with	  hierarchical	  control	  (colored	  
regions	  in	  Figure7A&B).	  These	  analyses	  revealed	  a	  rostrocaudal	  dissociation	  in	  
which	  more	  rostral	  areas	  were	  more	  associated	  with	  time	  spent	  on	  the	  more	  
concrete	  1D	  task,	  rather	  than	  the	  more	  abstract	  2D	  task.	  In	  this	  analysis,	  the	  most	  
caudal	  region,	  PMd,	  showed	  a	  larger	  scaling	  with	  time-­‐on-­‐task	  in	  the	  2D	  task	  
bilaterally;	  by	  contrast,	  more	  rostral	  regions	  showed	  a	  larger	  scaling	  with	  time-­‐on-­‐
task	  in	  the	  1D	  task	  bilaterally	  (Figure	  7C).	  	  An	  RM-­‐ANOVA	  of	  average	  BOLD	  PSC	  
associated	  with	  matched	  RTs	  in	  the	  4-­‐8	  seconds	  following	  stimulus	  onset	  yielded	  a	  
reliable	  interaction	  in	  the	  focused	  contrast	  of	  area	  [PMd	  vs.	  more	  rostral	  areas]	  and	  
task	  [1D	  vs.	  2D]	  (F(1,21)=6.51,	  p=.019).	  
	  

	  

9	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  

A

B

Maximal Model
D1 TOT > D2 TOT, p<.05 corrected
z = 2.58

C

D1 TOT > D2 TOT, p<.05 corrected

z = 4.2

0.16"
BOLD,PSC,per,RT,s.d.,

Matched Maximal Model

1D"

2D"

0.12"
0.08"
0.04"
0"
(0.04"
(0.08"

RLPFC

IFS

Pre-PMd

PMd

0" 2" 4" 6" 8" 10" 12" 14" 16" 18"

0" 2" 4" 6" 8" 10" 12" 14" 16" 18"

0" 2" 4" 6" 8" 10" 12" 14" 16" 18"

0" 2" 4" 6" 8" 10" 12" 14" 16" 18"

Peri%S'mulus,Time,(s),

Peri%S'mulus,Time,(s),

Peri%S'mulus,Time,(s),

Peri%S'mulus,Time,(s),

Figure	  7.	  	  Rostrocaudal	  effects	  reverse	  with	  time-­‐on-­‐task.	  A.	  Greater	  scaling	  of	  BOLD	  with	  RT	  was	  observed	  
in	  the	  1D,	  as	  compared	  to	  2D	  task	  even	  when	  controlling	  for	  a	  variety	  of	  experimental	  factors.	  The	  resulting	  foci	  
bear	  a	  striking	  similarity	  to	  the	  foci	  previously	  implicated	  in	  more	  abstract	  forms	  of	  cognitive	  control,	  including	  
the	  RLPFC	  (white	  region),	  IFS	  (blue	  regions),	  Pre-­‐PMd	  (green	  regions).	  No	  results	  survived	  whole	  brain	  
correction	  in	  PMd	  (red)	  region	  most	  strongly	  associated	  with	  first-­‐order	  tasks	  .	  B.	  Greater	  scaling	  of	  BOLD	  with	  
RT	  in	  the	  1D	  task	  remained	  significant	  in	  the	  IFS	  and	  PrePMd	  when	  considering	  matched	  trials	  only,	  indicating	  
the	  effect	  in	  these	  rostral	  regions	  cannot	  be	  attributed	  to	  the	  different	  ranges	  of	  RT	  observed	  across	  those	  tasks.	  
C.	  A	  volume-­‐by-­‐volume	  analyses	  of	  RT/BOLD	  scaling	  (via	  an	  FIR	  model;	  see	  Methods)	  yielded	  a	  three-­‐way	  
interaction	  between	  rostral	  extent,	  task,	  and	  time-­‐on-­‐task,	  such	  that	  RT/BOLD	  scaling	  was	  larger	  for	  the	  1D	  as	  
compared	  to	  2D	  task	  in	  rostral	  regions	  (RLPFC,	  IFS,	  and	  Pre-­‐PMd),	  but	  the	  reverse	  relationship	  held	  in	  the	  most	  
caudal	  ROI,	  the	  PMd.	  

	  

	  
Discussion	  
	  
We	  show	  a	  paradoxical	  relationship	  between	  the	  BOLD	  response	  and	  RT	  during	  the	  
performance	  of	  hierarchical	  tasks.	  While	  the	  IFS	  and	  PrePMd	  show	  an	  increased	  
mean	  BOLD	  response	  to	  a	  more	  abstract	  “2D”	  task,	  consistent	  with	  prior	  work3-­‐5,	  
they	  also	  show	  an	  increased	  scaling	  of	  BOLD	  with	  RT	  in	  a	  more	  concrete	  “1D”	  task.	  
This	  difference	  in	  RT/BOLD	  scaling	  could	  not	  be	  explained	  as	  a	  result	  of	  regression	  
dilution	  or	  differences	  in	  spectral	  frequency,	  and	  persisted	  even	  when	  1D	  and	  2D	  
tasks	  were	  matched	  in	  terms	  of	  RT	  and	  all	  other	  experimental	  factors.	  The	  
correlation	  with	  RT	  during	  the	  1D	  task	  was	  not	  a	  global	  effect	  throughout	  the	  brain;	  
the	  more	  caudal	  PMd,	  previously	  associated	  with	  more	  concrete	  tasks,	  instead	  
showed	  greater	  RT/BOLD	  scaling	  during	  the	  more	  abstract	  2D	  task	  in	  an	  FIR	  
analysis.	  	  
	  
This	  region-­‐	  and	  task-­‐specific	  double	  dissociation	  in	  the	  RT/BOLD	  scaling	  is	  
incompatible	  with	  the	  view	  that	  both	  elevated	  RT	  and	  BOLD	  in	  hierarchical	  tasks	  
arise	  solely	  from	  increased	  difficulty.	  If	  a	  single	  difficulty	  factor	  had	  caused	  both	  RT	  
and	  BOLD	  change,	  then	  the	  RT/BOLD	  relationship	  should	  have	  been	  
	  

10	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
indistinguishable	  when	  these	  tasks	  were	  matched	  in	  terms	  of	  RT.	  We	  conclude	  that	  
functional	  heterogeneity	  of	  these	  regions	  in	  lateral	  frontal	  cortex	  is	  unlikely	  to	  be	  
wholly	  explained	  by	  a	  single	  “task	  difficulty”	  construct,	  at	  least	  as	  reflected	  in	  terms	  
of	  time-­‐on-­‐task.	  These	  results	  specifically	  demonstrate	  this	  to	  be	  the	  case	  for	  
rostrocaudal	  differences	  in	  prefrontal	  recruitment	  as	  a	  function	  of	  abstraction2-­‐5;	  c.f.	  
14.	  	  
	  
If	  unitary	  task	  difficulty	  is	  insufficient	  to	  explain	  the	  pattern	  of	  functional	  data	  in	  
frontal	  cortex,	  what	  does	  explain	  the	  differential	  scaling	  of	  the	  IFS	  and	  PrePMd	  with	  
RT	  on	  the	  1D	  task,	  even	  when	  RT	  was	  matched	  with	  the	  2D	  task?	  We	  consider	  two	  
possible	  accounts,	  both	  of	  which	  necessarily	  rely	  on	  the	  existence	  of	  functional	  
specialization	  of	  lateral	  frontal	  cortex.	  One	  possibility	  is	  that	  subjects	  are	  actually	  
engaging	  in	  higher-­‐order	  control,	  of	  the	  type	  supported	  by	  these	  rostral	  regions,	  on	  
these	  particularly	  slow	  trials	  of	  the	  1D	  task.	  For	  example,	  though	  unnecessary,	  
participants	  may	  occasionally	  treat	  a	  1D	  task	  trial	  as	  though	  it	  were	  a	  2D	  task	  trial.	  
This	  would	  explain	  the	  functional	  specificity	  of	  this	  effect	  among	  both	  rostral	  and	  
caudal	  frontal	  regions.	  In	  essence,	  this	  effect	  arises	  under	  conditions	  that	  do	  not	  
require	  the	  function	  of	  the	  region	  in	  question.	  However,	  though	  plausible,	  we	  found	  
no	  clear	  evidence	  to	  support	  any	  specific	  strategies	  being	  consistently	  used	  on	  slow	  
trials	  in	  secondary	  analyses.	  For	  example,	  we	  did	  not	  find	  evidence	  that	  participants	  
were	  unnecessarily	  encoding	  color	  as	  a	  higher	  order	  dimension	  on	  slow	  1D	  trials	  
(see	  Supplementary	  Text	  S1).	  Nevertheless,	  it	  is	  conceivable	  that	  these	  slow	  trials	  
reflect	  a	  variable	  range	  of	  inefficient	  control	  strategies	  or	  other	  demands	  that	  
recruit	  available	  capacity,	  supported	  by	  more	  rostral	  lateral	  frontal	  regions.	  Our	  
approach	  would	  be	  insensitive	  to	  such	  a	  possibility.	  
	  
A	  related	  alternative	  is	  that	  BOLD	  variance	  in	  areas	  supporting	  hierarchical	  control	  
may	  be	  “quenched”	  by	  demands	  on	  hierarchical	  control.	  	  In	  that	  case,	  RT/BOLD	  
scaling	  would	  necessarily	  be	  reduced	  in	  these	  areas,	  even	  if	  RTs	  were	  matched	  
between	  tasks	  differing	  in	  hierarchical	  control	  demands.	  	  This	  follows	  observations	  
in	  posterior	  cortex	  that	  stimuli	  matching	  regional	  tuning	  properties	  elicit	  a	  
reduction	  in	  spiking	  variance,	  even	  as	  mean	  spike	  rates	  are	  increased31-­‐32.	  Our	  
results	  may	  reflect	  a	  fundamentally	  similar	  mechanism	  operating	  within	  frontal	  
cortex.	  By	  this	  account,	  the	  hierarchical	  control	  demands	  of	  the	  2D	  task	  
differentially	  match	  the	  tuning	  properties	  of	  rostral	  regions	  of	  frontal	  cortex,	  and	  
those	  of	  the	  more	  concrete	  1D	  task	  differentially	  match	  the	  tuning	  properties	  of	  
caudal	  areas.	  This	  matching	  quenches	  variance	  in	  these	  regions	  in	  a	  task-­‐selective	  
way.	  For	  illustration,	  consider	  the	  PrePMd,	  which	  appears	  responsive	  to	  demands	  
on	  second-­‐order	  hierarchical	  control.	  When	  those	  demands	  are	  encountered,	  a	  large	  
set	  of	  neurons	  within	  the	  PrePMd	  would	  be	  expected	  to	  increase	  their	  activity,	  and	  
hence	  BOLD.	  Any	  neurons	  in	  the	  prePMd	  with	  dissimilar	  tuning	  properties	  would,	  
by	  contrast,	  be	  suppressed.	  Both	  effects	  should	  be	  reliable	  across	  time,	  and	  hence	  
drive	  reduced	  variance	  in	  BOLD	  when	  second-­‐order	  control	  demands	  are	  
encountered.	  	  As	  a	  result,	  RT/BOLD	  scaling	  would	  be	  decreased	  in	  any	  region	  
exhibiting	  both	  time-­‐on-­‐task	  effects	  and	  tuning	  properties	  that	  match	  the	  demands	  

	  

11	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
of	  the	  task	  itself,	  a	  possibility	  for	  which	  we	  also	  found	  some	  support	  
(Supplementary	  Text	  S2	  and	  Figure	  S1).	  
	  
Our	  work	  significantly	  advances	  prior	  investigations	  of	  time-­‐on-­‐task	  effects	  in	  
several	  ways24-­‐29;	  33-­‐37.	  First,	  we	  identify	  methodological	  issues	  confronting	  the	  
investigation	  of	  time-­‐on-­‐task	  effects22-­‐23,	  and	  adopt	  novel	  methods	  to	  resolve	  these	  
issues.	  Second,	  we	  apply	  these	  methods	  in	  the	  domain	  of	  cognitive	  control,	  where	  
recent	  theoretical	  and	  empirical	  work	  has	  suggested	  a	  potentially	  prominent	  role	  
for	  a	  unitary	  difficulty	  construct14-­‐17;	  24-­‐29.	  And,	  finally,	  we	  extend	  classical	  
dissociation	  logic	  (and	  subsequent	  work	  on	  state-­‐trace	  methodology)	  by	  allowing	  
for	  non-­‐monotonicity	  in	  how	  a	  single	  latent	  process	  maps	  to	  either	  of	  two	  
dependent	  measures	  (Fig	  1B-­‐C).	  	  
	  
However,	  one	  important	  caveat	  to	  our	  work	  comes	  from	  a	  related	  limitation	  
inherent	  to	  classical	  dissociation	  logic.	  In	  prior	  applications	  of	  dissociation	  logic	  and	  
state	  trace	  methods,	  latent	  cognitive	  processes	  must	  map	  monotonically	  all	  to	  
dependent	  variables	  to	  draw	  valid	  inferences	  regarding	  the	  number	  of	  underlying	  
processes18-­‐20.	  Here,	  by	  contrast,	  we	  require	  only	  a	  monotonic	  mapping	  between	  the	  
latent	  process	  and	  one	  dependent	  measure.	  This	  requirement	  is	  illustrated	  in	  Figure	  
8	  (see	  also	  Figure	  1).	  Even	  if	  the	  mapping	  from	  difficulty	  to	  RT	  is	  nonlinear,	  and	  the	  
mapping	  from	  difficulty	  to	  BOLD	  is	  nonmonotonic	  (Figure	  8A),	  matching	  two	  tasks	  
on	  RT	  leads	  to	  the	  unavoidable	  prediction	  of	  an	  identical	  BOLD/RT	  relationship	  if	  a	  
single	  underlying	  construct	  (e.g.,	  “difficulty”)	  is	  taken	  to	  drive	  these	  patterns	  (Figure	  
8B).	  However,	  if	  the	  mapping	  from	  difficulty	  to	  RT	  becomes	  nonmonotonic	  (Figure	  
8C),	  then	  RTs	  can	  appear	  to	  be	  matched	  while	  actually	  having	  distinct	  values	  of	  
difficulty	  (Figure	  8D).	  
	  

	  

12	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  

BOLD%

RT%on%Correct%Trials%

B

Task%A%

Overlap%

RT(

Diﬃculty(
Range of “Task A” Difficulty
BOLD%

Range of “Task B” Difficulty
RT%on%Correct%Trials%

D

Task%A%

Task%B%

Overlap%

BOLD(

Outcome(on(DV(

C

Task%B%

BOLD(

Outcome(on(DV(

A

Diﬃculty(
Range of “Task A” Difficulty

Range of “Task B” Difficulty

RT(

	  

Figure	  8.	  Nonmonotonicity	  in	  the	  mapping	  of	  a	  single	  process	  to	  the	  matched	  dependent	  measure	  
subverts	  the	  analysis	  of	  interdependent	  variables.	  A.	  Here,	  both	  BOLD	  and	  RT	  are	  non-­‐linear	  functions	  of	  
difficulty.	  BOLD	  is	  also	  a	  nonmonotonic	  function	  of	  difficulty.	  B.	  Given	  the	  differences	  in	  difficulty	  between	  the	  
two	  tasks	  illustrated	  in	  A,	  there	  are	  clear	  differences	  in	  their	  mean	  BOLD	  and	  RT.	  Nonetheless,	  when	  the	  tasks	  
are	  matched	  on	  RT	  (purple	  region),	  the	  RT/BOLD	  relationship	  is	  necessarily	  the	  same	  across	  them.	  C.	  However,	  
if	  both	  dependent	  measures	  are	  nonmonotonically	  mapped	  to	  difficulty,	  then	  it	  is	  possible	  to	  match	  the	  tasks	  on	  
any	  one	  measure	  and	  still	  have	  mismatched	  difficulty.	  D.	  As	  a	  result,	  the	  RT/BOLD	  relationship	  may	  differ	  
between	  tasks,	  even	  when	  RTs	  are	  matched	  between	  them.	  

	  
In	  the	  current	  study,	  this	  requirement	  amounts	  to	  the	  assumption	  that	  difficulty	  is	  a	  
monotonic	  function	  of	  RTs	  within	  the	  range	  of	  our	  matched	  distribution	  (600-­‐
1300ms).	  Two	  kinds	  of	  potential	  departures	  from	  non-­‐monotonicity	  are	  worth	  
considering.	  First,	  very	  long	  RTs	  might	  sometimes	  occur	  on	  trials	  where	  
experienced	  difficulty	  was	  minimal,	  but	  performance	  was	  nevertheless	  delayed	  (e.g.,	  
due	  to	  inattention).	  Second,	  very	  short	  RTs	  might	  sometimes	  occur	  on	  trials	  where	  
experienced	  difficulty	  was	  maximal,	  and	  so	  participants	  issue	  a	  quick	  guess	  rather	  
than	  expending	  the	  mental	  effort	  to	  generate	  a	  response.	  	  Findings	  from	  the	  current	  
study	  speak	  against	  both	  these	  possibilities.	  First,	  2D	  trials	  falling	  in	  the	  lower	  half	  
of	  the	  matched	  RT	  distribution	  (600-­‐950ms)	  were	  in	  fact	  less	  error-­‐prone	  than	  
those	  in	  the	  upper	  half	  (950-­‐1300ms;	  2%	  vs.	  8%	  errors,	  respectively;	  t(21)=2.56,	  
p<.02),	  contrary	  to	  what	  would	  be	  expected	  if	  guessing	  were	  disproportionately	  
common	  on	  trials	  with	  short	  RTs.	  Second,	  disproportionate	  mind-­‐wandering	  on	  
slow	  trials	  would	  predict	  greater	  BOLD	  in	  default	  mode,	  not	  frontoparietal	  regions	  
in	  the	  slow	  1D	  task	  trials,	  as	  compared	  to	  the	  fast	  2D	  trials.	  Again,	  if	  anything,	  we	  
observe	  the	  opposite	  pattern,	  with	  greater	  activation	  in	  default	  regions	  during	  the	  
1D	  relative	  to	  2D	  task	  (Fig	  4A).	  Thus,	  there	  is	  no	  evidence	  that	  non-­‐monotonic	  
difficulty	  effects	  could	  explain	  the	  patterns	  we	  report.	  
	  

	  

13	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
While	  our	  results	  therefore	  suggest	  a	  unitary	  construct	  of	  task	  difficulty	  cannot	  fully	  
explain	  both	  RT	  and	  BOLD	  phenomena	  from	  hierarchical	  control	  tasks,	  these	  results	  
should	  also	  not	  be	  taken	  to	  indicate	  that	  general	  difficulty	  makes	  no	  contribution	  in	  
cognition	  or	  is	  not	  represented	  by	  the	  brain	  in	  any	  context.	  To	  the	  contrary,	  
theoretical	  arguments	  for	  the	  importance	  of	  difficulty	  representations	  in	  domains	  
such	  as	  mental	  effort	  and	  decision	  making	  are	  compelling15-­‐17.	  Instead,	  we	  suggest	  
that	  investigations	  of	  task-­‐induced	  changes	  in	  RT/BOLD	  scaling	  will	  be	  important	  
for	  validating	  a	  domain-­‐general	  difficulty	  construct.	  For	  example,	  future	  work	  
investigating	  the	  behavioral	  and	  neural	  correlates	  of	  a	  unified	  difficulty	  construct	  
may	  explicitly	  posit	  mappings	  between	  this	  construct	  and	  both	  RT	  and	  BOLD,	  and	  
search	  for	  regions	  where	  the	  implicitly	  predicted	  RT/BOLD	  relationship	  can	  be	  
shown	  to	  be	  task-­‐general,	  matching	  for	  any	  differences	  in	  the	  reliability,	  range,	  and	  
spectral	  frequency	  of	  RT	  that	  escape	  experimental	  control.	  
	  
A	  further	  methodological	  consideration	  raised	  by	  our	  results	  is	  that	  if	  RT/BOLD	  
scaling	  is	  generally	  reduced	  in	  regions	  whose	  tuning	  properties	  match	  the	  demands	  
of	  a	  given	  taske.g.	  31-­‐32,	  then	  functional	  localization	  via	  trial-­‐by-­‐trial	  RT	  regressors	  
could	  yield	  potentially	  counterintuitive	  results.	  Specifically,	  parameter	  estimates	  for	  
trial-­‐by-­‐trial	  RT	  regressors	  might	  actually	  be	  higher	  in	  regions	  that	  are	  less	  
associated	  with	  the	  task	  itself	  (the	  same	  would	  hold	  for	  estimates	  of	  percent	  signal	  
change,	  even	  if	  variance-­‐normalized	  statistics,	  like	  z	  statistics,	  are	  lower).	  	  This	  in	  
turn	  motivates	  additional	  caution	  in	  comparing	  the	  neural	  correlates	  of	  individual	  
differences	  in	  task	  performance	  with	  the	  neural	  correlates	  of	  trial-­‐by-­‐trial	  
fluctuations	  in	  task	  performance.	  	  
	  
Finally,	  our	  work	  highlights	  the	  potential	  importance	  of	  exploring	  how	  variance	  in	  
BOLD	  signal	  intensity,	  rather	  than	  just	  its	  mean,	  may	  be	  influenced	  by	  experimental	  
and	  behavioral	  factors31-­‐32;	  38-­‐39,	  beyond	  merely	  reflecting	  nuisance	  variance40.	  For	  
example,	  a	  task	  may	  reduce	  BOLD	  variance	  because	  the	  task	  drives	  greater	  
homogeneity	  in	  the	  response	  across	  multiple	  instances	  of	  the	  same	  event.	  
Supplementary	  analysis	  provided	  preliminary	  evidence	  of	  such	  increased	  variance	  	  
in	  prePMd,	  relative	  to	  PMd	  in,	  the	  1D	  task	  relative	  to	  the	  2D	  task	  (see	  
Supplementary	  Text	  S2).	  Typical	  univariate	  analyses	  and	  also	  standard	  MVPA	  
methods	  may	  be	  relatively	  insensitive	  to	  the	  presence	  of	  such	  higher-­‐order	  
moments	  in	  the	  BOLD	  timeseries41.	  Future	  methodological	  work	  may	  be	  needed	  to	  
consider	  ways	  to	  better	  address	  these	  higher	  order	  effectse.g.	  42.	  	  
	  
To	  conclude,	  by	  demonstrating	  this	  paradoxical	  relationship	  between	  BOLD	  and	  RT,	  
we	  provide	  evidence	  that	  task	  difficulty	  does	  not	  yield	  a	  pattern	  in	  RT	  and	  BOLD	  
across	  regions	  of	  lateral	  frontal	  cortex	  consistent	  with	  a	  unitary	  difficulty	  factor.	  
Though	  task	  difficulty	  can	  be	  a	  useful	  heuristic	  for	  predicting	  when	  cognitive	  control	  
or	  lateral	  frontal	  cortex	  is	  needed	  for	  task	  performance,	  regional	  involvement	  in	  
these	  tasks	  appears	  driven	  by	  specific	  task	  demands,	  like	  the	  degree	  of	  abstraction,	  
that	  have	  a	  more	  complex	  relationship	  with	  experienced	  difficulty.	  
	  
Online	  Methods	  
	  

14	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
	  
Participants	  
Twenty-­‐two	  right-­‐handed	  adults	  (aged	  18-­‐35;	  14	  female)	  with	  normal	  or	  corrected-­‐
to-­‐normal	  vision	  completed	  the	  experiment.	  	  All	  spoke	  English	  natively,	  were	  
screened	  for	  contraindications	  for	  MRI	  as	  well	  as	  for	  the	  use	  of	  neurological	  
medications	  and	  conditions,	  and	  provided	  informed	  consent	  in	  accordance	  with	  the	  
Research	  Protections	  Office	  at	  Brown	  University.	  	  
	  
Task	  Design	  
	  
Training	  Phase.	  Subjects	  were	  trained	  in	  the	  scanner	  to	  press	  one	  of	  four	  buttons	  to	  
each	  of	  four	  abstract	  shapes,	  and	  to	  each	  of	  four	  abstract	  textures.	  	  This	  training	  was	  
administered	  in	  blocks	  of	  35	  trials	  for	  each	  dimension	  (shape	  vs.	  texture).	  Two	  
blocks	  appeared	  per	  run,	  with	  a	  total	  of	  8	  runs	  of	  training.	  The	  correct	  feature-­‐to-­‐
response	  mappings	  remained	  consistent	  throughout	  the	  entirety	  of	  the	  experiment.	  
	  
Practice	  Phase.	  Following	  this	  training,	  subjects	  were	  given	  two	  (unscanned)	  blocks	  
of	  12	  trials	  each	  in	  which	  to	  practice	  the	  experimental	  version	  of	  the	  tasks.	  Each	  
block	  began	  with	  the	  presentation	  of	  the	  color-­‐to-­‐dimension	  mappings	  relevant	  for	  
that	  block;	  only	  two	  colors	  were	  ever	  presented	  in	  a	  block.	  In	  “1D”	  blocks,	  both	  
presented	  colors	  were	  associated	  with	  a	  single	  dimension	  (shape	  or	  texture).	  In	  
“2D”	  blocks,	  one	  color	  was	  associated	  with	  shape,	  and	  the	  other	  color	  with	  texture.	  
Like	  the	  feature-­‐to-­‐response	  mappings,	  these	  color-­‐to-­‐dimension	  mappings	  also	  
remained	  consistent	  throughout	  the	  task.	  Thus,	  subjects	  were	  required	  to	  attend	  to	  
the	  color	  surrounding	  each	  stimulus	  only	  in	  the	  2D	  blocks.	  	  
	  
Testing	  Phase.	  Following	  these	  24	  practice	  trials,	  subjects	  completed	  six	  scanned	  
runs	  consisting	  of	  48	  trials	  each.	  Each	  run	  consisted	  of	  two	  blocks	  of	  each	  task,	  
occurring	  in	  counterbalanced	  order.	  As	  in	  the	  practice,	  each	  task	  occurred	  in	  a	  block	  
of	  12	  consecutive	  trials,	  and	  began	  with	  the	  presentation	  of	  an	  instruction	  screen	  for	  
16	  seconds	  showing	  the	  color-­‐to-­‐dimension	  mappings	  relevant	  for	  that	  block.	  	  Four	  
of	  the	  16	  possible	  shape	  x	  texture	  combinations	  were	  presented	  with	  70%	  
frequency;	  the	  remaining	  12	  stimuli,	  corresponding	  to	  the	  other	  possible	  feature	  
combinations,	  were	  presented	  with	  only	  30%	  frequency.	  This	  frequency	  
manipulation,	  while	  controlled	  for	  in	  all	  analyses	  presented	  here,	  is	  not	  of	  primary	  
interest	  in	  the	  present	  report.	  
	  
MRI	  procedure	  
	  
During	  training	  and	  experimental	  phases	  of	  the	  task,	  whole-­‐brain	  imaging	  was	  
performed	  with	  a	  Siemens	  3T	  TIM	  Trio	  MRI	  system	  using	  a	  32-­‐channel	  head	  coil.	  A	  
high	  resolution	  T1	  MPRAGE	  was	  collected	  from	  each	  participant	  at	  the	  beginning	  of	  
each	  session.	  Each	  of	  the	  six	  runs	  of	  the	  experimental	  task	  involved	  128	  functional	  
volumes,	  with	  a	  fat-­‐saturated	  gradient-­‐echo	  echo-­‐planar	  sequence	  (TR	  =	  2s,	  
TE=28ms,	  flip	  angle	  =	  90°,	  33	  interleaved	  axial	  slices,	  192mm	  FOV	  with	  voxel	  size	  of	  

	  

15	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
3x3x3.5mm).	  	  Head	  motion	  was	  restricted	  with	  padding,	  visual	  stimuli	  were	  rear-­‐
projected	  and	  viewed	  with	  a	  mirror	  attached	  to	  the	  head	  coil.	  	  	  
	  
Data	  preprocessing	  
Behavioral	  data.	  Reaction	  times	  less	  than	  250ms	  or	  more	  than	  2s	  were	  excluded	  
from	  analysis,	  resulting	  in	  an	  exclusion	  of	  less	  than	  3.5%	  of	  all	  trials;	  all	  reaction	  
time	  effects	  are	  reported	  for	  correct	  trials,	  except	  where	  noted.	  	  Statistical	  analysis	  
of	  error	  rates	  was	  conducted	  after	  variance-­‐stabilizing	  arcsin-­‐square	  root	  
transform.	  	  	  
	  
Imaging	  data.	  Data	  were	  processed	  using	  a	  combination	  of	  SPM8	  and	  FSL5.1.0.	  	  
First,	  SPM8	  tools	  (artglobal	  and	  tsdiffana)	  were	  used	  for	  artifact	  detection,	  and	  slice	  
timing	  correction	  was	  then	  performed.	  	  Data	  were	  motion-­‐corrected	  using	  rigid	  
transformations	  in	  MCFLIRT	  to	  the	  middle	  acquisition	  of	  each	  run.	  	  Runs	  with	  
movement	  of	  more	  than	  2mm	  were	  excluded	  from	  analysis,	  resulting	  in	  the	  
exclusion	  of	  3	  runs	  total	  (one	  from	  each	  of	  3	  subjects).	  Four	  additional	  subjects	  were	  
excluded	  from	  analysis	  due	  to	  >2mm	  translation	  in	  more	  than	  one	  run.	  	  Grand-­‐mean	  
intensity	  normalization	  of	  the	  entire	  4D	  dataset	  was	  performed	  with	  a	  single	  
multiplicative	  factor,	  and	  the	  data	  were	  subjected	  to	  a	  temporal	  highpass	  filter	  
(Gaussian-­‐weighted	  least-­‐squares	  straight	  line	  fitting,	  with	  sigma=100s);	  the	  data	  
were	  then	  smoothed	  at	  8mm	  FWHM.	  	  The	  middle	  acquisition	  of	  each	  run	  was	  then	  
registered	  to	  each	  participant’s	  brain-­‐extracted	  MPRAGE,	  via	  boundary-­‐based	  
registration,	  with	  a	  linear	  7DOF	  transform,	  and	  the	  MPRAGE	  was	  registered	  to	  the	  
MNI	  standard	  brain	  using	  a	  linear	  12DOF	  transform.	  	  
	  
Statistical	  Analysis	  
GLMs	  were	  estimated	  using	  FEAT	  (FMRI	  Expert	  Analysis	  Tool)	  version	  5.98	  
(FMRIB's	  Software	  Library,	  www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl),	  on	  the	  basis	  of	  explanatory	  
variables	  (EVs)	  coding	  for	  all	  possible	  conjunctions	  of	  the	  following	  event	  types:	  
task	  [D1	  vs.	  D2],	  accuracy	  [correct	  vs.	  incorrect],	  and	  frequency	  [high	  vs.	  low].	  In	  
addition,	  contrast-­‐coded	  regressors	  were	  estimated	  for	  task-­‐specific	  effects	  of	  
stimulus	  congruency	  [congruent	  vs.	  incongruent],	  dimension	  switches	  [switch	  vs.	  
repeat	  of	  color],	  and	  response	  switches	  [switch	  vs.	  repeat	  of	  the	  specific	  button	  
press].	  These	  additional	  regressors	  were	  included	  in	  a	  “maximal	  model,”	  as	  noted	  in	  
the	  text,	  to	  help	  ensure	  the	  effects	  of	  interest	  could	  not	  be	  attributed	  to	  any	  of	  a	  
variety	  of	  other	  experimental	  factors.	  	  The	  duration	  of	  all	  aforementioned	  events	  
was	  uniformly	  set	  to	  .5s.	  Task-­‐specific	  sustained	  regressors	  were	  also	  used	  in	  the	  
maximal	  model;	  the	  duration	  of	  these	  sustained	  regressors	  was	  made	  equal	  to	  the	  
duration	  of	  each	  task	  block.	  	  
For	  models	  investigating	  time-­‐on-­‐task,	  additional	  parametric	  EVs	  were	  
added	  to	  these	  models.	  These	  EVs	  were	  duration-­‐modulated	  (aka	  the	  “variable-­‐
epoch	  model”),	  given	  the	  increased	  power	  of	  such	  regressors	  for	  detecting	  RT-­‐
related	  BOLD	  responses,	  and	  the	  increased	  specificity	  to	  time-­‐on-­‐task	  effects	  
conferred	  by	  including	  them	  in	  models	  already	  containing	  constant	  epoch	  
regressors37.	  The	  duration	  of	  each	  such	  event	  was	  set	  to	  the	  actual	  duration	  of	  each	  

	  

16	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
trial’s	  RT.	  	  As	  noted	  in	  the	  text,	  duration-­‐modulated	  regressors	  were	  constructed	  
with	  separate	  EVs	  for	  1D	  and	  2D	  trials	  independently.	  	  
In	  all	  models,	  EVs	  corresponding	  to	  the	  6	  degrees	  of	  motion	  estimated	  by	  
MCFLIRT,	  and	  transient	  responses	  to	  the	  instruction	  events,	  were	  entered	  as	  EVs	  of	  
no	  interest.	  Likewise,	  in	  all	  models,	  all	  EVs	  except	  those	  corresponding	  to	  motion	  
were	  convolved	  with	  a	  standard	  double-­‐gamma	  hemodynamic	  response	  function	  
(HRF),	  high-­‐pass	  filtered	  in	  the	  same	  way	  as	  the	  functional	  data,	  and	  then	  used	  as	  a	  
regressor	  in	  the	  GLM	  and	  FSL’s	  prewhitening	  tool,	  FILM.	  Results	  presented	  in	  the	  
main	  text	  are	  from	  models	  that	  include	  temporal	  derivatives,	  however	  all	  Results	  
were	  robust	  when	  temporal	  derivatives	  were	  omitted,	  suggesting	  that	  any	  variance	  
attributed	  to	  these	  derivatives	  does	  not	  alter	  the	  conclusions	  presented	  here.	  
	  	  
Second-­‐level	  analyses	  were	  constructed	  for	  each	  subject	  by	  considering	  runs	  
as	  a	  fixed	  effect.	  	  Group-­‐level	  whole-­‐brain	  analyses	  were	  conducted	  with	  FLAME	  by	  
considering	  subjects	  as	  a	  random	  effect.	  We	  used	  a	  voxel-­‐level	  threshold	  of	  z>2.58	  
and	  a	  further	  cluster-­‐based	  family-­‐wise	  error	  rate	  correction	  to	  p<.05	  using	  FSL’s	  
implementation	  of	  Gaussian	  Random	  Field	  theory,	  which	  adopts	  contrast-­‐specific	  
extent	  thresholds	  given	  each	  contrast’s	  effective	  resolution	  (resels).	  
	  
For	  FIR	  models,	  we	  estimated	  10	  beta-­‐coefficients	  corresponding	  to	  the	  
effect	  of	  z-­‐transformed	  RT	  across	  each	  of	  the	  10	  volumes	  following	  trial	  onset36.	  
These	  analyses	  represent	  a	  model-­‐free	  method	  of	  interrogating	  any	  changes	  in	  the	  
amplitude	  and	  shape	  of	  the	  hemodynamic	  response	  that	  may	  scale	  with	  RT.	  The	  FIR	  
parameter	  estimates	  were	  averaged	  across	  hemispheres	  to	  assess	  BOLD	  percent	  
signal	  change	  (PSC)	  as	  a	  function	  of	  RT	  in	  each	  bilateral	  ROI.	  Owing	  to	  the	  larger	  
number	  of	  parameters	  that	  must	  be	  estimated	  for	  a	  FIR	  model,	  it	  was	  not	  possible	  to	  
fit	  them	  for	  the	  larger	  “maximal	  model.”	  	  
	  
Matching	  analyses	  were	  conducted	  using	  the	  genmatch	  procedure	  of	  the	  
Matching	  package	  version	  4.8-­‐3.443.	  This	  procedure	  uses	  a	  genetic	  algorithm	  to	  find	  
one-­‐to-­‐one	  matches	  between	  trials	  from	  each	  tasks,	  so	  as	  to	  maximize	  the	  
multivariate	  balance	  between	  tasks	  in	  terms	  of	  RT,	  run,	  frequency,	  congruency,	  
switching,	  and	  their	  interactions	  on	  correct	  trials.	  Matching	  was	  conducted	  without	  
replacement	  and	  a	  caliper	  of	  .15.	  The	  genetic	  algorithm	  employed	  a	  population	  of	  
2500	  individuals	  and	  1000	  generations,	  and	  stopped	  only	  when	  5	  consecutive	  
generations	  yielded	  no	  change	  in	  the	  identity	  of	  included	  trials.	  This	  procedure	  was	  
carried	  out	  for	  each	  subject	  independently,	  ensuring	  both	  within-­‐	  and	  between-­‐
subject	  multivariate	  matching	  of	  trials	  between	  the	  1D	  and	  2D	  tasks.	  It	  yielded	  an	  
average	  of	  22	  matched	  trials	  for	  each	  task	  per	  subject	  (range:	  15-­‐28).	  Runs	  in	  which	  
no	  trials	  could	  be	  matched	  across	  tasks	  were	  dropped	  from	  analyses	  involving	  
matched	  trials	  (n=4).	  
All	  statistical	  tests	  are	  two-­‐tailed,	  with	  corrected	  alphas	  of	  .05.	  
	  
	  
References	  
	  
1. Wendelken,	  C.,	  Ditterich,	  J.,	  Bunge,	  S.	  A.,	  &	  Carter,	  C.	  S.	  (2009).	  Stimulus	  and	  
response	  conflict	  processing	  during	  perceptual	  decision	  making.	  Cognitive,	  
Affective,	  &	  Behavioral	  Neuroscience,	  9(4),	  434-­‐447.	  
	  

17	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
2. Koechlin,	  E.,	  Ody,	  C.,	  &	  Kouneiher,	  F.	  (2003).	  The	  architecture	  of	  cognitive	  
control	  in	  the	  human	  prefrontal	  cortex.	  Science,	  302(5648),	  1181-­‐1185.	  
3. Badre,	  D.,	  &	  D'Esposito,	  M.	  (2007).	  Functional	  magnetic	  resonance	  imaging	  
evidence	  for	  a	  hierarchical	  organization	  of	  the	  prefrontal	  cortex.	  Cognitive	  
Neuroscience,	  Journal	  of,	  19(12),	  2082-­‐2099.	  
4. Badre,	  D.,	  Hoffman,	  J.,	  Cooney,	  J.	  W.,	  &	  D'Esposito,	  M.	  (2009).	  Hierarchical	  
cognitive	  control	  deficits	  following	  damage	  to	  the	  human	  frontal	  
lobe.	  Nature	  neuroscience,	  12(4),	  515-­‐522.	  
5. Badre,	  D.,	  Kayser,	  A.	  S.,	  &	  D'Esposito,	  M.	  (2010).	  Frontal	  cortex	  and	  the	  
discovery	  of	  abstract	  action	  rules.	  Neuron,	  66(2),	  315-­‐326.	  
6. Braver,	  T.	  S.,	  Gray,	  J.	  R.,	  &	  Burgess,	  G.	  C.	  (2007).	  Explaining	  the	  many	  
varieties	  of	  working	  memory	  variation:	  Dual	  mechanisms	  of	  cognitive	  
control.Variation	  in	  working	  memory,	  76-­‐106.	  
7. Chatham,	  C.	  H.,	  Frank,	  M.	  J.,	  &	  Munakata,	  Y.	  (2009).	  Pupillometric	  and	  
behavioral	  markers	  of	  a	  developmental	  shift	  in	  the	  temporal	  dynamics	  of	  
cognitive	  control.	  Proceedings	  of	  the	  National	  Academy	  of	  Sciences,	  106(14),	  
5529-­‐5533.	  
8. Townsend,	  J.	  T.,Yang,	  H.&	  Burns,	  D.	  M.	  (2011).	  Experimental	  discrimination	  
of	  the	  world's	  simplest	  and	  most	  antipodal	  models:	  The	  parallel-­‐serial	  
issue.	  In	  Hans	  Colonius	  and	  Ehtibar	  Dzhafarov	  (Ed.s),	  Descriptive	  and	  
Normative	  Approaches	  to	  Human	  Behavior	  in	  the	  Advanced	  Series	  on	  
Mathematical	  Psychology.	  Singapore:	  World	  Scientific.	  
9. Braverman,	  A.,	  Berger,	  A.,	  &	  Meiran,	  N.	  (2014).	  The	  hierarchy	  of	  task	  
decision	  and	  response	  selection:	  A	  task-­‐switching	  event	  related	  potentials	  
study.	  Brain	  and	  cognition,	  88,	  35-­‐42.	  
10. Ranti,	  C.	  R.,	  Chatham,	  C.	  H.,	  &	  Badre,	  D.	  (under	  revision)	  Parallel	  Temporal	  
Dynamics	  in	  Hierarchical	  Cognitive	  Control.	  
11. Miyake,	  A.,	  Friedman,	  N.	  P.,	  Emerson,	  M.	  J.,	  Witzki,	  A.	  H.,	  Howerter,	  A.,	  &	  
Wager,	  T.	  D.	  (2000).	  The	  unity	  and	  diversity	  of	  executive	  functions	  and	  
their	  contributions	  to	  complex	  “frontal	  lobe”	  tasks:	  A	  latent	  variable	  
analysis.Cognitive	  psychology,	  41(1),	  49-­‐100.	  
12. Friedman,	  N.	  P.,	  Miyake,	  A.,	  Young,	  S.	  E.,	  DeFries,	  J.	  C.,	  Corley,	  R.	  P.,	  &	  Hewitt,	  
J.	  K.	  (2008).	  Individual	  differences	  in	  executive	  functions	  are	  almost	  
entirely	  genetic	  in	  origin.	  Journal	  of	  Experimental	  Psychology:	  
General,	  137(2),	  201.	  
13. Herd,	  S.	  A.,	  Hazy,	  T.	  E.,	  Chatham,	  C.	  H.,	  Brant,	  A.	  M.,	  &	  Friedman,	  N.	  P.	  (2014).	  
A	  neural	  network	  model	  of	  individual	  differences	  in	  task	  switching	  
abilities.	  Neuropsychologia.	  
14. Crittenden,	  B.	  M.,	  &	  Duncan,	  J.	  (2012).	  Task	  difficulty	  manipulation	  reveals	  
multiple	  demand	  activity	  but	  no	  frontal	  lobe	  hierarchy.	  Cerebral	  Cortex,	  
bhs333.	  
15. Duncan,	  J.	  (2010).	  The	  multiple-­‐demand	  (MD)	  system	  of	  the	  primate	  brain:	  
mental	  programs	  for	  intelligent	  behaviour.	  Trends	  in	  cognitive	  
sciences,	  14(4),	  172-­‐179.	  
16. Kool,	  W.,	  &	  Botvinick,	  M.	  (2014).	  A	  labor/leisure	  tradeoff	  in	  cognitive	  
control.Journal	  of	  Experimental	  Psychology:	  General,	  143(1),	  131.	  
	  

18	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
17. Kool,	  W.,	  McGuire,	  J.	  T.,	  Wang,	  G.	  J.,	  &	  Botvinick,	  M.	  M.	  (2013).	  Neural	  and	  
behavioral	  evidence	  for	  an	  intrinsic	  cost	  of	  self-­‐control.	  PloS	  one,	  8(8),	  
e72626.	  
18. Ashby,	  F.	  G.	  (2014).	  Is	  state-­‐trace	  analysis	  an	  appropriate	  tool	  for	  assessing	  
the	  number	  of	  cognitive	  systems?.	  Psychonomic	  bulletin	  &	  review,	  1-­‐12.	  
19. Machery,	  E.	  (2012).	  Dissociations	  in	  neuropsychology	  and	  cognitive	  
neuroscience.	  Philosophy	  of	  Science,	  79(4),	  490-­‐518.	  
20. Yeates,	  F.,	  Wills,	  A.	  J.,	  Jones,	  F.	  W.,	  &	  McLaren,	  I.	  P.	  (2014).	  State-­‐Trace	  
Analysis:	  Dissociable	  Processes	  in	  a	  Connectionist	  Network?.	  Cognitive	  
science.	  
21. Newell,	  B.	  R.,	  &	  Dunn,	  J.	  C.	  (2008).	  Dimensions	  in	  data:	  Testing	  
psychological	  models	  using	  state-­‐trace	  analysis.	  Trends	  in	  cognitive	  
sciences,	  12(8),	  285-­‐290.	  
22. Hutcheon,	  J.	  A.,	  &	  Chiolero,	  A.	  Hanley.	  JA	  (2010).	  Random	  measurement	  
error	  and	  regression	  dilution	  bias.	  British	  Medical	  Journal,	  340.	  
23. Holden,	  J.	  G.,	  Choi,	  I.,	  Amazeen,	  P.	  G.,	  &	  Van	  Orden,	  G.	  (2011).	  Fractal	  1/ƒ	  
dynamics	  suggest	  entanglement	  of	  measurement	  and	  human	  
performance.Journal	  of	  Experimental	  Psychology:	  Human	  Perception	  and	  
Performance,37(3),	  935.	  
24. Grinband,	  J.,	  Savitskaya,	  J.,	  Wager,	  T.	  D.,	  Teichert,	  T.,	  Ferrera,	  V.	  P.,	  &	  Hirsch,	  
J.	  (2011).	  The	  dorsal	  medial	  frontal	  cortex	  is	  sensitive	  to	  time	  on	  task,	  not	  
response	  conflict	  or	  error	  likelihood.	  Neuroimage,	  57(2),	  303-­‐311.	  
25. Weissman,	  D.	  H.,	  &	  Carp,	  J.	  (2013).	  The	  congruency	  effect	  in	  the	  posterior	  
medial	  frontal	  cortex	  is	  more	  consistent	  with	  time	  on	  task	  than	  with	  
response	  conflict.	  PloS	  one,	  8(4),	  e62405.	  
26. Yeung,	  N.,	  Cohen,	  J.	  D.,	  &	  Botvinick,	  M.	  M.	  (2011).	  Errors	  of	  interpretation	  
and	  modeling:	  A	  reply	  to	  Grinband	  et	  al.	  Neuroimage,	  57(2),	  316-­‐319.	  
27. Shenhav,	  A.,	  Straccia,	  M.	  A.,	  Cohen,	  J.	  D.,	  &	  Botvinick,	  M.	  M.	  (2014).	  Anterior	  
cingulate	  engagement	  in	  a	  foraging	  context	  reflects	  choice	  difficulty,	  not	  
foraging	  value.	  Nature	  neuroscience,	  17(9),	  1249-­‐1254.	  
28. Buchsbaum,	  B.	  R.,	  Erickson,	  D.	  T.,	  &	  Kayser,	  A.	  S.	  (2013).	  Decomposing	  
Effects	  of	  Time	  on	  Task	  Reveals	  an	  Anteroposterior	  Gradient	  of	  Perceptual	  
Decision	  Regions.	  PloS	  one,	  8(8),	  e72074.	  
29. Neta,	  M.,	  Schlaggar,	  B.	  L.,	  &	  Petersen,	  S.	  E.	  (2014).	  Separable	  Responses	  to	  
Error,	  Ambiguity,	  and	  Reaction	  Time	  in	  Cingulo-­‐Opercular	  Task	  Control	  
Regions.	  NeuroImage.	  
30. Dixon,	  M.	  L.,	  Fox,	  K.	  C.,	  &	  Christoff,	  K.	  (2014).	  Evidence	  for	  rostro-­‐caudal	  
functional	  organization	  in	  multiple	  brain	  areas	  related	  to	  goal-­‐directed	  
behavior.Brain	  research.	  
31. Churchland,	  M.	  M.,	  Byron,	  M.	  Y.,	  Cunningham,	  J.	  P.,	  Sugrue,	  L.	  P.,	  Cohen,	  M.	  
R.,	  Corrado,	  G.	  S.,	  ...	  &	  Shenoy,	  K.	  V.	  (2010).	  Stimulus	  onset	  quenches	  neural	  
variability:	  a	  widespread	  cortical	  phenomenon.	  Nature	  neuroscience,	  13(3),	  
369-­‐378.	  
32. Churchland,	  A.	  K.,	  Kiani,	  R.,	  Chaudhuri,	  R.,	  Wang,	  X.	  J.,	  Pouget,	  A.,	  &	  Shadlen,	  
M.	  N.	  (2011).	  Variance	  as	  a	  signature	  of	  neural	  computations	  during	  
decision	  making.	  Neuron,	  69(4),	  818-­‐831.	  
	  

19	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
33. Connolly,	  J.	  D.,	  Goodale,	  M.	  A.,	  Goltz,	  H.	  C.,	  &	  Munoz,	  D.	  P.	  (2005).	  fMRI	  
activation	  in	  the	  human	  frontal	  eye	  field	  is	  correlated	  with	  saccadic	  
reaction	  time.	  Journal	  of	  Neurophysiology,	  94(1),	  605-­‐611.	  
34. Dux,	  P.	  E.,	  Ivanoff,	  J.,	  Asplund,	  C.	  L.,	  &	  Marois,	  R.	  (2006).	  Isolation	  of	  a	  
central	  bottleneck	  of	  information	  processing	  with	  time-­‐resolved	  
fMRI.	  Neuron,	  52(6),	  1109-­‐1120.	  
35. Weissman,	  D.	  H.,	  Roberts,	  K.	  C.,	  Visscher,	  K.	  M.,	  &	  Woldorff,	  M.	  G.	  (2006).	  
The	  neural	  bases	  of	  momentary	  lapses	  in	  attention.	  Nature	  
neuroscience,	  9(7),	  971-­‐978.	  
36. Yarkoni,	  T.,	  Barch,	  D.	  M.,	  Gray,	  J.	  R.,	  Conturo,	  T.	  E.,	  &	  Braver,	  T.	  S.	  (2009).	  
BOLD	  correlates	  of	  trial-­‐by-­‐trial	  reaction	  time	  variability	  in	  gray	  and	  white	  
matter:	  a	  multi-­‐study	  fMRI	  analysis.	  PLoS	  One,	  4(1),	  e4257.	  
37. Grinband,	  J.,	  Wager,	  T.	  D.,	  Lindquist,	  M.,	  Ferrera,	  V.	  P.,	  &	  Hirsch,	  J.	  (2008).	  
Detection	  of	  time-­‐varying	  signals	  in	  event-­‐related	  fMRI	  
designs.	  Neuroimage,43(3),	  509-­‐520.	  
38. Wang,	  Z.,	  Li,	  Y.,	  Childress,	  A.	  R.,	  &	  Detre,	  J.	  A.	  (2014).	  Brain	  Entropy	  Mapping	  
Using	  fMRI.	  PloS	  one,	  9(3),	  e89948.	  
39. De	  Araujo,	  D.	  B.,	  Tedeschi,	  W.,	  Santos,	  A.	  C.,	  Elias	  Jr,	  J.,	  Neves,	  U.	  P.	  C.,	  &	  
Baffa,	  O.	  (2003).	  Shannon	  entropy	  applied	  to	  the	  analysis	  of	  event-­‐related	  
fMRI	  time	  series.	  NeuroImage,	  20(1),	  311-­‐317.	  
40. Barry,	  R.	  L.,	  Coaster,	  M.,	  Rogers,	  B.	  P.,	  Newton,	  A.	  T.,	  Moore,	  J.,	  Anderson,	  A.	  
W.,	  ...	  &	  Gore,	  J.	  C.	  (2013).	  On	  the	  origins	  of	  signal	  variance	  in	  FMRI	  of	  the	  
human	  midbrain	  at	  high	  field.	  PloS	  one,	  8(4),	  e62708.	  
41. Davis,	  T.,	  LaRocque,	  K.	  F.,	  Mumford,	  J.	  A.,	  Norman,	  K.	  A.,	  Wagner,	  A.	  D.,	  &	  
Poldrack,	  R.	  A.	  (2014).	  What	  do	  differences	  between	  multi-­‐voxel	  and	  
univariate	  analysis	  mean?	  How	  subject-­‐,	  voxel-­‐,	  and	  trial-­‐level	  variance	  
impact	  fMRI	  analysis.	  NeuroImage,	  97,	  271-­‐283.	  
42. Kang,	  H.,	  Ombao,	  H.,	  Linkletter,	  C.,	  Long,	  N.,	  &	  Badre,	  D.	  (2012).	  Spatio-­‐
spectral	  mixed-­‐effects	  model	  for	  functional	  magnetic	  resonance	  imaging	  
data.Journal	  of	  the	  American	  Statistical	  Association,	  107(498),	  568-­‐577.	  
43. Sekhon,	  J.	  S.	  (2011).	  Multivariate	  and	  Propensity	  Score	  Matching	  Software	  
with	  Automated	  Balance	  Optimization:	  The	  Matching	  package	  for	  R.	  Journal	  
of	  Statistical	  Software,	  42(i07).	  
44. Howell,	  D.	  C.	  (2005).	  Median	  Absolute	  Deviation.	  Encyclopedia	  of	  Statistics	  
in	  Behavioral	  Science.	  
	  
Acknowledgements	  
	  
We	  thank	  our	  reviewers	  and	  funding	  agencies.	  This	  study	  was	  supported	  by	  awards	  
from	  the	  National	  Institute	  of	  Neurological	  Disease	  and	  Stroke	  (R01	  NS065046),	  the	  
Alfred	  P.	  Sloan	  Foundation,	  and	  the	  James	  S.	  McDonnell	  Foundation.	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

20	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
Supplementary	  Information	  
	  
	  
Supplementary	  Table	  1:	  Peak	  Coordinates	  from	  Maximal	  Model	  Contrasts	  of	  Interest	  
	  
	  
Contrast	  	  

D2>D1	  Task	  
Events	  

D1	  Task	  Events	  

D2	  Task	  Events	  

Effect	  of	  
D1>D2TOT	  

D1	  TOT	  Effect	  

	  

	  
Label	  
LOC	  
SFG	  
MFG	  
SPL	  
Insula	  
PCG	  
O	  Fusiform	  
FPC	  
Occipital	  Pole	  
LOC	  
LOC	  
Occipital	  Pole	  
O	  Fusiform	  
TPJ	  
Post-­‐C	  Gyrus	  
Post-­‐C	  Gyrus	  
Post-­‐C	  Gyrus	  
Pre-­‐C	  Gyrus	  
TO	  Fusiform	  
SPL	  
Post-­‐C	  Gyrus	  
TO	  Fusiform	  
O	  Fusiform	  
O	  Fusiform	  
SMG	  
SMG	  
Precuneous	  
Post-­‐C	  Gyrus	  
LOC	  
SPL	  
Pre-­‐C	  Gyrus	  
MFG	  
MFG	  
IFG	  
MFG	  
Pre-­‐C	  Gyrus	  
MFG	  
MFG	  
MFG	  
Pre-­‐C	  Gyrus	  
MFG	  
SFG	  
FPC	  
LOC	  
LOC	  
LOC	  
LOC	  
SPL	  

X	  
-­‐24	  
-­‐22	  
-­‐46	  
-­‐30	  
32	  
-­‐4	  
16	  
-­‐32	  
32	  
42	  
38	  
-­‐12	  
38	  
36	  
-­‐52	  
-­‐48	  
-­‐56	  
-­‐62	  
30	  
-­‐28	  
-­‐42	  
25	  
32	  
34	  
-­‐48	  
-­‐48	  
-­‐10	  
-­‐50	  
-­‐26	  
-­‐28	  
-­‐40	  
-­‐40	  
-­‐54	  
-­‐34	  
-­‐28	  
-­‐48	  
50	  
40	  
40	  
40	  
44	  
22	  
-­‐30	  
-­‐8	  
-­‐28	  
-­‐10	  
-­‐32	  
-­‐24	  

Peak	  (MNI)	  
Y	  
-­‐64	  
8	  
10	  
-­‐54	  
24	  
16	  
-­‐72	  
56	  
-­‐90	  
-­‐86	  
-­‐90	  
-­‐102	  
-­‐64	  
-­‐56	  
-­‐14	  
-­‐16	  
-­‐14	  
2	  
-­‐52	  
-­‐56	  
-­‐28	  
-­‐58	  
-­‐62	  
-­‐80	  
-­‐40	  
-­‐34	  
-­‐66	  
-­‐34	  
-­‐60	  
-­‐48	  
4	  
32	  
16	  
18	  
-­‐4	  
6	  
12	  
10	  
30	  
-­‐2	  
26	  
-­‐6	  
52	  
-­‐72	  
-­‐68	  
-­‐68	  
-­‐60	  
-­‐58	  

Z	  
44	  
56	  
32	  
60	  
0	  
50	  
-­‐18	  
6	  
4	  
10	  
0	  
12	  
-­‐10	  
-­‐14	  
44	  
44	  
52	  
30	  
-­‐14	  
58	  
54	  
-­‐18	  
-­‐14	  
-­‐10	  
52	  
42	  
42	  
60	  
48	  
54	  
40	  
28	  
32	  
26	  
52	  
24	  
36	  
32	  
26	  
38	  
34	  
54	  
14	  
62	  
50	  
64	  
48	  
50	  

Peak	  Z	  
4.72	  
4.64	  
4.61	  
4.59	  
4.42	  
4.41	  
3.96	  
4.02	  
6.11	  
5.86	  
5.73	  
5.71	  
5.63	  
5.59	  
4.08	  
4.05	  
3.98	  
3.78	  
7.57	  
7.1	  
7.06	  
6.95	  
6.9	  
6.89	  
4.12	  
3.77	  
3.75	  
3.74	  
3.68	  
3.61	  
3.96	  
3.73	  
3.57	  
3.49	  
3.26	  
3.22	  
3.79	  
3.54	  
3.54	  
3.51	  
3.48	  
3.42	  
3.79	  
4.31	  
4.08	  
4.06	  
3.94	  
3.92	  

Extent	  (voxels)	  
12981	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
621	  
561	  
16760	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
1792	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
64727	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
3466	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
1582	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
1388	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
599	  
6406	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  

21	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  

D2	  TOT	  Effect	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

Precuneous	  
SFG	  
MFG	  
MFG	  
MFG	  
MFG	  
MFG	  
MFG	  
MFG	  
MFG	  
Caudate	  
MFG	  
SFG	  
ITG	  
O	  Fusiform	  
LOC	  
ITG	  
MTG	  
TO	  Fusiform	  
PCG	  
FPC	  
Occipital	  Pole	  
LOC	  
O	  Fusiform	  
Occipital	  Pole	  
Occipital	  Pole	  
LOC	  
Putamen	  

-­‐4	  
-­‐44	  
-­‐34	  
-­‐48	  
-­‐56	  
-­‐40	  
-­‐48	  
50	  
34	  
32	  
20	  
42	  
32	  
-­‐48	  
-­‐42	  
-­‐48	  
-­‐50	  
-­‐56	  
-­‐34	  
-­‐6	  
-­‐40	  
-­‐30	  
32	  
18	  
22	  
10	  
38	  
26	  

-­‐70	  
34	  
16	  
16	  
16	  
28	  
8	  
24	  
0	  
2	  
28	  
32	  
8	  
-­‐58	  
-­‐68	  
-­‐70	  
-­‐56	  
-­‐60	  
-­‐48	  
14	  
64	  
-­‐96	  
-­‐78	  
-­‐86	  
-­‐94	  
-­‐100	  
-­‐84	  
-­‐30	  

50	  
46	  
28	  
32	  
32	  
28	  
54	  
34	  
44	  
50	  
-­‐6	  
30	  
70	  
-­‐8	  
-­‐18	  
-­‐8	  
-­‐14	  
2	  
-­‐24	  
52	  
10	  
-­‐10	  
0	  
-­‐8	  
22	  
16	  
2	  
8	  

3.9	  
4.33	  
3.84	  
3.83	  
3.8	  
3.78	  
3.75	  
4.19	  
3.86	  
3.83	  
3.64	  
3.5	  
3.46	  
3.85	  
3.71	  
3.66	  
3.59	  
3.46	  
2.96	  
3.62	  
3.7	  
4.49	  
4.25	  
4.1	  
4.1	  
4.02	  
4	  
4.41	  

(local	  max)	  
3699	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
2674	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
1173	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
953	  
801	  
5399	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
(local	  max)	  
723	  

	  

22	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
Supplementary	  Text	  S1:	  No	  Evidence	  for	  Hierarchical	  Control	  on	  Slow	  1D	  Task	  Trials	  
	  
To	  assess	  whether	  subjects	  may	  have	  been	  engaging	  in	  hierarchical	  control	  on	  the	  
slow	  trials	  of	  1D	  task	  –	  for	  example,	  by	  erroneously	  attending	  to	  color	  –	  we	  used	  
multivariate	  pattern	  analysis	  (PyMVPA;	  Hanke,	  et	  al.	  2009).	  	  
	  
We	  reasoned	  that	  if	  subjects	  were	  erroneously	  attending	  to	  color	  on	  slow	  1D	  trials,	  
then	  color	  should	  be	  more	  accurately	  classified	  on	  slow,	  as	  compared	  to	  fast	  1D	  
trials.	  To	  test	  this	  hypothesis	  we	  first	  extracted	  the	  motion-­‐corrected	  timeseries	  
from	  each	  voxel	  within	  each	  of	  our	  a	  priori	  ROIs,	  and	  divided	  them	  into	  “chunks”	  
defined	  by	  run	  for	  cross-­‐validation.	  Each	  timeseries	  was	  linearly	  detrended,	  and	  z-­‐
scored	  with	  respect	  to	  rest.	  The	  detrended	  and	  z-­‐scored	  BOLD	  intensities	  occurring	  
4-­‐6	  seconds	  following	  each	  1D	  stimulus	  were	  then	  classified	  according	  to	  the	  color	  
used	  on	  that	  trial,	  using	  a	  linear	  support	  vector	  machine	  (LinearCSVMC	  in	  PyMVPA).	  
Separate	  classifiers	  were	  trained	  and	  tested	  on	  1D	  trials	  falling	  above	  and	  below	  
each	  subject’s	  mean	  RT.	  In	  neither	  “fast”	  nor	  “slow”	  1D	  trials	  did	  we	  observe	  
classification	  accuracy	  exceeding	  that	  observed	  across	  1000	  permuted	  training	  sets;	  
if	  anything,	  color-­‐decoding	  accuracy	  relative	  to	  the	  permuted	  null	  was	  somewhat	  
higher	  on	  short	  as	  compared	  to	  long	  trials	  (ranking	  in	  the	  top	  36.5%	  vs.	  39.6%	  of	  
the	  permuted	  distribution).	  Similar	  results	  were	  achieved	  with	  many	  variants	  on	  
this	  procedure,	  including	  the	  provision	  of	  BOLD	  in	  each	  of	  the	  first	  3	  post-­‐stimulus	  
TRs	  to	  the	  classifier,	  feature	  selection	  using	  one-­‐way	  ANOVA,	  subsampling	  of	  the	  
data	  to	  ensure	  balanced	  classes,	  and	  z-­‐scoring	  voxels	  within	  ROIs	  for	  each	  time-­‐
point	  separately.	  
	  
As	  a	  second	  attempt,	  we	  trained	  classifiers	  on	  2D	  task	  trials,	  and	  assessed	  their	  
generalization	  to	  1D	  task	  trials	  as	  a	  function	  of	  RT.	  In	  none	  of	  our	  a	  priori	  ROIs	  did	  
we	  observe	  a	  significant	  correlation	  between	  classifier	  accuracy	  and	  RT	  (mean	  
R=.04,	  thus	  accounting	  for	  less	  than	  1%	  of	  the	  variance	  in	  RT).	  As	  above,	  many	  
variants	  on	  this	  scheme	  were	  assessed	  with	  no	  qualitative	  change	  to	  the	  results.	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

23	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
Supplementary	  Text	  S2:	  Variance	  Analyses	  As	  a	  Function	  of	  Task	  and	  Area	  
	  
If	  the	  demands	  of	  the	  2D	  task	  better	  match	  the	  tuning	  properties	  of	  the	  PrePMd	  than	  
the	  1D	  task,	  intrinsic	  variability	  in	  the	  PrePMd	  may	  be	  quenched	  by	  the	  2D	  task,	  and	  
not	  the	  1D	  task.	  This	  would	  translate	  to	  greater	  heterogeneity	  in	  the	  response	  of	  the	  
PrePMd	  across	  trials	  of	  the	  1D	  task,	  as	  compared	  to	  the	  2D	  task,	  and	  as	  compared	  to	  
the	  PMd	  (see	  Discussion).	  To	  test	  this	  hypothesis,	  we	  used	  a	  robust	  measure	  of	  
variability	  (the	  median	  absolute	  deviation;	  MAD44)	  in	  the	  residuals	  of	  the	  models	  
assessing	  trials	  matched	  for	  RT	  across	  the	  1D	  and	  2D	  task.	  The	  ToT	  regressor	  was	  
removed	  from	  these	  models	  for	  this	  analysis,	  to	  reveal	  variability	  which	  the	  ToT	  
regressor	  could	  explain	  in	  principle.	  We	  then	  averaged	  the	  MAD	  across	  the	  voxels	  of	  
each	  volume	  acquired	  2-­‐8s	  following	  the	  onset	  of	  each	  matched	  trial.	  	  
	  
This	  analysis	  revealed	  that	  the	  PrePMd	  shows	  larger	  residual	  variability	  from	  2-­‐8s	  
post-­‐stimulus	  on	  matched	  trials	  of	  the	  1D	  task,	  relative	  to	  the	  matched	  trials	  of	  the	  
2D	  task	  (t(21)=3.26,	  p=.004).	  No	  such	  pattern	  was	  observed	  within	  PMd	  
(t(21)=1.26,	  p>.22).	  The	  interaction	  with	  ROI	  is	  significant	  (F(1,21)=6.96,	  p=.015;	  
See	  Figure	  S1A).	  Even	  when	  analyzing	  the	  residuals	  of	  these	  same	  trials	  in	  the	  
"maximal"	  model	  –	  that	  is,	  the	  model	  controlling	  for	  the	  effects	  of	  congruency,	  
dimension	  switches,	  and	  response	  switches	  –	  the	  same	  interaction	  holds	  (Figure	  1B;	  
F(1,21)=5.24,	  p=.03;	  note	  however	  that	  neither	  simple	  effect	  remains	  significant	  in	  
this	  analysis,	  p‘s>.24).	  	  	  These	  effects	  were	  observed	  only	  around	  the	  anticipated	  
peak	  of	  the	  HRF	  (e.g.,	  p's	  >.15	  for	  the	  period	  0-­‐4s	  prior	  to	  matched	  trial	  onset,	  or	  
from	  10-­‐20s	  after	  matched	  trial	  onset).	  
	  
These	  results	  are	  consistent	  with	  the	  notion	  that	  the	  1D	  task	  does	  not	  match	  the	  
tuning	  properties	  of	  the	  PrePMd	  as	  well	  as	  the	  2D	  task.	  As	  a	  result,	  the	  1D	  task	  may	  
less	  effectively	  “quench”	  the	  intrinsic	  variability	  of	  the	  PrePMd	  response	  (see	  
Discussion).	  This	  greater	  residual	  variability	  in	  the	  BOLD	  response	  in	  the	  PrePMd	  
could	  therefore	  enable	  a	  larger	  scaling	  of	  BOLD	  with	  factors	  that	  vary	  from	  trial-­‐to-­‐
trial.	  	  
	  
	  

	  

24	  

RUNNING	  HEAD:	  Rostrocaudal	  reaction	  time	  effects	  
	  
Supplementary	  Figure	  S1	  
	  

A#

PMD#

PrePMd#

MAD$at$Lags$1+3$from$Maximal$Matched$
model$

MAD$at$Lags$1+3$from$Matched$model$

22#

B#

21#
20#
19#
18#
17#
16#

PMD#

PrePMd#

20#
19.5#
19#
18.5#
18#
17.5#
17#
16.5#
16#
15.5#
15#

1D#

2D#

1D#

2D#

	  

Figure	  S1	  –	  The	  median	  absolute	  deviation	  (MAD)	  of	  the	  residuals	  on	  RT-­‐matched	  trials	  in	  the	  1D	  and	  2D	  
tasks,	  as	  a	  function	  of	  area	  [PrePMd	  vs.	  PMd],	  in	  the	  standard	  (A)	  and	  maximal	  models	  (B)	  when	  the	  time	  
on	  task	  regressor	  was	  omitted.	  A.	  Relative	  to	  the	  PMd,	  the	  PrePMd	  shows	  disproportionately	  greater	  residual	  
variability	  in	  the	  2-­‐8s	  following	  matched	  trials	  of	  the	  1D,	  as	  compared	  to	  2D	  task.	  B.	  Even	  when	  additionally	  
controlling	  for	  a	  number	  of	  other	  experimental	  factors,	  the	  PMd	  and	  PrePMd	  show	  discrepant	  patterns	  in	  
residual	  variability	  as	  a	  function	  of	  task.	  

	  

25	  

