arXiv:1501.00302v2 [q-bio.GN] 24 Feb 2015

An Event-Driven Approach for Studying Gene Block
Evolution in Bacteria
David C Ream , Asma R Bankapur and Iddo Friedberg
Department of Microbiology
Miami University
Oxford, OH
USA

∗

February 26, 2015

Abstract
Motivation: Gene blocks are genes co-located on the chromosome. In many cases,
genes blocks are conserved between bacterial species, sometimes as operons, when genes
are co-transcribed. The conservation is rarely absolute: gene loss, gain, duplication,
block splitting, and block fusion are frequently observed. An open question in bacterial molecular evolution is that of the formation and breakup of gene blocks, for which
several models have been proposed. These models, however, are not generally applicable to all types of gene blocks, and consequently cannot be used to broadly compare
and study gene block evolution. To address this problem we introduce an event-based
method for tracking gene block evolution in bacteria.
Results: We show here that the evolution of gene blocks in proteobacteria can be
described by a small set of events. Those include the insertion of genes into, or the
splitting of genes out of a gene block, gene loss, and gene duplication. We show how
the event-based method of gene block evolution allows us to determine the evolutionary
rate, and to trace the ancestral states of their formation. We conclude that the eventbased method can be used to help us understand the formation of these important
bacterial genomic structures.
Availability: The software is available under GPLv3 license on
http://github.com/reamdc1/gene_block_evolution.git
Supplementary online material:
http://iddo-friedberg.net/operon-evolution
Contact: Iddo Friedberg i.friedberg@miamioh.edu

1

Introduction

In bacterial and archaeal genomes, gene blocks are sequences of genes co-located on the
chromosome. The evolutionary conservation of gene blocks is strikingly apparent between
many genomes. It may also be that conservations across numerous taxa indicate that at
least some conserved blocks are operons: a special case of gene blocks where the genes are
co-transcribed to polycistronic mRNA and are often associated with a single function, such
as a metabolic pathway or a protein complex. It is estimated that 5-25% of bacterial genes
reside in operons [37]. Typically operons are under the control of one or more regulator
proteins, which facilitate co-regulated transcription. From an evolutionary point of view,
there are several questions that are asked about operons and gene blocks. How did these
units evolve? What confers fitness upon genes in an operon or block structure as opposed
∗ to

whom correspondence should be addressed: i.friedberg@miamioh.edu

1

to not being neighboring? Are certain operons more or less evolutionarily conserved in
bacteria? What affects the conservation of the operon or gene block structure in different
taxa?
Several models exist to explain gene block evolution (for more extensive reviews see
[8, 20]. One of the first models proposed for biopathway evolution is the Natal or Retrograde
model which proposed that genes are arranged in blocks and operons due to tandem gene
duplications derived from the depletion of metabolites in the environment [13]. However, this
model does not explain many operons which encode for proteins that are not homologous.
Early co-adaptation models (reviewed in: [32]) applied to operons propose that neighboring
genes into operons would lower the chances of co-adapted genes being separated by random
recombination. However, orthologous replacements of operon genes have been observed,
suggesting that preservation of co-localization of co-adapted alleles is not an exclusive reason
for operons to form. The coregulation model is derived from the original definition of an
operon: that the neighboring operon genes is due to the increased benefit of coregulation,
providing an increased fitness for the population which has the operon [27]. However,
intermediate stages involving the cotranscription of non-beneficial genes cannot explain an
incremental increase in fitness. The selfish operon model [19] proposes that the formation of
gene blocks in bacteria is mediated by transfer of DNA within and among taxa. The model
proposes an increase in fitness for the constituent genes because it enables the transfer of
functionally coupled genes that would otherwise not increase fitness if they were separate.
Furthermore, the joining of genes into blocks and eventually operons is beneficial for the
horizontal gene transfer (HGT) of weakly selected, functionally coupled genes. Thus, we
expect to see a certain percentage of “genetic hitchhikers”: non-beneficial genes that are
coupled to beneficial genes in the operon. It seems that the selfish operon model does account
for the structure of some operons, but is not the only mechanism of operon construction.
The main finding against the selfish operon model’s exclusivity is the much lower number
of “hitchhiking”, non-essential genes than expected [24]. Price et al. proposed that operon
evolution is being driven by selection on gene expression patterns, and they also found that
although genes within operons are usually closely spaced, genes in highly expressed operons
may be widely spaced because of regulatory fine-tuning by intervening sequences. This study
was based on a comparative analysis of two genomes, but included extensive expression data
[26]. Another model is that of the mosaic operons [21]. In this model, shuffling, disruption,
and HGT play dominant parts in operon formation. Under this model, an operon is not a
steady-state evolutionary entity, but rather a dynamic entity which continuously acquires
or loses genes via HGT. In their paper, Omelchenko et al. have shown that although some
operons follow the Selfish model, many do not, with HGT of individual genes into operons
being quite common. Whole operon transfer was identified in about 30% of the operons
studied. Another 20% of the operons were identified as mosaic operons. However, the
study does not attempt to further classify the different types of mosaic operons, but rather
provides an in-depth study of some of them. A study of the his operon by Fani et al. has
proposed a “piecewise” model to operon evolution [6]. The piecewise model suggests that
the construction of the his operon is a sequential series of events starting from a scattered
set of constituent genes. Other models include an adaptive life cycle of operons, in which
they rarely evolve optimally [26].
Each of the operon evolution models present a mechanism and fits a biological rationale
to the observation that operons/gene blocks exist in extant taxa. However these models do
not readily allow us to quantify the changes between either operons/gene block or between
different organisms. Moreover, more than one model can generally be applied to a chosen
gene block and set of taxa. Therefore, there is a need to create a universally applicable
method for charting gene block evolution. Having such a method on hand can help determine
the specific evolutionary trajectory of any given gene block.

2

Figure 1: The event-driven approach for operon evolution. Species A − E are arranged in a phylogenetic
species tree. A is a source taxon, with gene block A(a, b, c). In species B there is a strand reversal of
the homolog Bc, which is treated as a split. The orthoblock in species C has a deletion of gene Cc when
compared with species A or B. The orthoblock in D has a duplication of gene Bb in relation to taxon A.
The orthoblock in species E has a split and a deletion of gene Ea.

2

Approach

Here we present a novel approach to investigate gene block evolution which we call the
event-driven method. Our approach borrows from the model describing the evolution of
DNA and protein sequences. The accepted model for sequence evolution postulates two
types of basic events leading to changes: indels and mutations. Indels and mutations are
assigned scores [3, 12] based on the frequency of their occurrence over time. Given a pair of
sequences, a typical hypothesis is posed as to whether they are homologs. The hypothesis
is not rejected if we can show that these two sequences are significantly similar. In practical
terms, the similarity between two sequences is ascertained if the cumulative score of indels
and mutation events differentiating the sequences is below a certain threshold, determined
by an appropriate null model, so that it can be stated that the sequences are significantly
similar. Note that the smallest unit in which a change can happen is the nucleotide (DNA)
or the amino-acid (protein).
The event-driven method of gene block evolution we present here describes evolutionary
events that occur between gene blocks that are homologous between different bacterial
species. The atomic unit of change is now the gene as a building-block of a gene block,
rather than the nucleotide as the building block of a gene. This procedure is best explained
by example. Suppose that genome A has neighboring genes A(a, b, c) in that order (In this
annotation, upper case letters are the taxon, lower case letters are the genes). Genome B
has homologs to those in A B(a, b) are neighboring, but Bc is located somewhere else in
the chromosome, and reversed. As for genome C, c was deleted, so C(a, b) are neighboring.
For the scenario described, we can say that there was a gene split event between A and
B, and a gene deletion event between C and any of the other genomes for the gene block
A(a, b, c). When the phylogenetic tree is known, these events can be placed on the tree. See
full example in Figure 1.
If changes in gene blocks can be represented using a small set of events, the number and
type of these events can be used to describe the evolutionary history of the gene block. Here
we report on a set of 38 operons from E. coli whose homologs we have examined across 33
taxa of proteobacteria. For these 38 operons and related orthologous gene blocks, we show
an implementation of the event-driven approach to operon evolution.

3

Methods

We define the following concepts: reference taxon is a taxon where operons have been
identified by experimental means. Here we use E. coli K-12 MG1655 as the reference taxon.
We chose E. coli because it is expertly and comprehensively annotated in the RegulonDB

3

database [30]. Neighboring genes: two genes are considered neighboring if they are 500
nucleotides or fewer apart, and on the same strand. A gene block comprises no fewer
than two open reading frames, or ORFs which are neighboring. An event is a change in
the gene block between any two species with homologous gene blocks. Orthoblocks (gene
blocks that are orthologous) are defined as follows: two organisms have orthoblocks when
each organism must has at least two neighboring genes that are homologous to genes in
a gene block in the reference taxon’s genome. Genes are considered homologous if their
pairwise BLAST e-value is 10−10 or less. Relying on a strict BLAST threshold may exclude
homologous proteins whose sequence similarity is not high (false negatives). However, this
strategy will rarely include proteins with a different function (false positives). This rigorous
threshold was chosen with the primary goal of minimizing false positives when inferring
function by similarity.

3.1

Evolutionary events

Next we define events that we use to examine changes in gene block structure between
different bacterial taxa relative to E. coli. We chose a set of target taxa with known phylogenetic relationships. The genomes of the target taxa were searched for homologous blocks
to the operons found in E. coli. The operons we chose were selected based on the following
criteria: 1. all the genes were protein coding; 2. for all blocks chosen, the co-transcription
was experimentally determined in E. coli ; 3. each operon comprised at least five genes; 4.
each operon has orthoblocks in at least nine other genomes. Using these filtering criteria,
and RegulonDB’s annotation of E. coli as our reference taxon, we compiled 38 operons for
this study. See Supplementary Material, Table S1 for a full list of operons.
We define the following pairwise events between orthoblocks from different taxons:
1. Splits If two genes in one taxon are neighboring and their homologs in the other
taxon are not, then that is defined as a single split event. The distance is the minimal
number of split events identified between the compared genomes.
2. Deletions A gene exists in the operon in the one taxon, but its homolog cannot be
found in an orthoblock in another taxon. Note that the definition of homolog, e-value
10−10 is strict, and may result in false negatives. The deletion distance is the number
of deletion events identified between the compared target genomes.
3. Duplications A duplication event is defined as having gene j in a gene block in the
source genome, and a homologous genes (j 0 , j 00 ) in the homologous block in the target
genome. The duplication distance is the number of duplication events counted between
the source and target genomes. The duplication has to occur in a gene block to be
tallied.
Other events were examined too: rearrangement of genes, genes moving to another
strand, fusion and fission of open reading frames. These event types correlated strongly
with one or more of the three event types listed above, and were therefore discarded. Fusion/fission of open reading frames were rare rare in our data set, so this event type was
discarded as well.
The event-driven method does not account for horizontal gene transfer, which is suggested as a common mechanism for transferring neighboring genes [19]. However, We have
not yet incorporated HGT into our model. We have tried using AlienHunter [16], and the
IslandViewer [17] suite to detect HGT events in our data. However, given that the taxa we
are analyzing are closely related, these software were unable to detect HGT events.

4

3.2

Different Conservation Rates for Gene Blocks in Proteobacteria

Determining orthology: To trace the events that affect genes in gene blocks, it is necessary to determine which genes are orthologous between any two taxa when more than two
possible homolog pairings may exist. The problem may be stated as follows: given a gene g
in genome A, and a set of homologs to g in genome B, HgB = {g1 , g2 , ..., gn }, which of the
genes in HgB is the ortholog to g? The Best Reciprocal Hits (BRH) method is commonly
used to find orthologs, however, BRH assumes that ortholog gi is necessarily that which is
most similar to g, discounting the possibility of different evolutionary rates of paralogs. We
therefore take a different approach in determining ortholog identity for genes in homology
blocks. When selecting a single ortholog among all possible homologs in Hg , we use synteny and sequence similarity to determine which of the genes in an examined genome is the
correct ortholog. To do so we use the following three criteria:
1. Prioritizing by gene blocks We prioritize orthologs that are in gene blocks over
orthologs that are isolated in the genome, and we look for the minimal number of
such blocks that contain a representative of every ortholog that we recover. Example:
the operon in E. coli had gene block (abcdef ). The target genome has the following
orthologs grouped in its genome: (abcd), (abc). In this case, we will choose as orthologs
the genes populating (abcd).
2. Recovering maximum number of genes We consider the number of genes found.
Example: the reference taxon operon had the gene block (abcdef ). The studied
genome has the following blocks (abcd) and ((abc), (de)). We would choose ((abc), (de)),
two blocks,even though (abcde) is one block, because in the latter case we recover more
homologs.
3. Minimizing duplications If in the target genome we have a choice between ortholog
groups ((abc), (de)) or ((abcd), (de)) we choose the first because it has the minimal
number of gene duplications.
We now define a target homolog as a gene in the target genome that is a homolog to a
gene in a gene block in the reference genome E. coli. and a target homolog block as one or
more target homologs, spaced ≤ 500 bp.
1: for geneBlock in ReferenceGenome do
2:
for genes in geneBlock do
3:
Find all homologs in the target genome with BLAST e-value ≤ 10−10
4:
end for
5:
Find all homologs in the target genome that are neighboring (≤ 500bp)
6:
Use a greedy algorithm to recover the maximum number of target homologs prioritizing by gene blocks while minimizing gene duplications and maximizing number of
genes recovered.
7: end for
Event-based distances. Once orthologs are chosen, we are able to define the eventbased distance between any two gene blocks with respect to split events, duplication events
and deletion events. The distance between any two homologous gene blocks found in target
organisms is defined as follows:
1. Split distance (ds ) is the absolute difference in the number of relevant gene blocks
between the two taxa. Example: for the reference gene block with genes (abcdef g)
Genome A has blocks ((abc), (def g)) and genome B has ((abc), (de), (f g)). Therefore,
ds (A, B) = |2 − 3| = 1.
2. Duplication distance (du ) is the pairwise count of duplications between two orthoblocks.
Example: we have a reference gene block (abcde). Now, for genomes A and B the
5

orthoblocks are A = ((abd)) B = ((abbcc)). Gene b causes a duplication distance
du (A, B) of 1. Gene c generates a distance of one deletion (see below) and one duplication. This is because the most parsimonious explanation is that the most recent
ancestor for A and B may have had one copy of c, thus generating a duplication in one
lineage, and a deletion in another. Since gene d exists only in the reference genome,
it has no bearing on the event-based distance between the homologous gene blocks A
and B.
3. Deletion distance dd is the difference in number of orthologs that are in the homologous
gene blocks of the genome of one organism, or the other, but not in both.
Gene block frequency matrices The rules outlined above allow us to determine the
pairwise distance, for a given event and gene block, between any two genomes in our corpus.
To visualize the frequency of an event in a block, we created matrices whose axes are the
examined species, and whose cell is the normalized value of the pairwise distance for any
given event. For an event v being one of insertion, deletion or duplication, for any two taxa
i and j with homology blocks, the value for the normalized distance matrix entry Mij is:
Mij =

dv (i, j) − x̄dv
σdv

Where x̄dv is the mean value of the distance for event v calculated over all pairs of taxa
np sharing that event:
x̄dv =

1 X
dv (i, j)
np i<j

and σdv is the standard deviation.
Choice of proteobacteria species, and phylogenetic tree construction. We
chose our species as in [6], removing a few species that we deemed to be too evolutionarily
close. The phylogenetic trees shown in the study were constructed from multiple sequence
alignments of the rpoD gene, using ClustalX 2.1 [18], followed by neighbor-joining. Table S3
lists the species used.

4

Results

The results of this study show an interesting variety in gene block evolution. First, we show
the gene block tree diagrams in a phylogenetic tree. These diagrams show the gene blocks
as we find them in the different species we examine. The lack of a gene in the gene block
phylogenetic tree does not mean the homolog does not exist in that taxon, but rather that
it is no longer detectable by BLAST at the threshold of 10−10 . Further, if a gene block is
missing from the phylogenetic tree, it means that there are no two genes in the gene block
that are neighboring in the genome within a distance of ≤ 500bp.
To visualize the frequency of events, we generate gene block event frequency matrices as
described in Methods. The value of each matrix is a z -score. Figure 2 shows two conserved
gene blocks, and Figure 3 shows two non-conserved gene blocks.

4.1

Conservation of Gene Blocks and Relationship to Function

The event-driven method enables us to examine the relative conservation of gene blocks in
proteobacteria. Figure 4 the gene blocks are arranged in descending order of conservation.
The most conserved block is the operon rplKAJL-rpoBC, a highly conserved transcription
unit of ribosomal proteins (rplK, rplK, rplA and rplL) and two RNA polymerase subunits
(rpoB and rpoC ) [33], Figure 2(a).

6

(a) rplKAJL-rpoBC: deletions, duplications, splits

(b) atpIABCDEFGH: deletions, duplications, splits

Figure 2: Highly conserved orthoblocks. The color matrices each show degree of relative conservation
of the event between any two species. Left to right: Deletions, duplications, splits. Blue to red scale
is high to low conservation z -score as described in Methods. The boxes outline (top to bottom): α-,
-, β-, and γ-proteobacteria. a: rplKAJL-rpoBC has only a single gene deletion in Wollinela, no gene
duplications, and a few splits (red squares, rightmost panel) including genes that moved to another strand.
b: the atp orthoblock shows deletions of atpI and a false deletion of atpE due to low similarity to E.
coli atpE in  and α proteobacteria (left matrix). No gene duplications are exhibited (middle panel).
Splits are due to strand reversal of component genes (right panel. High resolution figure available at:
http://iddo-friedberg.net/operon-evolution/

7

(a) paaABCDEFGHIJK: deletions, duplications, splits

(b) hyfABCDEFGHIJR-focB: deletions, duplications, splits

Figure 3: Less conserved orthoblocks. Green squares are genomes in which component genes were not
found using BLAST. a: phenylacetate degradation orthoblock. b: the hyf operon encoding the fourth
hydrogenase in E. coli is not expressed under known conditions. See text for details on both operons. High
resolution figure available at: http://iddo-friedberg.net/operon-evolution/
No gene duplications or deletions were detected. Our program does erroneously call a
deletion of the rplJ in Wolinella, but this is an error due to the stringent e-value cutoff and
having a single exemplar of the rplJ gene as a query. The splits we detect are mostly between
the rplKA and rplJL-rpoBC transcription units. The genes in this operon have multiple
promotor and attenuator sites [28], and have been shown to be governed by a complex set of
signals [33]. It appears that a complete tetracistronic product is transcribed from rplKAJL
with less abundant bicistronic products of rplK-rplA and rplJ-rplL [4], which may explain
the strong conservation of these four genes in this gene block.
Another well-conserved operon is the atp operon, which codes for the genes for the
H + -ATPase complex. ATP synthase is responsible for generating ATP using the proton
motive force (PMF) across the cell membrane [7]. We examined the operon coding for
ATP synthase, atpIBEFHAGDC. While highly conserved, this operon does exhibit gene
deletions in some taxa. Most notably the gene atpI, a nonessential gene that codes for a
helper protein that assists the assembly of the ATP-synthase complex’s rotor. We readily
recover this gene in orthoblocks in organisms that are closely related to E.coli. We did
not observe any duplications in our dataset, The atpI deletion was a true deletion, which
makes sense functionally as the atpI gene codes for the AtpI protein which is a nonessential
component of the H + -ATPase complex. The other components supposedly deleted, afpF,
atpE in -proteobacteria and α-proteobacteria are highly dissimilar to the equivalent E. coli
genes, and are therefore not identifiable as homologs (e-value using BLAST > 0.01, data
not shown). See Figure 2(b).
At the other edge of the conservation spectrum, we examined the hyf operon. As the
genome diagram shows, the gene block of 12 genes is not conserved as a single block in any of
the proteobacteria in our data set [1]. The hyf proton-translocating formate hydrogenlyase
block of 12 genes appears to be an operon only in E. coli, although many of the genes appear
in separate blocks in other bacteria. The hyf operon in E. coli is probably silent, at least

8

under the environmental conditions examined, and has only been expressed under artificial
conditions [31]. Not being able to express it in E. coli under native conditions suggests it
may be redundant, as does its lack of conservation in the species examined. See Figure 3(a).
The paa operon in E. coli encodes for a multicomponent oxygenase/reductase subunit
for the aerobic degradation of phenylacetic acid. The E. coli operon comprises 11 genes.
The distribution of the genes of this operon in 102 bacterial genomes was studied in detail
in [20]. The authors’ conclusions from this study was that de novo clustering of some of
this orthoblock’s genes occur repeatedly, due to weak selective pressure. The proximity
of genes sets up opportunities for co-transcription. Specifically, this study has shown that
genes paaA, B, C and paaD, when they are found, always co-occur in an operon. This
makes sense, as those genes form a stable molecular complex with those genes coding for
essential subunits for the degradation of phenylacetate [10]. Both our study’s and Martin
et al ’s found the full gene block only in E. coli and Pseudomonas putida. Another geneblock co-occurrence we find in our study is that of paaF and paaG, in 12 out of 23 species
in which any components of the paa orthoblock occur. The products of these two genes
form the FaaGH complex, another stable complex which catalyzes consecutive steps in the
phenylacetate degradation pathway, and it was hypothesized that the proximity of the two
proteins in a complex provides a fitness advantage [11]. Another use of the event-driven
method is the reconstruction of ancestral gene blocks along the evolutionary tree. Figure S1
shows such a reconstruction for paa in the γ-proteobacteria species used in our study. We
manually examined the possible events needed to transition between the tree’s nodes, and
along each branch minimized the number of events leading to the extant orthoblocks. One
interesting outcome of this analysis, is that paa orthoblock appears to be the result of HGT
events in E. coli and in P. putida, where an entire gene block exists in both species, but not
in the closely related ones.
To determine if there is a relationship between gene block conservation and the function
of the gene blocks, we assigned each operon keywords based on its function. The categories
we used were Metabolism, Information, Molecular Complex, Stress Response, Energy, and
Environmental Response. The keywords were assigned based on reading the literature relevant for each operon, and the information provided in EcoCyc [15]. As can be seen in
Figure 4, from the gene blocks we studied, gene blocks whose function is information or
protein complex tend to be more conserved, and those dealing with stress response are less
conserved. Gene blocks whose primary function was identified as metabolism were found at
all levels of conservation. We conclude that there may be a relationship between gene block
conservation and function, and that gene blocks having to do with information or molecular
complexes are more conserved than those dealing with stress response and/or environmental
response.

5

Discussion and Conclusions

We introduce a method to examine gene block and operon evolution in bacteria. This
method, coupled with the visualization we present, enables the interrogation of the evolution of gene blocks in a bacterial clade. The event-driven approach we use allows for
the quantification of evolutionary conservation of any gene block. Most importantly, the
event-driven method does not attempt to present a predictive evolutionary model such as
the models reviewed in the introduction. Rather, it allows for these models to be examined
in specific gene blocks with specific taxa. The event-driven method is agnostic to any model
predicting how an operon or gene block evolved.
To determine the conservation of gene blocks, a choice needs to be made for the proper
orthologs between genomes. Identifying orthologs is a challenging problem that has been
studied extensively. Several methods have been developed to do so including use of interspecies clusters [35, 25, 29], reciprocal best hits [35], or phylogenetic methods [9]. Here we
used genomic context and strict similarity criteria to choose which genes are orthologous, and

9

Figure 4: Relative conservation of operons and their primary biological functions. Each bar shows the
cumulative number of events per genome pair per orthoblock. The orthoblocks are numbered as in Table S1. Conserved orthoblocks have shorter bars, operons are ordered top-to-bottom left-to-right from most
conserved to least conserved.

10

are likely to have the same function. The ortholog choice method we use here assumes that
evidence for orthology is strengthened by genomic context. This assumption has been shown
to be useful for a more precise assignment of orthologs [14, 36] and has been implemented
in computational resources [34, 2, 23] to resolve ortholog ambiguities.
We choose gene blocks on the basis that, at least in one species (E. coli ), the genes are
co-transcribed. The initial motivation for this study was the observation that orthoblocks
have been shown to be useful in inferring common function, even when co-transcription
has not been determined [22, 5]. We have shown that tracking gene block evolution in
bacteria through the tallying of simple events provides an obejective, quantifiable method
for understanding their evolutionary conservation, relative to a reference species. We have
shown examples of two highly conserved orthoblocks (atp and ydc) and two less-conserved orthoblocks (paa and hyf). We have also related overall conservation to the type of orthoblock
function, although a larger survey of orthoblocks is needed to obtain a more reliable picture.
Funding: This work is supported, in part, by the US National Science Foundation under
Grant Number ABI-1146960. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Science Foundation.

References
[1] Simon C. Andrews, Ben C. Berks, Joseph McClay, Andrew Ambler, Michael A. Quail,
Paul Golby, and John R. Guest. A 12-cistron Escherichia coli operon (hyf) encoding a putative proton-translocating formate hydrogenlyase system. Microbiology,
143(11):3633–3647, November 1997.
[2] Ramy K. Aziz, Daniela Bartels, Aaron A. Best, Matthew DeJongh, Terrence Disz,
Robert A. Edwards, Kevin Formsma, Svetlana Gerdes, Elizabeth M. Glass, Michael
Kubal, Folker Meyer, Gary J. Olsen, Robert Olson, Andrei L. Osterman, Ross A. Overbeek, Leslie K. McNeil, Daniel Paarmann, Tobias Paczian, Bruce Parrello, Gordon D.
Pusch, Claudia Reich, Rick Stevens, Olga Vassieva, Veronika Vonstein, Andreas Wilke,
and Olga Zagnitko. The RAST Server: rapid annotations using subsystems technology.
BMC genomics, 9(1):75+, February 2008.
[3] M.O. Dayhoff. Atlas of Protein Sequence and Structure: supplement 3 1978. Number
v. 5. National Biomedical Research Foundation, 1978.
[4] Willa L. Downing and Patrick P. Dennis. Transcription products from the rplKAJLrpoBC gene cluster. Journal of Molecular Biology, 194(4):609–620, April 1987.
[5] Francois Enault, Karsten Suhre, and Jean M. Claverie. Phydbac ”Gene Function Predictor” : a gene annotation tool based on genomic context analysis. BMC Bioinformatics, 6(1):247+, 2005.
[6] Renato Fani, Matteo Brilli, and Pietro Liò. The origin and evolution of operons:
the piecewise building of the proteobacterial histidine operon. Journal of molecular
evolution, 60(3):378–390, March 2005.
[7] H. Fernandez Moran, T. Oda, P. V. Blair, and D. E. Green. A macromolecular repeating unit of mitochondrial structure and function. Correlated electron microscopic
and biochemical studies of isolated mitochondria and submitochondrial particles of beef
heart muscle. The Journal of cell biology, 22:63–100, July 1964.
[8] Marco Fondi, Giovanni Emiliani, and Renato Fani. Origin and evolution of operons
and metabolic pathways. Research in Microbiology, 160(7):502–512, September 2009.

11

[9] Debra Fulton, Yvonne Li, Matthew Laird, Benjamin Horsman, Fiona Roche, and Fiona
Brinkman. Improving the specificity of high-throughput ortholog prediction. BMC
Bioinformatics, 7(1):270+, May 2006.
[10] Andrey M. Grishin, Eunice Ajamian, Limei Tao, Linhua Zhang, Robert Menard, and
Miroslaw Cygler. Structural and functional studies of the Escherichia coli phenylacetylCoA monooxygenase complex. The Journal of biological chemistry, 286(12):10735–
10743, March 2011.
[11] Andrey M. Grishin, Eunice Ajamian, Linhua Zhang, Isabelle Rouiller, Mihnea Bostina,
and Miroslaw Cygler. Protein-Protein Interactions in the -Oxidation Part of the Phenylacetate Utilization Pathway. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 287(45):37986–37996,
November 2012.
[12] S. Henikoff and J. G. Henikoff. Amino acid substitution matrices from protein blocks.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 89(22):10915–10919, November 1992.
[13] N. H. Horowitz. On the Evolution of Biochemical Syntheses. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 31(6):153–157, June 1945.
[14] Jin Jun, Ion Mandoiu, and Craig Nelson. Identification of mammalian orthologs using
local synteny. BMC Genomics, 10(1):630+, 2009.
[15] Ingrid M. Keseler, Amanda Mackie, Martin Peralta-Gil, Alberto Santos-Zavaleta, Socorro Gama-Castro, César Bonavides-Martı́nez, Carol Fulcher, Araceli M. Huerta,
Anamika Kothari, Markus Krummenacker, Mario Latendresse, Luis Muñiz Rascado,
Quang Ong, Suzanne Paley, Imke Schröder, Alexander G. Shearer, Pallavi Subhraveti,
Mike Travers, Deepika Weerasinghe, Verena Weiss, Julio Collado-Vides, Robert P. Gunsalus, Ian Paulsen, and Peter D. Karp. EcoCyc: fusing model organism databases with
systems biology. Nucleic Acids Research, 41(D1):D605–D612, January 2013.
[16] Morgan Langille, William Hsiao, and Fiona Brinkman. Evaluation of genomic island
predictors using a comparative genomics approach. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(1):329+,
August 2008.
[17] Morgan G. I. Langille and Fiona S. L. Brinkman. IslandViewer: an integrated interface
for computational identification and visualization of genomic islands. Bioinformatics,
25(5):664–665, March 2009.
[18] M. A. Larkin, G. Blackshields, N. P. Brown, R. Chenna, P. A. McGettigan,
H. McWilliam, F. Valentin, I. M. Wallace, A. Wilm, R. Lopez, J. D. Thompson, T. J.
Gibson, and D. G. Higgins. Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics,
23(21):2947–2948, November 2007.
[19] J. G. Lawrence and J. R. Roth. Selfish operons: horizontal transfer may drive the
evolution of gene clusters. Genetics, 143(4):1843–1860, August 1996.
[20] Fergal Martin and James McInerney. Recurring cluster and operon assembly for Phenylacetate degradation genes. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 9(1):36+, February 2009.
[21] Marina Omelchenko, Kira Makarova, Yuri Wolf, Igor Rogozin, and Eugene Koonin.
Evolution of mosaic operons by horizontal gene transfer and gene displacement in situ.
Genome Biology, 4(9):R55+, 2003.
[22] R. Overbeek, M. Fonstein, M. D’Souza, G. D. Pusch, and N. Maltsev. The use of gene
clusters to infer functional coupling. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 96(6):2896–2901, March 1999.

12

[23] Ross Overbeek, Robert Olson, Gordon D. Pusch, Gary J. Olsen, James J. Davis, Terry
Disz, Robert A. Edwards, Svetlana Gerdes, Bruce Parrello, Maulik Shukla, Veronika
Vonstein, Alice R. Wattam, Fangfang Xia, and Rick Stevens. The SEED and the Rapid
Annotation of microbial genomes using Subsystems Technology (RAST). Nucleic acids
research, 42(Database issue):D206–D214, January 2014.
[24] Csaba Pál and Laurence D. Hurst. Evidence against the selfish operon theory. Trends
in Genetics, 20(6):232–234, June 2004.
[25] Sean Powell, Kristoffer Forslund, Damian Szklarczyk, Kalliopi Trachana, Alexander
Roth, Jaime Huerta-Cepas, Toni Gabaldón, Thomas Rattei, Chris Creevey, Michael
Kuhn, Lars J. Jensen, Christian von Mering, and Peer Bork. eggNOG v4.0: nested
orthology inference across 3686 organisms. Nucleic Acids Research, 42(D1):D231–D239,
January 2014.
[26] Morgan N. Price, Adam P. Arkin, and Eric J. Alm. The Life-Cycle of Operons. PLoS
Genet, 2(6):e96+, June 2006.
[27] Morgan N. Price, Katherine H. Huang, Adam P. Arkin, and Eric J. Alm. Operon
formation is driven by co-regulation and not by horizontal gene transfer. Genome
Research, 15(6):809–819, June 2005.
[28] G. Ralling and T. Linn. Relative activities of the transcriptional regulatory sites in the
rplKAJLrpoBC gene cluster of Escherichia coli. Journal of bacteriology, 158(1):279–285,
April 1984.
[29] Maido Remm, Christian E. V. Storm, and Erik L. L. Sonnhammer. Automatic clustering of orthologs and in-paralogs from pairwise species comparisons. Journal of Molecular Biology, 314(5):1041–1052, December 2001.
[30] Heladia Salgado, Socorro Gama-Castro, Martı́n Peralta-Gil, Edgar Dı́az-Peredo, Fabiola Sánchez-Solano, Alberto Santos-Zavaleta, Irma Martı́nez-Flores, Verónica JiménezJacinto, César Bonavides-Martı́nez, Juan Segura-Salazar, Agustino Martı́nez-Antonio,
and Julio Collado-Vides. RegulonDB (version 5.0): Escherichia coli K-12 transcriptional regulatory network, operon organization, and growth conditions. Nucleic acids
research, 34(Database issue), January 2006.
[31] William T. Self, Adnan Hasona, and K. T. Shanmugam. Expression and regulation of
a silent operon, hyf, coding for hydrogenase 4 isoenzyme in Escherichia coli. Journal
of bacteriology, 186(2):580–587, January 2004.
[32] F. W. Stahl and N. E. Murray. The evolution of gene clusters and genetic circularity
in microorganisms. Genetics, 53(3):569–576, March 1966.
[33] K. L. Steward and T. Linn. In vivo analysis of overlapping transcription units in the
rplKAJLrpoBC ribosomal protein-RNA polymerase gene cluster of Escherichia coli.
Journal of molecular biology, 218(1):23–31, March 1991.
[34] Damian Szklarczyk, Andrea Franceschini, Stefan Wyder, Kristoffer Forslund, Davide Heller, Jaime Huerte-Cepas, Milan Simonovic, Alexander Roth, Alberto Santos,
Kalliopi P. Tsafou, Michael Kuhn, Peer Bork, Lars J. Jensen, and Christian von Mering. STRING v10: protein-protein interaction networks, integrated over the tree of life.
Nucleic acids research, October 2014.
[35] R. L. Tatusov, E. V. Koonin, and D. J. Lipman. A genomic perspective on protein
families. Science (New York, N.Y.), 278(5338):631–637, October 1997.

13

[36] Natalie Ward and Gabriel Moreno-Hagelsieb. Quickly Finding Orthologs as Reciprocal
Best Hits with BLAT, LAST, and UBLAST: How Much Do We Miss? PLoS ONE,
9(7):e101850+, July 2014.
[37] Y. I. Wolf, I. B. Rogozin, A. S. Kondrashov, and E. V. Koonin. Genome alignment,
evolution of prokaryotic genome organization, and prediction of gene function using
genomic context. Genome research, 11(3):356–372, March 2001.

14

