New insights on the Dynamic Cellular Metabolism

Ildefonso M. De la Fuente 1,2

1 Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, Institute of Parasitology and
Biomedicine “López-Neyra”, CSIC, Granada, Spain.
2 Department of Mathematics, University of the Basque Country, UPV/EHU, Leioa.
Spain.

Keywords: Systems biology, metabolic networks, systemic metabolism, Hopfield
dynamics, dissipative processes, self-organization.

Corresponding Author:
Ildefonso Mtz. de la Fuente Mtz.
Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina “López-Neyra”, CSIC,
Parque Tecnológico de Ciencias de la Salud
Avda. del Conocimiento s/n.
18016 Granada. ESPAÑA.
E-Mail: mtpmadei@ehu.es
Tel.: +34- 958-18-16-21; Fax: +34- 958-18-16-32.

1

Abstract

A large number of studies have shown the existence of metabolic covalent
modifications in different molecular structures, able to store biochemical information
that is not encoded by the DNA. Some of these covalent mark patterns can be
transmitted across generations (epigenetic changes). Recently, the emergence of
Hopfield-like attractor dynamics has been observed in the self-organized enzymatic
networks, which have the capacity to store functional catalytic patterns that can be
correctly recovered by the specific input stimuli. The Hopfield-like metabolic dynamics
are stable and can be maintained as a long-term biochemical memory. In addition,
specific molecular information can be transferred from the functional dynamics of the
metabolic networks to the enzymatic activity involved in the covalent post-translational
modulation so that determined functional memory can be embedded in multiple stable
molecular marks. Both the metabolic dynamics governed by Hopfield-type attractors
(functional processes) and the enzymatic covalent modifications of determined
molecules (structural dynamic processes) seem to represent the two stages of the
dynamical memory of cellular metabolism (metabolic memory). Epigenetic processes
appear to be the structural manifestation of this cellular metabolic memory. Here, a new
framework for molecular information storage in the cell is presented, which is
characterized by two functionally and molecularly interrelated systems: a dynamic,
flexible and adaptive system (metabolic memory) and an essentially conservative
system (genetic memory). The molecular information of both systems seems to
coordinate the physiological development of the whole cell.

2

1. Enzymatic self-organizations
1.1 Multienzymatic complexes
Living cells are essentially highly evolved dynamic metabolic reactors, in which the more
complex known molecules are synthesized and destroyed by means of interrelated
enzymatic processes, densely integrated in modular networks that shape one of the most
complex dynamic systems in nature [De la Fuente, 2014].
From a functional point of view, the enzymes are the main molecules of this amazing
biochemical reactor. They are responsible for almost all the biomolecular transformations,
which, when globally considered, are called cellular metabolism. Most enzymes are
proteins, but a few RNA molecules called ribozymes, also manifest catalytic activity.
How the enzymes are organized under the complex conditions prevailing inside the cell is a
crucial issue for the understanding of the fundamental functional architecture of cellular life.
For many years, it has been assumed that enzymes work in an isolated way. However,
intensive studies of protein-protein interactions have shown that the internal cellular medium
is an assembly of supra-molecular protein complexes [Gavin and Superti-Furga, 2003;
Segura et al., 2010; Völkel et al., 2010; Ramisetty and Washburn, 2011], where homologous
or heterologous protein-protein interactions are the rule [Pang et al., 2008]. Concretely,
analyses of the proteome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae have shown that at least 83% of
proteins form complexes comprised by two to eighty-three proteins [Gavin et al., 2002].
This kind of associative organization occurs in all sorts of cells, both eukaryotes and
prokaryotes [Bobik, 2006; Ho et al., 2002; Ito et al., 2001; Sutter et al., 2008; Uetz et al.,
2000; Yeates et al., 2008].
Multienzymatic associations forming complexes may allow for substrate channelling, i.e.
direct transfer of intermediate metabolites from the active site of one enzyme to the next
without prior diffusion into the bulk medium. Metabolic channelling decreases the transit
time of reaction substrates, thus increasing the speed and efficiency of catalysis by
preventing delays due to diffusion of reaction intermediates and their eventual loss [Clegg
and Jackson, 1990; Ovadi and Srere, 2000; Jorgensen et al., 2005; Jovanović et al., 2007].
Substrate channelling may also occur within channels or on the electrostatic surface of
enzymes belonging to complexes [Milani et al., 2003; Ishikawa et al., 2004; Beg et al.,
2007].

3

Additionally, reversible interactions between multienzyme complexes and structural proteins
or membranes occur frequently in eukaryotic cells leading to the emergence of metabolic
microcompartments [Verkman, 2002; Lunn, 2007; Monge et al., 2008; Monge et al., 2009;
Saks et al., 2009]. For instance, the nuclear processes such as DNA replication, DNA repair
and transcription of RNAs are organized in dynamic microenvironments that are
functionally connected to the ubiquitin–proteasome system [Zhao et al., 2009].
Microcompartmentation also happen in prokaryotes but in this case they consist of protein
“shells” composed of thousands of protein subunits [Yeates et al., 2007; Fan et al., 2010].
The dynamics of molecular processes that intervene in microcompartmentation and its
maintenance remain unclear.
The concept of multienzymatic associations was first conceived in 1970 by A. M. Kuzin
[Kuzin, 1970] and adopted in 1972 by P. A. Srere [Srere, 1972; Srere, 1985] who suggested
the use of the term metabolon to refer to an organized multienzyme complex belonging to a
metabolic sequence.
A wide variety of studies point to the importance of multienzymatic associations in almost
all processes occurring in cells [Veliky et al., 2007; Pflieger et al., 2011] e.g., the
purinosome [Zhao et al., 2013], the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase complex [Bhaskaran and
Perona, 2011], the urea cycle [Cheung et al., 1989], the ATP synthasome [Clémençon,
2012], respiratory chain supercomplex [Schägger, 2002; Stuart, 2008; Bultema et al., 2009],
the Benson-Calvin cycle [Suss et al., 1993; Graciet et al., 2004], the replisome [Murthy and
Pasupathy, 1994], the amino acid catabolism complex [Islam et al., 2007], the cellulosome
[Bayer et al., 2004], the sporopollenin biosynthesis complex [Lallemand et al., 2013], the
spliceosome [Will and Lührmann, 2011], the 21 S complex of enzymes for DNA synthesis
[Li et al., 1993], the TRAMP complex [Jia et al., 2012], the glycogen biosynthesis complex
[Wilson et al., 2010], the degradosome [Carpousis, 2002], the vault ribonucleoprotein
complex [Zheng et al., 2005], the proteasome [Murata et al., 2009], the fatty acid oxidation
complex [Binstock and Schulz, 1981; Parker and Engel, 2000], the ribosome [Lin et al.,
2013], the glycolytic enzymes associate [Waingeh et al., 2006; Graham et al., 2007; Forlemu
et al., 2011], the protein kinase complexes [Rohila et al., 2009], the photosystem I [Fromme
and Mathis, 2004], the Krebs cycle [Barnes and Weitzman, 1986; Beeckmans et al., 1990;
Mitchell, 1996], the COP9 signalosome complex [Schwechheimer, 2004], the ski complex
[Halbach et al., 2013], the exosome [Makino et al., 2013], the dystrophin-associated protein
complex [Ehmsen et al., 2002], the arginine biosynthesis complex [Abadjieva et al., 2001],
and the mitotic and cytokinetic protein complexes [D'Avino et al., 2009].
4

Recently, analysis of conserved sequences in biochemical reactions has shown that the
cellular metabolism contains basic functional units which tend to correspond to
traditional metabolic pathways. These functional multi-enzymatic units seem to be
catalytic building blocks of the cellular metabolism [Kanehisa, 2013; Muto et al., 2013].
Another kind of functional catalytic association is the interactome which refers to protein–
protein interaction networks (unlike metabolic pathways, that represent a sequence of
molecular interactions leading to a final product) [Van Leene et al., 2007; Bonetta, 2010;
Gautam et al., 2012; Sharma et al., 2013].

1. 2 Temporal self-organization of multienzymatic processes
The enzymatic organization at the molecular level presents another relevant characteristic:
the emergence of dissipative catalytic structures.
Experimental observations have shown that the enzymes shape functional catalytic
associations in which molecular rhythms and quasi-steady states may spontaneously emerge
far from thermodynamic equilibrium. In fact, under cellular conditions, the time evolution of
practically all metabolite concentrations is subjected to marked variations, presenting
transitions between quasi-steady states and oscillatory behaviors [De la Fuente, 2014]. In the
quasi-stationary states the concentration of any given metabolite drifts over time in a nonoscillatory way. Not long ago, the use of nanobiosensors has contributed with real-time
measurements of determinate intracellular metabolites in intact cells, which show complex
oscillations and quasi-steady states, but importantly, these patterns are never constant [Ozalp
et al., 2010].
Metabolic rhythms constitute a genuine manifestation of the dissipative self-organization in
the enzymatic activities of cell. In general terms, self-organization can be defined as the
spontaneous emergence of macroscopic non-equilibrium dynamic structures, as a result of
collective behavior of elements, interacting nonlinearly with each other, to generate a system
that increases its structural and functional complexity driven by energy dissipation [Halley
and Winkler, 2008; Misteli, 2009; De la Fuente, 2014].
An important ingredient of metabolic self-organization is given by nonlinear interaction
between metabolites and enzymes, involving autocatalysis, feed-back processes, and
allosteric regulation among others.
It is well established that non-equilibrium states can be a source of order in the sense that the
irreversible processes may lead to a new type of dynamic state in which the system becomes
ordered in space and time. In fact, the non-linearity associated to the irreversible enzymatic
5

reactions seems to be an essential mechanism which may allow the dissipative metabolic
organization far from thermodynamic equilibrium [Goldbeter, 2002; Goldbeter, 2007].
Self-organization is based on the concept of dissipative structures, and its theoretical roots
can be traced back to the Nobel Prize in Chemistry Ilya Prigogine [Nicolis and Prigogine,
1977].
There exist different kinds of metabolic dissipative structures in cellular conditions, mainly
oscillations in the metabolite concentrations, molecular circadian rhythms and spatial
biochemical waves.
During the last four decades, extensive studies of biochemical dynamics both in prokaryotic
and eukaryotic cells have revealed that oscillations (temporal self-organizations) exist in
most of the fundamental metabolic processes. For instance, specific molecular oscillations
were reported to occur in: free fatty acids [Getty-Kaushik et al., 2005], NAD(P)H
concentration [Rosenspire et al., 2001], biosynthesis of phospholipids [Marquez et al.,
2004], cyclic AMP concentration [Holz et al., 2008], ATP [Ainscow et al., 2002] and other
adenine nucleotide levels [Zhaojun et al., 2004], intracellular glutathione concentration
[Lloyd and Murray, 2005], actin polymerization [Rengan and Omann, 1999], ERK/MAPK
metabolism [Shankaran et al., 2009], mRNA levels [Zhaojun et al., 2004], intracellular free
amino acid pools [Hans et al., 2003], cytokinins [Hartig and Beck, 2005], cyclins
[Hungerbuehler et al., 2007], transcription of cyclins [Shaul et al., 1996], gene expression
[Chabot et al., 2007; Tian et al., 2005; Tonozuka et al., 2001; Klevecz et al., 2004],
microtubule polymerization [Lange et al., 1988], membrane receptor activities
[Placantonakis and Welsh, 2001], membrane potential [De Forest and Wheeler, 1999],
intracellular pH [Sánchez-Armáss et al., 2006], respiratory metabolism [Lloyd et al., 2002],
glycolysis [Dano et al., 1999], intracellular calcium concentration [Ishii et al., 2006],
metabolism of carbohydrates [Jules et al., 2005], beta-oxidation of fatty acids [Getty et al.,
2000], metabolism of mRNA [Klevecz and Murray, 2001], tRNA [Brodsky et al.,1992],
proteolysis [Kindzelskii et al., 1998], urea cycle [Fuentes et al., 1994], Krebs cycle
[Wittmann et al., 2005], mitochondrial metabolic processes [Aon et al., 2008], nuclear
translocation of the transcription factor [Garmendia-Torres et al., 2007], amino acid
transports [Barril and Potter, 1968], peroxidase-oxidase reactions [Møller et al., 1998],
protein kinase activities [Chiam and Rajagopal, 2007] and photosynthetic reactions
[Smrcinová et al., 1998].
Experimental observations performed in S. cerevisae during continuous culture have shown
that most of transcriptome and the metabolome exhibit oscillatory dynamics [Klevecz et al.,
6

2004; Murray et al., 2007]. In some studies, it has been observed that at least 60% of all
gene expression exhibit oscillations with an approximate period of 300 min [Tu et al., 2005].
Moreover, other studies have shown that the entire transcriptome exhibits low-amplitude
oscillatory behavior [Lloyd and Murray, 2006] and this phenomenon has been described as a
genome-wide oscillation [Klevecz et al., 2004, Lloyd and Murray, 2005; Oliva et al., 2005;
Tu et al., 2005; Lloyd and Murray; 2006, Murray et al., 2007].
Evidence that cells exhibit multi-oscillatory metabolic processes with fractal properties has
also been reported. This dynamic behavior appears to be consistent with scale-free dynamics
spanning a wide range of frequencies of at least three orders of magnitude [Aon et al., 2008].
The temporal organization of the metabolic processes in terms of rhythmic phenomena spans
periods ranging from milliseconds [Aon et al., 2006], to seconds [Roussel et al., 2006],
minutes [Berridge and Galione, 1988; Chance et al., 1973] and hours [Brodsky, 2006].
Oscillatory behavior from simple patterns to complex temporal structures [MacDonald et al.,
2003], including bursting oscillations, with one large spike and series of secondary
oscillations [Dekhuijzen and Bagust, 1996], have often been observed.
Multiple autonomous oscillatory behaviors emerge simultaneously in the cell, so that the
whole metabolism resembles a complex multi-oscillator super-system [Lloyd and Murray,
2005; Lloyd and Murray, 2006; Murray et al., 2007; Aon et al., 2008; Sasidharan et al.,
2012; Amariei et al., 2014; De la Fuente et al., 2014].
Numerous mathematical studies on temporal metabolic rhythms have contributed to a better
understanding of the self-organized enzymatic functionality in cellular conditions [Boiteux
et al., 1980; Tyson, 1991; De la Fuente et al., 1996; Heinrich and Schuster 1996; De la
Fuente et al., 1999; Novak et al., 2007; Zhou et al., 2009; Goldbeter, 2013].
The dissipative self-organization at the enzymatic level presents other kinds of emergent
dynamic structures as, for instance, circadian rhythms [Schibler and Sassone-Corsi, 2002;
Cardone et al., 2005; De la Fuente, 2010] and spatial biochemical waves [Petty and
Kindzelskii, 2001; Bernardinelli et al., 2004; Asano et al., 2008; De la Fuente, 2010].
Metabolic rhythms constitute one of the most genuine properties of multienzymatic
dynamics. The conditions required for the emergence and sustainability of these rhythms,
and how they are regulated, represent a biological problem of the highest significance.
However, in spite of its physiological importance, many aspects of the cellular dissipative
structures are still poorly understood and thus deserve further attention.

7

1. 3 Dissipative multienzymatic complexes: Metabolic Subsystems
Self-organized multienzymatic complexes can be viewed as dissipative structures in which
molecular rhythms and functional integrative processes can emerge, increasing the
efficiency and control of the biochemical reactions involved [De la Fuente, 2010; De la
Fuente and Cortes, 2012]. This concept was conceived in 1999, being suggested the use of
the term Metabolic Subsystem to refer to a dissipativelly structured enzymatic set in which
molecular oscillations and steady state patterns may emerge spontaneously [De la Fuente et
al., 1999].
Thermodynamically,

metabolic

subsystems

represent

advantageous

biochemical

organizations, forming unique, well-defined autonomous dynamic systems, in which the
catalytic activity is autonomous with respect to the other enzymatic associations. Therefore,
each self-organized enzymatic set shapes a catalytic entity as a whole and carry out its
activities relatively independently of others [De la Fuente, 2010; De la Fuente, 2014].
The presence of some regulatory proteins (enzymes of both allosteric and covalent
modulation) in each metabolic subsystem makes possible the sophisticated interconnections
among them. As a result of the variable combinations in the different input conditions
(substrate fluxes, allosteric signals, specific post-translational modulations, etc.) a rich
variety of dynamic patterns emerge in each metabolic subsystem, which correspond to
distinct catalytic activity regimes [De la Fuente et al., 2013; De la Fuente, 2014]. This huge
variety of catalytic patterns is a sine qua non condition for the complex information
properties (with capacity to store functional catalytic patterns) that can emerge in the cellular
metabolic networks (see Section Three for more details).
Metabolic subsystems represent highly efficient nanomachines that can perform autonomous
and discrete biological functions, allowing the structural and functional dynamic
organization of the cell.
Associations between metabolic subsystems can form higher level complex molecular
organizations, as for example it occurs with Intracellular Energetic Units (ICEU) [Saks et
al., 2006] and synaptosomes [Monge et al., 2008].
In essence, metabolic subsystems are self-organized biochemical machines which seem to
constitute a fundamental and elemental catalytic unit of the cellular biochemical reactor [De
la Fuente, 2014].

8

2. Functional organization of enzymes in metabolic networks
2.1 Metabolic functionality
All physiological processes rely on metabolic functionality, which is a key element to
understanding the dynamic principles of cellular life at all levels of its biochemical
organization [Noble et al., 2014].
Enzymatic activity depends on different factors, mainly substrate concentration,
temperature, pH, enzyme concentration and the presence of any inhibitors or activators.
When an enzymatic system operates sufficiently far from equilibrium, oscillatory
catalytic patterns can emerge. Such dynamic behaviors find their roots in the non-linear
regulatory processes, e.g., feedback loops, cooperativity and stoichiometric autocatalysis
[Goldbeter, 2002].
In addition, due to the collective interactions under cellular conditions, substrate fluxes
and regulatory signals shape complex topological structures in which the metabolite
concentration is continuously changing over time because of the dynamics that emerge in
the catalytic networks [De la Fuente, 2014]. These collective enzymatic connectivities
make the rate at which enzymatic reactions proceed highly complex.
As a consequence, the functional architecture of the cell is the result of all these different
factors, particularly of the complex dynamic interactions between enzymatic processes
integrated in the biochemical networks.
In brief, metabolic functionality at a systemic level prominently depends on the collective
architecture (structural and functional) of the catalytic reactions, which is defined by the
two essential principles that link the different modes of enzymatic connectivity: the
metabolic segregation and the metabolic integration.

2. 2 Metabolic segregation
The separation of metabolic tasks and catalytic roles demands that the enzymes with
correlated biochemical activities are grouped together. As a consequence, the entire
metabolism is functionally segregated at multiple levels of specialization (e.g., the signal
transduction, the oxidative phosphorylation, the lysosomal metabolic activity, etc.),
originating different kinds of specific modular structures.

9

A metabolic module can be considered as a discrete functional entity, which performs
relatively autonomous processes with specific and coherent dynamic activities [Hartwell
et al., 1999].
A wide variety of studies have shown that the cellular metabolic networks are organized
in a specialized modular fashion, which constitutes a defining characteristic of the
metabolic organization in the cell [Ravasz et al., 2002; Ravasz, 2009; Nurse, 2008; Hao
et al., 2012; Kaltenbach and Stelling, 2012; Geryk and Slanina, 2013].
Modular segregations have been observed in all main physiological processes, e.g., the
enzymatic organization of metabolic pathways [Muto et al., 2013], the chaperone
activities [Korcsmáros et al., 2007], the chemotaxis [Postma et al., 2004; Shimizu et al.,
2010], the apoptosis processes [Harrington et al., 2008], the cell cycle [Boruc et al., 2010;
Hsu et al., 2011], the Golgi apparatus [Nakamura et al., 2012], and the kinetochore
organization [Petrovic et al., 2014]. Specific modular metabolic networks also participate
in the transcriptional system such as the miRNA regulatory networks [Gennarino et al.,
2012], the transcription factors networks [Neph et al., 2012], the RNA polymerase
complexes [Schubert, 2014], and the mRNA dynamics [Vlasova-St Louis and Bohjanen,
2011]. Metabolic subsystems, i.e., self-organized multienzymatic associations, can be
considered as elemental catalytic modules of the cell [De la Fuente et al., 2008, De la
Fuente, 2010; De la Fuente, 2014].
Metabolic networks may also contain canonical motifs, which represent recurrent and
statistically significant sub-graphs or patterns [Milo et al., 2002; Kashtan and Alon, 2005;
Alon, 2007; Masoudi-Nejad et al., 2012]. These sub-graphs that repeat themselves in a
specific network are defined by a determinate pattern of interactions, which may reflect
particular functional properties but, in contrast with the modules, motifs do not function
in isolation [Lacroix et al., 2006].
The functional role played by the specialized metabolic networks has been defined
largely by its structural connections. However, at least three main kinds of metabolic
connectivity must be considered: the structural connectivity, which is formed by
structural molecular links such as substrate fluxes and regulatory signals, the functional
connectivity, which describes statistical dependencies (non-causal) between the activity
patterns, and the effective connectivity, which rests on the causal effects between different
biochemical activities [De la Fuente et al., 2011; De la Fuente et al., 2013].
A number of information-based dynamic tools for the functionality and correlations
between biochemical processes have been proposed. However, functional correlations
10

(functional

connectivity)

do

not

imply

effective

connectivity

because

most

synchronization measures do not distinguish between causal and non-causal interactions.
In recent studies, Transfer Entropy (TE) has been proposed to be a rigorous, robust and
self-consistent method for the causal quantification of the functional information flow
between nonlinear processes (effective connectivity). In fact, TE allows to quantify the
reduction in uncertainty that one variable has on its own future when adding another,
allowing for a calculation of the functional influence in terms of effective connectivity
between two variables [Schreiber, 2000].
The quantitative study of the enzymatic effective connectivity can be considered at
different biochemical organization levels, e.g., in a biochemical pathway [De la Fuente
and Cortes, 2012] and in a metabolic network [De la Fuente et al., 2011]. For example, in
order to investigate the functional structure (both functional and effective connectivity) in
a large number of self-organized enzymes, the effective connectivity has been analyzed
by means of TE in dissipative metabolic networks (DMNs) under different external
conditions [De la Fuente et al., 2011].
Essentially, a DMN is a set of interconnected nodes, each one correspond to a specific
metabolic subsystem, which can be considered as elemental self-organized catalytic
modules of the cell (see Section One for more details). The DMN´s nodes are
interconnected through a complex topological structure (structural connectivity) of
substrate fluxes and different regulatory mechanisms: activatory and inhibitory allosteric
modulations, and post-translational modulations (PTM or covalent modulation in short).
In agreement with experimental observations, the emergent output activity of each
enzymatic subsystem in the DMN´s can be either oscillatory or steady state and
comprises an infinite number of distinct activity regimes [De la Fuente et al., 2008; De la
Fuente et al., 2010; De la Fuente and Cortes, 2013].
The TE analysis in the DMN showed that in addition to the network’s topological
structure, characterized by the specific location of enzymatic subsystems, molecular
substrate fluxes and regulatory signals, there is another functional structure of
biomolecular information flows which is modular, dynamical and able to modify the
catalytic activities of all the enzymatic sets. Specifically, certain self-organized enzymatic
sets are spontaneously clustered forming functional metabolic sub-networks. Some
modules are preserved under different external conditions while others are preserved but
with the inverted fluxes and yet other modules emerge only under specific external
perturbations. These modules work efficiently: very concrete enzymatic subsystems are
11

connected with others by means of effective information flows allowing high
coordination and precise catalytic regulations. The dynamic changes between the
functional modules correspond to metabolic switches, which allow for critical transitions
in the enzymatic activities. The coordinated modules by effective connectivity and the
functional switches seem to be important regulatory mechanisms that are able to modify
the catalytic activity of all the enzymatic sets [De la Fuente et al., 2011].

2.3 Metabolic integration
In addition to the functional segregation, the cellular enzymatic processes exhibit another
fundamental principle of metabolic connectivity: the functional integration.
Catalytic systems organized into distinct modular networks seem to be integrated,
emerging systemic responses from the concerted actions of the specialized metabolic
processes [Almaas et al., 2004; Almaas et al., 2005; Yoon et al., 2007; Buescher et al.,
2012; San Roman et al., 2014].
Whilst functional segregation expresses the relative autonomy of specialized biochemical
networks, metabolic integration is a complementary principle that refers to significant
deviations from autonomy of the modular networks, so that the collective catalytic
behavior generates coherent global patterns and molecular information that is
simultaneously highly diversified and highly integrated [De la Fuente et al., 2011].
Different mechanisms are responsible for establishing functional metabolic integration.
Studies with TE in DMNs have shown that the integration of specialized biochemical
areas is mediated by effective connectivity processes which lead to the emergence of a
systemic functional structure that encompasses the whole metabolic system. This global
structure is characterized by a small set of different enzymatic processes always locked
into active states (metabolic core) while the rest of the catalytic reactions present on-off
dynamics [De la Fuente et al., 2011].
Already in 1999, in an exhaustive analysis with several millions of different DMNs, the
emergence of this functional structure at global level was observed for the first time [De
la Fuente et al., 1999]. Afterwards, different studies implementing flux balance analysis
in experimental data added new evidence of this systemic metabolic structure in the cell
by which a small set of enzymatic reactions belonging to different metabolic processes
remain active under all investigated growth conditions (metabolic core), and the
remaining enzymatic reactions stay only intermittently active. The emergence of the
global catalytic structure was verified for E. coli, H. pylori, and S. cerevisiae [Almaas et
12

al., 2004; Almaas et al., 2005]. In these studies, the reactions present in the metabolic
core were also characterized, which seemed to be essential for biomass formation and for
ensuring optimal metabolic performance. Likewise, the percentage of enzymatic reactions
belonging to the core turned out to be small: 36.2% of all different reactions in H. pylori,
11.9% in E. coli and 2.8% in S. cerevisiae.
Similar results about the size of the metabolic cores have been obtained in extensive
numerical studies with DMNs, in which the sizes ranged between 44.6% and 0.7% and
their distribution is skewed toward low values since 71% of the studied networks show
sizes that range between 7.6% and 0.7%, with a mean of 2% [De la Fuente et al., 2009].
In addition to the emergence of a global metabolic structure [De la Fuente et al., 2008],
metabolic analysis implementing flux balance analysis and other studies on effective
connectivity in DMNs have shown that two main dynamic mechanisms are involved in
the systemic metabolic self-regulation: flux plasticity and structural plasticity [Almaas et
al., 2004, Almaas et al., 2005; De la Fuente et al., 2011]. Flux plasticity represents
changes in the intensity of the substrate fluxes. Structural plasticity results in persistent
changes in the dynamic structure conformed by the catalytic processes that present on-off
and on changing states.
Another mechanism involved in the functional metabolic integration is the energy.
Living cells require a permanent generation of energy flow to keep the functionality of
their complex metabolic structures, which integrate a large ensemble of modular
networks. Practically all bioenergetic processes are coupled with each other via adenosine
nucleotides, which are consumed or regenerated by different enzymatic reactions.
Moreover, the adenosine nucleotides also act as an allosteric control of numerous
regulatory enzymes allowing changes in ATP, ADP and AMP levels to regulate the
functional activity of those metabolic subsystems that exhibit this allosteric mechanism.
At a systemic level, the temporal dynamics for the concentrations of adenosine
nucleotides seem to be determined by the Adenylate Energy System which represents the
synthesis of ATP coupled to energy-consumption processes through a complex network
of enzymatic reactions which interconvert ATP, ADP and AMP [De la Fuente et al.,
2014].
Experimental studies have shown that the adenosine nucleotide dynamics present
complex transitions across time, e.g., the use of nanobiosensors has shown real-timeresolved measurements of intracellular ATP in intact cells. In these experimental
observations, the ATP concentration showed a rhythmic behavior and complex quasi
13

steady-state dynamics with large variations over time but, importantly, the ATP
concentration is never constant [Ozalp et al., 2010; Ytting et al., 2012].
The concentration levels of ATP, ADP and AMP roughly reflect the energetic status of
the cell, and a determined systemic ratio between them was proposed by Atkinson as the
adenylate energy charge (AEC) [Atkinson and Walton, 1967] which is a scalar index
ranging between 0 and 1. When all adenine nucleotide pool is in form of AMP, the
energy charge is zero, and the system is completely discharged (zero concentrations of
ATP and ADP). With only ADP, the energy charge is 0.5. If all adenine nucleotide pool
is in form of ATP, the AEC is 1.
Under growth conditions, the organisms seem to maintain their AEC within narrow
physiological values (AEC values between 0.7 and 0.95), despite of extremely large
fluctuations in the adenine nucleotide concentrations. This systemic physiological
phenomenon, constitute a key property of the functional integration of metabolic
processes in the cell [De la Fuente et al., 2014].
The main biological significance of the maintained AEC level appears to be the necessity
of having the adenylate pool highly phosphorylated keeping the rate of adenylate energy
production similar to the rate of adenylate energy expenditure [De la Fuente et al., 2014].
Intensive experimental studies have shown that the physiological AEC ratio is practically
preserved in all unicellular organisms, both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Besides, the ratio
is also strictly fulfilled during all the metabolic transformations that occur during the cell
cycle, which seems to be a manifestation of the integrative processes of the systemic
metabolism [De la Fuente et al., 2014].
Functional specialization and integration are not exclusive; they are two dynamic
complementary principles, and the interplay between them seems to be an essential
element for the functional collective architecture of the cell systemic metabolism.

14

3. Metabolic networks and information properties
3.1 Experimental findings of biomolecular information processing in unicellular
organisms
A large number of experimental studies have shown that unicellular organisms possess
complex behavior only possible if some kind of biomolecular information is stored and
processed.
One of the most studied examples of complex systemic behavior in a single cell is
Physarum polycephalum. This unicellular species, belonging to the Amoebozoa phylum,
is an important branch of eukaryote evolution, characterized by a large cytoplasm with
many nuclei that remain suspended in a single contiguous protoplasmic volume called
plasmodium. The body of the plasmodium contains a complex dynamic network of
tubular structures by means of which nutrients and biomolecular elements circulate in an
effective manner [Shirakawa and Gunji, 2007].
The movement of the plasmodium is termed shuttle streaming, characterized by the
rhythmic back-and-forth flow of biomolecular substances. The dynamically reconfiguring
network of tubular structures can redirect the flow of protoplasm towards the plasmatic
membrane causing the movement of a mass of flowing pseudopods, and as a result, the
organism can crawl over the ground at a speed of approximately 1-5cm/h [Kessler, 1982].
The complex protoplasm exhibits rich spatio-temporal oscillatory behavior, and
rhythmically synchronized streams with intracellular oscillatory patterns such as the
oscillations in ATP concentration, the plasmagel/plasmasol exchange rhythm and the
oscillations in the cytoplasmic free calcium level [Ueda et al., 1986].
In the last several years, a number of studies in Physarum polycephalum have shown that
this cell is able to store information, learn and recall past events. For example:
-

This unicellular organism has the ability to find the minimum-length solution between
two points in a maze, which is considered cellular information processing [Nakagaki
et al., 2000; Nakagaki et al., 2001]; and it has also been verified that the shortest path
problem in the maze is a mathematically rigorous solution [Miyaji and Ohnishi, 2008].

-

The Physarum constructs appropriate networks for maximizing nutrient uptakes,
achieving better network configurations than those based on the shortest connections
of Steiner’s minimum tree [Nakagaki et al., 2004a; Nakagaki et al., 2004b].

15

-

In particular, high quality solutions for the 8-city travelling salesman problem (TSP),
which is known to be NP-hard and hence computationally difficult, have been found
by using Physarum Polycephalum [Aono et al., 2011a; Aono et al., 2011b; Zhu et al.,
2011].

-

Other direct experimental studies evidenced that this kind of amoeba can memorize
sequences of periodic environmental changes and recall past events during the
adaptation to different stimuli (it can even anticipate a previously applied 1 hour colddry pattern) [Saigusa et al., 2008].

-

Despite being a single multinucleate cell, the plasmodium can be used to control
autonomous robots [Tsuda et al., 2007; Gough et al., 2009].

-

This cell is able to form an optimized network closely approaching the purposely
designed Tokyo railway system [Tero et al., 2010].

-

Furthermore, it has also been verified that the plasmodium can solve complex
multiobjective foraging problems [Dussutour et al., 2010; Bonner, 2010; Latty and
Beekman, 2011].

-

Self-organization, self-optimization and resolution of complex optimization problems
by means of adaptive network development also occur in the Physarum Polycephalum
[Marwan, 2010].

All these experimental results push forward the need for an intrinsic memory storage
mechanism [Marwan, 2010] and a “primitive intelligence” [Nakagaki et al., 2000;
Saigusa et al., 2008; Pershin et al., 2009; Nakagaki, 2001; Nakagaki and Guy, 2008].
Many other experimental examples show that other different unicellular organisms have
sophisticated behavior including information storage. A pioneer scientist in revealing
such behavior was H. S. Jennings, who showed many years ago that a single cell such as
Paramecium could have a primitive kind of learning and memory [Jennings, 1905].
Neutrophils also exhibit a rudimentary memory system by which they are able to “recall”
past directions [Albrecht and Petty, 1998]. Dictyostelium and Polysphondylium amoebae
seem to have a rudimentary memory and they can show long directional persistence (~10
min), being able to remember the last direction in which they turned [Li et al., 2008].
Even individual neurons seem to display short-term memory, and permanent information
can be stored when nerve cells in the brain reorganize and strengthen the connections
with one another [Sidiropoulou, 2009].
At a molecular level, information processing [Ausländer et al., 2012; Daniel et al., 2013]
has been observed in numerous examples, such as the reversible phosphorylation of
16

proteins [Thomson and Gunawardena, 2009]; the microtubule dynamics [Faber et al.,
2006]; the enzymatic processes [Baron et al., 2006; Katz and Privman, 2010]; the redox
regulation [Dwivedi and Kemp, 2012]; the transcription processes [Mooney et al., 1998];
the genetic regulatory networks [Qi et al., 2013]; the input signal transductions [Roper,
2007]; the biochemical networks [Bowsher, 2011]; the NF-kappaB dynamics [Tay et al.,
2010]; the intracellular signaling reactions [Purvis and Lahav, 2013; Kamimura and
Kobayashi, 2012]; the metabolic switches [Ramakrishnan and Bhalla, 2008]; the
chemotaxis pathway [Shimizu et al., 2010]; the network motifs [Alon, 2007], and other
cellular processes [Ben-Jacob, 2009].

3.2 Quantitative studies for molecular information processing in self-organized
enzymatic sets and in dissipative metabolic networks
Metabolic patterns may have information which can be captured by the Transfer Entropy
(TE) which allows quantifying biomolecular information flows in bits [Schreiber, 2000].
In 2012, the molecular informative properties of a single self-organized multienzymatic
set (a metabolic subsystem) were analyzed in silico by using Transfer Entropy for the
first time [De la Fuente and Cortes, 2012].
According to this analysis, the information patterns contained in the different substrate
fluxes are continually integrated and transformed by the set of enzymes that form part of
the metabolic subsystem. The TE analysis showed that in the integrative catalytic
processes, a dynamic functional structure for molecular information processing emerges,
characterized by changing the informative flows that reflect the modulation of the
enzymatic kinetic activities. The level of functional influence in terms of causal
interaction between the enzymes is not always the same, but varies depending on the
information fluxes and the particular dynamic regime of the catalytic system.
The multienzymatic set shapes a functional dynamic structure, able to permanently send
biomolecular information between its different enzymatic parts, in such a way that the
activity of each enzyme could be considered an information event.
As a result of the overall catalytic process, the enzymatic activities are functionally
coordinated, and the metabolic subsystem operates as an information processing system,
which at each moment, redefines sets of biochemical instructions that make each enzyme
evolve in a particular and precise catalytic pattern.

17

In terms of information theory, the metabolic subsystem performs three simultaneous
functions: signal reception, signal integration, and generation of new molecular
information.
In light of this research, the self-organized enzymatic sets seem to represent the most
basic units for information processing in the cells [De la Fuente and Cortes, 2012].
On the other hand, when considering the activity of an interrelated set of different
metabolic subsystems, a highly parallel, super-complex structure of molecular
information processing emerges in the network. This was evidenced in a numerical study
of dissipative metabolic networks in which the biomolecular information flows were
quantified in bits between the metabolic subsystems by using Transfer Entropy [De la
Fuente et al., 2011].
Specifically, the results showed that the network as a whole integrates and transforms the
molecular information coming from both the external environment and the individually
assembled metabolic subsystems. The basic units of information processing (each selforganized multienzymatic set) work in parallel and coupled with each other, and as a
consequence of these collective processes, functional modules, metabolic switches,
highly dynamical metabolic synapses and an information processing super-system
emerge in the network.
In addition to the topological network structure, characterized by the specific location of
each multienzymatic set, molecular substrate fluxes and regulatory signals (mainly
allosteric and covalent modulations), a functional network structure of effective
connectivity emerges which is dynamic and characterized by having significant variations
of biomolecular information flows between the metabolic subsystems.
The dissipative network behaves as a very complex decentralized information processing
super-system which generates molecular information flows between the self-organized
enzymatic sets, and forces them to be functionally interlocked, i.e., each catalytic set is
conditioned to cooperate with others at a precise and specific activity regime in
concordance to the activity system as a whole. As a result of the overall functional
process, the network defines sets of biochemical instructions at each moment that make
every metabolic subsystem evolve with a particular and precise dynamic change of
catalytic patterns.
The quantitative analysis also showed that the functional network is able to self-regulate
against external perturbations by means of this information processing super-system [De
la Fuente et al., 2011].
18

3.3.1 Dynamic metabolic memories
Memory is a fundamental element for the efficient information processing.
Recently, catalytic network dynamics has been numerically analyzed using statistical
mechanics tools; in concrete, an equivalent Hopfield network has been obtained using a
Boltzmann machine, showing that the enzymatic activities are governed by systemic
attractors with the capacity to store functional metabolic patterns. This stored molecular
information can be correctly recovered from specific input stimuli [De la Fuente et al.,
2013].
In short, the main conclusions of the statistical mechanic analysis were the following:
I. The catalytic dynamics of the dissipative metabolic network are dependent on the
Lyapunov function i.e., the energy function of the biochemical system, which is a
fundamental element in the regulation of the enzymatic activities.
Starting in any initial state after an external stimulus, and due to the collective enzymatic
dynamics, the metabolic network evolves trying to reduce the energy function, which in
the absence of noise will decrease in a monotone way until achieving a final system state
that is a local minimum of the Lyapunov function. When the biochemical system state
reaches a local minimum, it becomes a (locally) stable state for the enzymatic network.
The dissipative metabolic network has multiple stable states, each of which corresponds
to a specific global enzymatic pattern of the biochemical system.
II. The enzymatic activities of the metabolic network are governed by systemic attractors,
which are locally stable states where all the enzymatic dynamics are stabilized.
The minima of the Lyapunov function corresponds to these emergent systemic attractors,
which regulate the metabolic patterns of the subsystems and determine the enzymatic
network to operate as an individual, completely integrated system.
The energy function, on which the dynamics of the metabolic network depend, has a
complex landscape with multiple attractors (local minima).
III. The emerging systemic attractors correspond with Hopfield-like attractors in which
metabolic information patterns can be stored [Hopfield, 1982].
The biochemical information contained in the attractors behaves as a functional metabolic
memory i.e., enzymatic activity patterns stored as stable states, which regulate both the
permanent catalytic changes in the internal medium, as well as the metabolic responses
originated to properly integrate the perturbations coming from the external environment.

19

When an external stimulus pattern is presented to the system, the network states are
driven by the intrinsic enzymatic dynamics towards a determined systemic attractor
which corresponds to a set of memorized biochemical patterns.
The formation of the attractor landscape is achieved by metabolic synaptic modifications,
i.e., the functional and molecular connections between enzymatic sets, essentially through
substrate fluxes, covalent modulations (PTM) and allosteric regulations. These
connectivity patterns can be oscillatory or steady states and comprises an infinite number
of distinct activity behaviors.
Each biochemical synapse is involved in the storage of the metabolic memory, and the
metabolic synaptic plasticity seems to be the basis of the memories stored in the
metabolic network.
IV. A key attribute of the analyzed systemic attractors is the presence of “associative
memory”. When the metabolic network is stimulated by an input pattern, the enzymatic
activities converge to the stored pattern, which most closely resembles the input, i.e. the
attractors have associative memory.
The metabolic network attractors seem to store functional enzymatic patterns which can
be correctly recovered from specific input patterns. The results explicitly show that there
are indeed memory attractors and capacity to retrieve information patterns (from the
weights) which are local minima of the catalytic activity in the network.
Thus, if the initial condition of the network dynamics starts within the basin of attraction
of such a pattern, the dynamics will converge to the originally stored pattern. As it is well
known, this class of “pattern-completion” dynamics has been addressed in Hopfield
network studies for years, and it is generally named “associative memory” [Amit, 1989].

3.3.2 The mean field approximation
In the metabolic memory analysis [De la Fuente et al., 2013], a mean field assumption to
describe the equivalent-Hopfield network depicting the metabolic dynamics was
computed. The results indicate that by the local minima of the metabolic network energy
the information can be stored and eventually retrieved; this is what researchers in neural
networks studies described as “having associative memory” [Amit, 1989]. Notice that the
original dissipative metabolic network can have much more complicated energy
landscapes than the ones approached using the mean field solution.
For more details about information encoding and retrieving (associative memory) and the
capacity for pattern storage of a metabolic network see Supplementary Material 01.
20

3.4 Post-translational modifications and metabolic memories
The dynamic of the metabolic synaptic plasticity governed by Hopfield-type attractors is
the fundamental element indispensable to store functional metabolic memories in the
enzymatic networks.
However, from a bioenergetic point of view, the Hopfield-like metabolic memory is
expensive since it requires a permanent activity to maintain the network functionality,
expending significant amounts of energy mainly in the form of ATP.
Recent investigations have shown that certain enzymes responsible for post-translational
modulation act on multimeric proteins which undergo different modification states that
could have slow-relaxation dynamics under specific conditions. The activity of such PTM
enzymes depends, in a crucial manner, on the temporal history of the molecular
information input they receive, and this information can be stored as a slow relaxation
process in which slowness enables long-term maintenance of an embedded state
[Hatakeyama and Kaneko, 2014].
This property makes possible an efficient information transfer from the Hopfield-like
metabolic dynamics to the enzymes involved in covalent post-translational modulation so
that the functional memory can be embedded in multiple stable molecular marks.
The molecular information transfer from the functional metabolic memories to the
covalent marks requires a lot less energy than the maintenance of the emergent attractor
dynamics in the metabolic networks. Thus, the post-translational modification of proteins
seems to represent an essential mechanism for the maintenance of Hopfield-like
memories in a structural and energetically efficient way.
PTM is a highly dynamic, essential enzymatic process, which modifies the proteic
functionality, reversibly transforming its structure by adding biochemical marks.
Consequently, a single protein subjected to PTM may show a broad range of molecular
functions and provoke profound physiological effects in cells [Cohen, 2000; Impens et
al., 2014].
In fact, PTM is a metabolic mechanism present in all cell types, which can affect the
protein structures involved in most cellular processes, e.g., the regulation of the
microtubule cytoskeleton [Janke and Bulinski, 2011]; the signal integration [Deribe et al.,
2010]; the chromatin regulation [Bannister and Kouzarides, 2011]; the modifications of
RNA silencing factors [Heo and Kim, 2009]; the modulation of mitochondrial membrane
activities [Distler et al., 2009]; the regulation of different metabolic processes in the
21

nucleus [Gloire and Piette, 2009]; the changes of cytochrome activity [Aguiar et al.,
2005]; the regulation of the mitochondrial translation machinery [Koc and Koc, 2012];
and other modulations of metabolic processes [Running, 2014].
There are different types of PTMs, e.g., phosphorylation, methylation, glycosylation,
acetylation, ubiquitination, SUMOylation, etc., and the number and abundance of these
modifications is constantly being updated [Khoury et al., 2011].
Protein phosphorylation is the most extensively studied PTM, and the phosphorylationdephosphorylation mechanism is assumed to take place on a fast time scale in comparison
to the protein half-lives. Different sites on the same protein can be consecutively
phosphorylated-dephosphorylated: these events are not distributed along the whole
protein structure but are instead constrained to sites of high accessibility and structural
flexibility [Gnad et al., 2007], which allows molecular information encoding, adding or
removing molecular marks [Thomson and Gunawardena, 2009].
While bare DNA encodes 2 bits of information per nucleotide, even in a single protein,
reversible chemical modifications occur at multiple sites, allowing the encoding of a
potentially large amount of information. A protein with n phosphorylated sites has an
exponential number (2∧n) of phospho-forms; the number of phosphorylated sites on a
protein shows a significant increase from prokaryotes (with n≤7 sites) to eukaryotes, with
examples having n≥150 sites, implying that a protein can encode a large amount of
molecular information as a function of a varying number of covalent phospho-marks
[Thomson and Gunawardena, 2009].
The reversible structural changes in regulatory networks of proteins through PTM allow
molecular information encoding and complex information processing, which can
originate flexibility and adaptive metabolic responses in the cell [Sims and Reinberg,
2008; Sunyer et al., 2008; Thomson and Gunawardena, 2009].
Attractor network dynamics followed by structural modifications of proteins would
represent the two stages of the dynamic memory of cellular metabolism. In accordance
with both processes, the metabolic memories are derived from continuous changes in the
functionality of the network dynamic (due to metabolic synaptic plasticity) linked to
structural molecular modifications (covalent marks).

22

3.5 Examples of post-translational modifications and molecular information storage
in the cell
Escherichia coli chemotaxis network represents one of the best studied examples of a
biochemical dynamic system with the capacity to store functional information using
molecular information processing linked to post-translational modification dynamics
[Greenfield et al., 2009; Li and Stock 2009; Tu et al., 2008; Shimizu et al., 2010; Stock
and Zhang, 2013].
Bacterial cell swimmers integrate environmental information accurately in order to make
proper decisions for their own survival, in such a way that they can move towards
favorable sites and away from unfavorable environments by changing their swimming
patterns. As a result of the chemotaxis system, the signal transduction process translates
information into appropriate motor responses and the bacterial cells traverse gradients of
chemical attractants displaying directional sensing and moving in an efficient manner by
performing temporal comparisons of ligand concentrations. Thus, the cell detects
extracellular chemical gradients and senses very small fractional changes, even at
nanomolar concentrations [Sourjik and Berg, 2002; Sourjik and Berg, 2004].
Since the pioneering works by Julius Adler in the 1960’s [Adler, 1966; Adler and Dahl,
1967; Adler and Templeton, 1967] the biochemical mechanisms that underlie sensorymotor regulation in E. coli have been extensively investigated and their principal
characteristics have been detailed [Baker et al., 2006; Hazelbauer and Falke, 2008].
Membrane receptors responsible for signal transduction assemble into large clusters of
interacting proteins, shaping a complex modular network [Greenfield et al., 2009;
Hamadeh et al., 2011; Shimizu et al., 2010] with one main feedback loop [Emonet and
Cluzel, 2008; Wadhams and Armitage, 2004]. The network consists of several thousands
of alpha-helical transmembrane protein fibers that interact with one another forming a
cortical structure below the cytoplasmic membrane. The fiber ends that pass through the
cytoplasmic membrane interact with a complex layer of sensory receptor domains.
E. coli sensory–motor is functionality regulated by two reversible protein modification
processes: phosphorylation and carboxyl methylation. The phosphorylation processes
provide a direct connection between sensory receptor complexes and motor responses.
The transmembrane protein fibers shape a four-helix bundle with at least eight potentially
anionic glutamate side chains that can be either exposed as a minus charge or neutralized
by methylation. Each fiber can potentially be in any one of 2∧8 different states of
23

modification, and the increments or decrements in attractant concentration produce
behavioral responses that lead to changes in the methylation dynamics [Stock and Zhang,
2013].
The dynamic changes in the chemotaxis network functionality provoke specific
molecular information processing and, as a consequence, structural molecular
modifications in form of methylations, and they are carried out in such a way that the cell
can record recent chemical past by using these reversible methylation in determined
glutamic acid residues [Li and Stock, 2009].
The dynamic methylation-demethylation patterns linked to information processing serve
as a structural functional memory allowing the detection of attractant gradients by
comparing current concentrations to those encountered in the past. The carboxyl
methylation mechanism stores information concerning the environmental conditions that
the bacterium has experienced, and these dynamic patterns of glutamyl modifications act
as a structural dynamic memory which allows cells to respond efficiently to continual
changes in attractant concentrations [Greenfield et al., 2009; Li and Stock, 2009; Stock
and Zhang, 2013].
E. coli chemotaxis network exhibits a rich variety of behavior and dynamic properties
such as robustness [Kollmann et al., 2005; Alon et al., 1999; von Dassow et al., 2000],
signal amplification [Tu, 2013], molecular information processing [Shimizu et al., 2010],
fast response and ultra-sensitive adaptation [Bray et al., 1998; Kollmann et al., 2005;
Wadhams and Armitage, 2004; Sourjik, 2004].
The essential components of the E. coli chemotaxis system are highly conserved among
all motile prokaryotes [Wuichet et al., 2007]. However, many species have chemotaxis
networks that are much more complex than that of E. coli [Hamadeh et al., 2011],
Although the chemistry of signal transduction in bacterial and vertebrate cells differs
substantially, there are numerous fundamental similarities [Stock et al., 2002]. As in
prokaryotes, signal transduction in eukaryotic cells generally involves phosphotransfer
mechanisms and other post-translational modifications that couple metabolic energy to
information processing [Li and Stock, 2009].
In particular, the biochemical systems of molecular information processing linked to posttranslational modification dynamics are highly evolved in neuronal cells.
Neurons are connected through synapses that undergo long-lasting activity dependent
alterations in their transmission efficacy, permitting learning and response to experience.
One of the principal means to control synaptic transmission is regulation of
24

neurotransmitter receptors, especially the AMPA-type glutamate receptors (AMPARs)
that represent the main excitatory neurotransmitter receptors in the neurons. The number
of AMPA receptors at the synapse is extremely dynamic and strictly regulated through
the addition or removal of receptors resulting in long-term synaptic potentiation or
depression (LTP or LTD, respectively) [Anggono and Huganir, 2012]. These synaptic
plasticity events are thought to underlie information storage. In particular, reversible posttranslational modifications of AMPARs, including phosphorylation [Wang et al. 2005],
palmitoylation [Hayashi et al., 2005], ubiquitination [Schwarz et al., 2010],
SUMOylation [Luo et al., 2013], N-glycosylation [Tucholski et al., 2014] and OGlcNAcylation [Taylor et al., 2014] are important regulatory mechanisms of synaptic
AMPA receptor expression and function.
By controlling the expression and function of AMPARs, these multiple forms of posttranslational modifications of AMPA receptors vigorously regulate plasticity events and
many important functions linked to molecular information processing, including learning
and memory [Takeuchi et al., 2014].
While prevailing models of long-lasting information storage identify mRNA translation
as essential for learning and memory in neural cells, there is evidence that memory
storage at PTM level can occur in the absence of protein synthesis [Routtenberg and
Rekart, 2005; Routtenberg, 2008].

3.6 Long-term and short-term memory
Since the beginning of the neuronal network modeling of associative memory, the
connectivity matrix in Hopfield network was assumed to result from a long-term memory
learning process, occurring in a much slower time scale than the neuronal dynamics
[Willshaw et al., 1969; Willshaw et al., 1970; Amari, 1975; Hopfield, 1982; Amit 1989;
Hertz et al., 1991]. Therefore, it is well accepted that the attractors emerging in the
neuronal dynamics described by Hopfield networks are the result of a long-term memory
process.
Besides, long physiological recordings of neuronal processes exhibit some type of
memory structure. Among others, there are at least two commonly used indicators for this
kind of memory: the Hurst exponent [Das et al., 2003; De la Fuente et al., 2006] and the
presence of long range correlations in the plasticity dynamics for synaptic weightsmeasured, for instance, with long tails in the synaptic distribution of weights [Barbour et
al., 2007]. Several phenomenological models have shown that this persistence in the
25

dynamics of weights underlying short-term memory, eventually might be translated into a
stable long-term memory after memory consolidation [Fusi et al 2005; Mongillo et al.,
2008; Itskov et al., 2011; Romani et al., 2013], but the precise mechanisms making this
transition possible are not yet well understood.
Long-term correlations (mimicking short-term memory in neuronal systems) have also
been analyzed in different metabolic processes not belonging to neuronal cells. One of
the most studied is the calcium-activated potassium channels which has been observed in
Leydig cells [Varanda et al., 2000; Bandeira et al., 2008], kidney Vero cells [Kazachenko
et al., 2007], and human bronchial epithelial cells [Wawrzkiewicz et al., 2012]; moreover,
other biochemical processes also present long-term correlation, for instance, the
intracellular transport pathway of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii [Ludington et al., 2013],
the NADPH series of mouse liver cells [Ramanujan et al., 2006], the mitochondrial
membrane potential of cardiomyocytes [Aon et al., 2008], and different biochemical
numerical studies on enzymatic pathways and dissipative metabolic networks [De la
Fuente et al., 1998a; De la Fuente et al., 1998b; De la Fuente et al., 1999].
These studies support that, at the molecular level, metabolic memories seem to exhibit
both long-term and short-term memory, but this issue requires further research.

26

4. The System CMS-DNA
4.1 Elements of the Cellular Metabolic Structure
Metabolism is the largest known source of complexity in nature.
The cellular enzymatic processes shape a highly structured dynamic super-system with
different levels of organization, which have a large number of adaptive molecular
mechanisms acquired throughout biological evolution.
On the way to structural and functional complexity, metabolic evolution has given rise to
a great diversity of biochemical organizational forms, ranging from the sophisticated
bacterial metabolisms, through the complex enzymatic networks belonging to protists, to
the extraordinary structures and processes derived from multicellular eukaryotic
organizations such as embryogenesis or the neural networks of higher mammals.
The millions of living metabolic species represent the inexhaustible source of complexity
developed by the dynamic forces that structure the metabolic systems.
Enzymes are the fundamental molecules for metabolic life. At a basic level, they can
shape functional associations dissipativelly structured (metabolic subsystems), which
seem to constitute elemental catalytic units of the cell reactor (Section One).
A rich variety of dynamic catalytic patterns emerge in each metabolic subsystem
(including oscillatory and quasi-steady states), which correspond to distinct activity
regimes (Section One). Catalytic changes allow the metabolic synapses, i.e., the structural
and functional dynamic connections between enzymatic sets. As a result of the flexible
activity regimes, flux plasticity and structural plasticity also appear in the cell (Section
Two).
At a superior level, enzymatic processes are organized into distinct modular metabolic
networks, which work with relative independence of the global system. In turn, the whole
metabolism seems to be functionally integrated, generating systemic responses from the
concerted actions of modular networks, shaping a complex dynamic super-system: the
Cellular Metabolic Structure (CMS in short). Therefore, the two principles that link the
main modes of metabolic connectivity in the cell are functional segregation and
functional systemic integration (Section Two).
The CMS is an integrated catalytic entity that acts as an information processing system
capable of storing functional biochemical patterns. The metabolic synaptic dynamics

27

governed by Hopfield-type attractors and the structural covalent modifications represent
the two stages of the dynamic memory of cellular metabolism. Plasticity seems to be the
key essential property for the emergence of metabolic memory (Section Three).
All these properties constitute some of the main elemental principles of the CMS, which
allow the self-organization, self-regulation and adaptation of the cell to the external
medium.

4.2 Self-regulation of the Cellular Metabolic Structure
Unicellular organisms are open metabolic systems.
To maintain the self-organized biochemical functionally, the CMS needs a permanent
exchange of energy and matter with the external medium. As a consequence, metabolic
life would not be possible without it having the capacity to adequately respond to the
large possible combinations of external variables to which it is exposed.
The CMS is a sophisticated, sensitive system, whose enzymatic processes change
immediately in response to any variations in the environmental conditions [Almaas et al.,
2004; Almaas et al., 2005; Papp et al., 2004; Wang and Zhang 2009].
When the external perturbations are small, the CMS changes accordingly, and slowly
reverts back to the pre-stimulus dynamic by reorganizing and adjusting the catalytic
patterns and metabolic fluxes [Inoue and Kaneko 2013].
If the external perturbations are stronger, i.e., the replacement of a major source of
nutrients for another, the CMS computes the various possible ways to efficiently process
the molecular substrates, turning off certain metabolic activities (even completely
eliminating specific enzymatic sets), and adding new reactive processes and alternative
routes. As a result, the metabolism shows extensive reorganization in the metabolic
functionality resulting in a rewiring of the global network fluxes [Storlien et al., 2004;
Buescher et al., 2012; San Román et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2014].
When the metabolic system undergoes extreme external conditions as, for instance,
nutrient deprivation, the CME generates very complex enzymatic reorganization
comprising the entire system. In general, the autophagy interaction network is activated
in response to starvation [Behrends et al., 2010], and as a consequence, proteins,
organelles and other cellular substructures are sequestered in autophagosomal vesicles to
be later degraded. This is one of the major mechanisms by which a starving cell
reallocates nutrients from unnecessary metabolic pathways to more-essential processes
[Shintani and Klionsky, 2004].
28

Under starvation conditions, the CMS computes the efficient rates of molecular turnover,
modulates the systemic enzymatic processes with extreme precision, and adjusts the
number of different organelles to match the available resources, e.g., the metabolic
system drastically regulates different mechanisms such as the ribosome biosynthesis and
degradation [Pestov and Shcherbik, 2012], the nucleolar proteome dynamics [Andersen et
al., 2005], the protein turnover [Neher et al., 2003]; the lipid degradation [Holdsworth
and Ratledge 1988], the peroxisomal number [Mijaljica et al., 2006], and the global
cellular energy [Boender et al., 2011] among others.
There are endless possible combinations of environmental variables (physical, chemical,
nutritional and biological) to which the cell must give an answer. The CMS has the
properties to self-adapt against these numberless external variables, displaying an
impressive capacity to regulate thousands of metabolic processes simultaneously,
computing the appropriate regulatory responses at each time through complex and
specific catalytic dynamic patterns that must properly correspond to each set of external
perturbations.
Furthermore, these self-regulations occur very quickly, for instance, the metabolic
dynamics of the Escherichia coli were studied under cultures in which the glucose
concentration was constantly changing, following an up-and-down pattern. These studies
show that the systemic energetic state of the cell (measured by the adenylate energy
charge) self-adjusts as a whole in only 2 min after the external perturbations [Weber et
al., 2005].
In addition, the metabolism also exhibits complex and continuous cycles of molecular
turnover which includes the complete proteome, glycome, lypidome, metabolome and
transcriptome of the cell. More specifically, enzymes, the essential molecular actors for
cell functionality, are continually synthesized and destroyed in a dynamic turnover
process in which all proteins are broken down partially, into peptides, or completely, into
amino acids for later being regenerated de novo [Doherty et al., 2009; Li, 2010]. Even
when a cell is not undergoing growth, the protein pool is dynamic and the proteolytic
machinery continues its relentless process of molecular turnover, requiring for it
significant energy [Doherty and Beynon, 2006; Doherty et al., 2009].
As a result of the whole metabolic dynamic that encompasses reactive molecular
transformations including protein turnover, determined polypeptides must be suitably
synthetized when the physiological conditions require it. Therefore an adequate

29

molecular information flow from the CMS to the DNA is essential for ensuring the
adequate polypeptide replacement.

4.3 Nexus between the CMS and the DNA
Just over 40 years ago, the Nobel Prize John Gurdon showed the existence of a molecular
flow from the cytoplasm into the nucleus involved in the differential expression of certain
genes during early embryonic development [Gurdon, 1971]. The experiments were
realized transplanting the nucleus of a cell, which was carrying out one specific dynamic
activity, into an enucleated cytoplasm whose metabolic activity was quite another. These
studies were an extension of Briggs and King’s works on transplanting nuclei from
embryonic blastula cells [Briggs and King, 1959].
In the aforementioned Gurdon’s experiments, a fundamental conclusion was reached:
some cytoplasmic molecules control the expression of certain genes (or their repression)
in an independent way. In all hybrid cells, the transplanted nucleus did not continue with
its previous activity, but changed their function conforming to that of the host
cytoplasmic metabolism to which it had been exposed.
For instance: the mid-blastula nucleus synthesizes DNA but not RNA, and when it is
implanted into the cytoplasm of a growing oocyte whose nucleus does not synthesize
DNA, but RNA, the new hybrid cell stops synthesizing DNA and starts synthesizing
RNA; if this same mid-blastula nucleus is injected into the cytoplasm of a mature oocyte
which did not synthesize any nucleic acid and whose chromosomes are placed in spindle
phase, the implanted nucleus ends up synthesizing DNA and the chromosomes arrange in
the spindle of cell division; and when an adult neuron nucleus, which synthesizes RNA
but rarely synthesizes DNA, is injected into an unfertilized but activated cytoplasm egg
whose nucleus would normally synthesize DNA but not RNA, the transplanted nucleus
stops the RNA synthesis and begins DNA synthesis [Gurdon, 1971].
Another one of Gurdon’s experimental series proved that certain cytoplasmic components
select which genes will be activated and/or repressed at any one time; and consequently,
it was observed that major changes in different kinds of gene activity respond by
molecular signals came from the cytoplasmic metabolism [Gurdon, 1971].
Analogous experiments have been conducted in protozoans, amphibians, plants and in
different mammalians such as cats, mice, monkeys rabbits, horses, donkeys, pigs, goats
and cows; even a mouse was cloned using the nucleus of an olfactory neuron [Eggan et
al., 2004]. Of all these, the most popular example is Dolly, that was the result of an
30

experiment in which a single nucleus come from a differenced mammary cell was
successfully fused to an enucleated unfertilized egg from another adult sheep [Wilmut et
al., 1997].
According to the current vision, the DNA should have all the essential information for the
maintenance and development of the cell, and therefore the mammary nucleus should
modify the metabolic activity of the cytoplasm in which it has been injected, so that the
new hybrid organism should act as a mammary cell. But what happens is just the
opposite. It is the transferred nucleus that undergoes a radical transformation, so that the
molecular information flux originated from the host cytoplasmic metabolism reprograms
the genetic expression of the implanted nucleus expressing transcription patterns
completely different from the previous non-transplanted conditions, and this new
program of molecular instructions comes from the metabolic structure of the host
cytoplasm.
The gene expression patterns are regulated by the cytoplasmic metabolic structure in
which the mammary nucleus was injected, and no longer behaves like in a mammary cell
but starts dividing according to the new molecular program (sequence of instructions to
perform a specified biochemical task) executed by the cytoplasmic metabolism. During
the first three divisions the new cell replicates its DNA without expressing any of the
genes, and it is followed by successive cell divisions and progressive differentiation, first
into the early embryo and subsequently into all of the cell types that characterize the
animal.
Cellular Metabolic Structure (the cytoplasm and nucleoplasm metabolism as a whole) is
able to reprogram the gene expression of mammary DNA, and both the CMS and the
DNA coordinate together the development of an entire organism.
In eukaryotic cells, there is a long history of experimental observations about the
molecular flow from the cytoplasmic metabolism to the nucleus, dating back to 60s of the
last century [Zetterberg, 1966; Arms, 1968; Merriam, 1969; Gurdon and Weir, 1969] to
the present [Cook et al., 2007; Wimmer et al., 2013; Tamura and Hara-Nishimura, 2014].
A great variety of experimental studies have shown that the molecular flow from the
cytoplasmic metabolism to the nucleoplasm consists of ordinary components of the
cellular metabolism. Thousands of proteins, metabolites, cofactors and ions are
transferred to the nucleoplasm with remarkable efficiency and specificity [Kuersten et al.,
2001; Cook et al., 2007; Gerhäuser, 2012], and the different molecular combinations

31

(with precise concentrations) allows for modulation of the DNA-associated metabolism
(essentially integrated in the transcriptional system), which regulates the gene activity.
Extensive experimental studies both in prokaryotes and eukaryotes have shown the same
fundamental process: genes exhibiting transcriptional induction in response to metabolic
changes, originated during self-adaptation to a wide range of external factors such as
nutrient deprivation, chemical agents (the hormones, the pH, the ionic strength, and
others) and physical fluctuations (including temperature shock, drought, high-intensity
light etc.) [Causton et al., 2001; Gasch and Werner-Washburne, 2002; Kreps et al., 2002;
Hazen et al., 2003; Liu et al., 2005; Deutscher et al., 2006; Stern et al., 2007; Swindell et
al., 2007; Wilson and Nierhaus, 2007; Angers et al., 2010; Mirouze and Paszkowski,
2011]. For instance, under glucose starvation, the stringent reduction of ATP turnover at
the metabolic level was accompanied by a strong down-regulation of genes involved in
protein synthesis [Boender et al., 2011].
The traffic from the CMS to the DNA-associated metabolism ensures the intimate
subordination of the transcriptional system to the needs of the metabolic activity, at each
time.
The transcriptional system seems to be one the most complex dynamic structures of the
cell. It is formed by different, highly coordinated metabolic networks which integrate a
great variety of signals and process molecular information from both the DNA and the
CMS.
Unfortunately, most of the dynamic regulatory aspects of the metabolic transcriptional
system are still poorly understood.
A surprising variety of biochemical mechanisms participate in the control of gene
expression, including the topoisomerases, the transcription factors, the RNA polymerases,
the small RNAs, the translation system, the turnover rate of proteins, the dynamic levels
of the adenylate energy charge, etc. These metabolic processes are in turn modulated by
complex molecular networks [Balázsi et al., 2005; Missiuro et al., 2009], already
described in the miRNAs [Dong et al., 2010; Gennarino et al., 2012; Schulz et al., 2013],
the transcription factors [Walhout,

2006; Neph et al., 2012], the RNA polymerase

complexes [Coulombe et al., 2006; Schubert, 2014], and the mRNA dynamics [Maquat
and Gong, 2009; Schott and Stoecklin, 2010; Vlasova-St Louis and Bohjanen, 2011]
among others.
Chromosome packaging is another essential biochemical control process for gene
expression, common to all living organisms. In eukaryotes, the nucleosome-based DNA
32

organization allows reversible access of different metabolic regulatory mechanisms in
order to modulate determined DNA sequences. In fact, the tails of the four core histones
are subject to a variety of enzyme-catalyzed, post-translational modifications [Turner,
2005]. Networks of biochemical factors that functionally interact with the nucleosome,
reversibly remodeling it, have also been observed [Burgio et al., 2008].
Prokaryotic cells, despite exhibiting a very different DNA organization than that of the
eukaryotes, also present a protein collectivity referred to as nucleoid-associated proteins,
which contribute to the compaction and regulation of the genome [Rimsky and Travers,
2011; Takeda et al., 2011].
In addition, gene expression can also be modulated through the methylationdemethylation dynamics on the DNA nucleotides, mostly at CpG sites to convert cytosine
to 5-methylcytosine. The enzymatic systems for these covalent marks are also integrated
in the DNA-associated metabolism, and seem to be directly involved in maintaining the
dynamic metabolic memories in the transcriptional system.
In brief, both eukaryotes and prokaryotes appear to have a common mechanism to
coordinate the two information storage systems in the cell: the CMS and the DNA
(Figure 1b). The CMS integrates and process the stimuli coming from the environment,
generating self-regulatory metabolic responses and a molecular information traffic to the
DNA-associated metabolism. This information flux ensures the intimate integration and
subordination of the transcriptional system to the rest of metabolic activity of the cell.
The molecular flow allows the appropriate orchestration of the whole transcriptional
system and, as a consequence, determined parts of the genome are activated and
deactivated at strategic times; so that, in accordance to the requirements of the adaptive
maintenance of the cellular metabolism at each moment, gene expression is accurately
regulated and only specific polypeptides are synthesized.
Other important implications of the CMS in the regulation of DNA-associated
metabolism such as the generation of new polypeptidic information by means of
alternative splicing or directed mutations are beyond the scope of the present work.

4.4 Duality of the cellular hereditary information.
In addition to the molecular DNA-based inheritance, a wide variety of experimental
evidences have shown that determined functional metabolic processes codified via
covalent mark patterns, not encoded in the DNA sequence (epigenetic changes), can be
preserved when cells divide and thus can be transferred to the next generation.
33

For instance, epigenetic changes originated by environmental impacts on the cellular
metabolism have been observed to extend over the offspring in different kinds of cells
[Pembrey et al., 2006; Gluckman et al., 2007; Nadeau, 2009; Jiminez-Chirallon et al.,
2009; Carone et al., 2010; Grossniklaus et al., 2011].
Nutrition also may induce specific metabolic processes that seem to be transmitted to the
next generation by means of covalent marks that do not involve changes in the underlying
DNA sequence of the cell [Kaati et al., 2007; Waterland et al., 2007].
Besides, experimental findings in cells under stress shed new light on transgenerational
inheritance of metabolic memory processes [Seong et al., 2011; Crews et al., 2012;
Pecinka and Mittelsten Scheid, 2012].
Likewise, persistent and stable transmission of epigenetic molecular information across
generations has been described. For instance, it was reported in Arabidopsis thaliana that
environmental stress leads to a raise in genomic flexibility (increasing the hyperrecombination state), which persisted in a stable way for up to four untreated generations
[Molinier et al., 2006].
Another example of stably inherited DNA methylation pattern occurs in a variant of
Linaria vulgaris originally described more than 260 years ago by Linnaeus [Linnaeus,
1749], in which the fundamental symmetry of the flower is changed from bilateral to
radial as a result of extensive methylation of the Lcyc gene that controls the formation of
dorsal petals [Cubas et al., 1999].
The complex reprogramming of the metabolic information marks in primordial germ cells
according to their parental origin is another example of notable relevance of heritable
biochemical patterns not caused by changes in the DNA sequence [Seisenberger et al.,
2012; Hanna and Kelsey, 2014].
Moreover, the transmission across generations of epigenetic metabolic information has
been observed in bacteria [Casadesús and Low, 2013; Gonzalez et al., 2014].
Epigenetic processes seem to be the manifestation of cellular metabolic memory. The
covalent modification of histones and the methylation-demethylation dynamics on
specific DNA nucleotides appear to represent the storage of determined functional
biochemical memories in a structural way and these marks could only emerge due to the
Hopfield-type metabolic dynamics.
There is enough evidence supporting that the unicellular organisms can exhibit two
storage information systems capable of transmitting determined information to next

34

generations: the CMS and the DNA. The molecular information of both systems seems to
coordinate the physiological development of the whole cell.

5. Concluding remarks
The observations and consequent reflections I have made concerning numerous cellular
processes and different quantitative biomolecular studies, both presumably interrelated,
have led me to consider, without underestimating the enormous importance of DNA, that
the elements responsible for the organization and regulation of the fundamental biological
processes can be found in determined properties and characteristics of the cellular
metabolism.
As far as I have been able to ascertain, I find it probable that the essential attributes upon
which cellular functionality lies have their basis in the as yet insufficiently understood
Cellular Metabolic Structure.
Throughout these lines I have tried, in a conceptual manner, to present the basic elements
of a dualist framework concerning the information stored in the cell, according to which
the dynamic metabolic memory and the genetic memory seem to be the manifestation of
two systems of information storage in the cell. From this perspective, rather than a
genoteque in evolution, the cell could be considered, a singular metabolic entity, able to
permanently self-organize and self-regulate as well as adapt to the outside medium.
The work presented is necessarily and predominantly an exercise of multidisciplinary
integration, where concepts from different branches of biological knowledge –mainly
Biochemistry, Physiology, Cellular Biology and Molecular Biology– are addressed
within the approach of Systems Biology. Moreover, during the development and
completion of the quantitative investigations, it has been necessary to study many
experimental and numerical data through the use of different analytic systems such as
differential calculus, statistical mechanics, discrete mathematics, computing techniques
and artificial intelligence, as well as other physico-mathematical tools.
However, in this manuscript, any physico-mathematical formulation has been omitted in
order to favour the didactic character of the text. That being said, it is necessary to stress
that, in my opinion, without mathematics –the language of nature– it would not be
possible to understand precisely the metabolic dynamics and the catalytic functionality
that sustain them.

35

Fortunately, today the necessary application of mathematics to all fields of human
knowledge, biology in particular, is widely accepted. In the autobiographical
recollections that Charles Darwin wrote in 1876 for his children, he expressed the
importance of understanding “something of the great leading principles of mathematics,
for men thus endowed seem to have an extra sense” [Darwin, 1905].
This novel dualist framework of functional and structural information stored in the cell
could open new perspectives on the comprehension of subjects of notable interest as yet
not well understood, such as cellular differentiation, to name but one. Thus, cells with a
different Cellular Metabolic Structure and, therefore, different catalytic activity
programs, but with the same genetic heritage, can express different genes and manifest
different physiological behaviour. Something along these lines could be said about the
Theory of Evolution, in terms of how it was presented by the endearing Charles Darwin,
and the possibility that the cells themselves are able to self-adapt to the medium
permanently through the dynamic properties of cellular metabolism and the dualist
character of cellular hereditary information.
Within the synopsis presented in these pages, no doubt some of opinions may appear
rushed and the reflections I have presented, insufficient.
Frankly, I have to admit that dealing with these overwhelmingly complex issues of
systemic cell biology with the desired clarity and precision is extraordinarily difficult. In
addition, at this time our comprehension of the dynamic biological phenomena in its most
elemental aspects is still very incomplete and insufficient.
It is truly extraordinary that in such a reduced space, of merely a few microns, millions of
biochemical processes form a metabolic entity that is sensitive, self-organized and selfregulated, able to process and store information, perpetuating itself in time.
A minute place in the cosmos, where millions upon millions of atoms, formed at the very
origin of the initial singularity and in the stars, self-organize to give birth to the molecules
of highest complexity and information value in all the known universe.

36

Fig 1

Figure1. Cellular metabolic memory
(a) Hopfield-like attractor dynamics can emerge in the metabolic networks. They have the
capacity to store functional catalytic patterns which can be correctly recovered by specific input
stimuli. These metabolic dynamics are stable and can be maintained as long-term memory. In
addition, specific molecular information can be transferred from the functional dynamics of the
metabolic networks to the enzymatic activity involved in the covalent post-translational
modulation so that specific functional memory can be embedded in multiple stable molecular
marks. Both the metabolic dynamics governed by Hopfield-type attractors (functional processes)
and the enzymatic covalent modifications of determined molecules (structural dynamic processes)
seem to represent the two stages of the dynamic memory of cellular metabolism.
(b) Between the extracellular environment and the DNA, there appears to exist a cellular
metabolic structure (CMS) that behaves as a very complex decentralized information processing
system with the capacity to store metabolic memory (Figure 1a). The CMS generates sets of
biochemical instructions that make each enzymatic activity evolve with a particular and precise
dynamic of change, allowing self-regulation and adaptation to the external medium. In addition,
the CMS permanently sends a flow of molecular signals to the DNA-associated metabolism,
which shapes the complex transcriptional system. The molecular flows allow accurate regulation
of gene expression, so that only specific polypeptides that are required for adaptive maintenance
of the CMS are synthesized. Together, both informative systems (CMS and DNA) coordinate the
physiological development of the cell. I: determinative molecular flux for the regulation of the
transcriptional system. II: polypeptidic reposition. TS: transcriptional system. The CMS is
represented by a network. Red circles: metabolic core. Green circles: on-off metabolic processes.

37

References
Abadjieva, A., Pauwels, K., Hilven, P., and Crabeel, M. (2001). A new yeast metabolon
involving at least the two first enzymes of arginine biosynthesis: acetylglutamate
synthase activity requires complex formation with acetylglutamate kinase. J. Biol. Chem.
276(46):42869-42880. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M103732200.
Adler, J. (1966). Chemotaxis in Bacteria. Science. 153, 708-716.
Adler, J., and Dahl M.M. (1967). A method for measuring the motility of bacteria and for
comparing random and non-random motility. J. Gen. Microbiol. 46, 161-173.
Adler, J., and Templeton, B. (1967). The effect of environmental conditions on the
motility of Escherichia coli. J. Gen. Microbiol. 46, 175-184.
Aguiar, M., Masse, R., and Gibbs, B.F. (2005). Regulation of cytochrome P450 by posttranslational modification. Drug. Metab. Rev. 37(2):379-404. doi: 10.1081/DMR200046136.
Ainscow, E.K., Mirsham, S., Tang, T., Ashford, M.L.J., and Rutter, G.A. (2002).
Dynamic imaging of free cytosolic ATP concentration during fuel sensing by rat
hypothalamic neurones: evidence for ATP independent control of ATP-sensitive K+
channels. J. Physiol. 544(Pt 2):429-445. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2002.022434.
Albrecht, E., and Petty, R.H. (1998). Cellular memory: neutrophil orientation reverses
during temporally decreasing chemoattractant concentrations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
95:5039-5044. doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.9.5039.
Almaas, E., Kovacs, B., Vicsek, T., Oltvai, Z.N., and Barabási, A.L. (2004). Global
organization of metabolic fluxes in the bacterium Escherichia coli. Nature.
427(6977):839-843. doi: 10.1038/nature02289.
Almaas, E., Oltvai, Z.N., and Barabási, A.L. (2005). The activity reaction core and
plasticity of metabolic networks. PLoS Comput. Biol. 1(7):e68. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010068.
Alon, U., Surette, M.G., Barkai, N. and Leibler, S. (1999). Robustness in bacterial
chemotaxis. Nature. 397, 168-117. doi:10.1038/16483.
Alon, U. (2007). Network motifs: theory and experimental approaches. Nat. Rev. Genet.
8(6):450-461. doi: 10.1038/nrg2102.
Amari, S. (1975). Homogeneous nets of neuron-like elements. Biol. Cybern. 17:211-220.
doi: 10.1007/BF00339367.
Amariei, C., Tomita, M. and Murray, D.B. (2014). Quantifying periodicity in omics data.
Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 2:40. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2014.00040.
Amit, D. (1989). Modeling Brain Function. New York: Cambridge University Press.

38

Andersen, J.S., Lam, Y.W., Leung, A.K., Ong, S.E., Lyon, C.E., Lamond, A.I., et al.
(2005).
Nucleolar
proteome
dynamics.
Nature.
433(7021):77-83.
doi:
10.1038/nature03207.
Angers, B., Castonguay, E., and Massicotte, R. (2010). Environmentally induced
phenotypes and DNA methylation: how to deal with unpredictable conditions until the
next generation and after. Mol. Ecol. 19(7):1283-1295. doi: 10.1111/j.1365294X.2010.04580.x.
Anggono, V., and Huganir R.L. (2012). Regulation of AMPA receptor trafficking and
synaptic
plasticity.
Curr.
Opin.
Neurobiol.
22(3):461-469.
doi:
10.1016/j.conb.2011.12.006.
Aon, M.A., Cortassa, S., and O’Rourke, B. (2006). The fundamental organization of
cardiac mitochondria as a network of coupled oscillators. Biophys. J. 91(11):4317-4327.
doi: 10.1529/biophysj.106.087817.
Aon, M.A., Roussel, M.R., Cortassa, S., O’Rourke, B., Murray, D.B., Beckmann, M., et
al. (2008). The scale-free dynamics of eukaryotic cells. Plos One. 3(11):e3624. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0003624.
Aono, M., Zhu, L., and Hara, M., (2011a). Amoeba-based neurocomputing for 8-city
traveling salesman problem. Int. J. Unconv. Comput. 7(6):463-480.
Aono, M., Zhu, L., Kim, S.J., and Hara, M. (2011b). Performance enhancement of
amoeba-based neurocomputer for 8-city traveling salesman problem. Proc. NOLTA. 104107.
Arms, K. (1968). Cytonucleoproteins in cleaving eggs of Xenopuslaevis. J. Embryol.
Exp. Morphol. 20(3):367-374.
Asano,Y., Nagasaki,A., and Uyeda, T.Q.P. (2008). Correlated waves of actin filaments
and PIP3 in Dictyostelium cells. Cell Mot. Cytosk. 65(12):923-934. doi:
10.1002/cm.20314.
Atkinson, D.E., and Walton, G.M. (1967). Adenosine triphosphate conservation in
metabolic regulation. Rat liver citrate cleavage enzyme. J. Biol. Chem. 242(13):32393241.
Ausländer, S., Ausländer, D., Müller, M., Wieland, M., and Fussenegger, M. (2012).
Programmable single-cell mammalian biocomputers. Nature. 487(7405):123-127. doi:
10.1038/nature11149.
Baker, M.D., Wolanin, P.M., and Stock, J.B. (2006). Signal transduction in bacterial
chemotaxis. Bioessays. 28:9-22.
Balázsi, G., Barabási, A.L., and Oltvai, Z.N. (2005). Topological units of environmental
signal processing in the transcriptional regulatory network of Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 102(22):7841-7846. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0500365102.

39

Bandeira, H.T., Barbosa, C.T., De Oliveira, R.A., Aguiar, J.F., and Nogueira, R.A.
(2008). Chaotic model and memory in single calcium-activated potassium channel
kinetics. Chaos. 18(3):033136. doi: 10.1063/1.2944980.
Bannister, A.J., and Kouzarides, T. (2011). Regulation of chromatin by histone
modifications. Cell. Res. 21(3):381-395. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.22.
Barbour, B., Brunel, N., Hakim, V. and Nadal, J.P. (2007). What can we learn from
synaptic
weight
distributions?.
Trends
Neurosci.
30(12):622-629.
doi:
10.1016/j.tins.2007.09.005.
Barnes, S.J., and Weitzman, P.D. (1986). Organization of citric acid cycle enzymes into a
multienzyme cluster. FEBS Lett. 201 (2): 267-270. doi:10.1016/0014-5793(86)80621-4.
Baron, R., Lioubashevski, O., Katz, E., Niazov, T., and Willner, I. (2006). Logic gates
and elementary computing by enzymes. J. Phys. Chem. A. 110:8548-8553. doi:
10.1021/jp0568327.
Barril, E.F., and Potter, A.R. (1968). Systematic oscillations of amino acid transport in
liver from rats adapted to controlled feeding schedules. J. Nutr. 95: 228-237.
Bayer, E.A., Belaich, J.P., Shoham, Y., and Lamed, R. (2004). The cellulosomes:
multienzyme machines for degradation of plant cell wall polysaccharides. Annu. Rev.
Microbiol. 58:521-554. doi: 10.1146/annurev.micro.57.030502.09102.
Beeckmans, S., Van Driessche, E., and Kanarek, L. (1990). Clustering of sequential
enzymes in the glycolytic pathway and the citric acid cycle. J. Cell. Biochem. 43(4):297306. doi: 10.1002/jcb.2404304022.
Beg, Q.K., Vazquez, A., Ernst, J., de Menezes, M.A., Bar-Joseph, Z., Barabási, A.L., et
al. (2007). Intracellular crowding defines the mode and sequence of substrate uptake by
escherichia coli and constrains its metabolic activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
104(31):12663-12668. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0609845104.
Behrends, C., Sowa, M.E., Gygi, S.P., and Harper, J.W. (2010). Network organization of
the human autophagy system. Nature. 466(7302):68-76. doi: 10.1038/nature09204.
Ben-Jacob, E. (2009). Learning from bacteria about natural information processing. Ann.
N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1178:78-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05022.x.
Bernardinelli, Y., Magistretti, P.J., and Chatton, J.Y. (2004). Astrocytes generate Na+mediated metabolic waves. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 101(41):14937-14942. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0405315101.
Berridge, M.J., and Galione, A. (1988). Cytosolic calcium oscillators. FASEB. J.
2(15):3074–3082.
Bhaskaran, H., and Perona, J.J. (2011). Two-step aminoacylation of tRNA without
channeling in Archaea. J. Mol. Biol. 411(4):854-869. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.06.039.

40

Binstock, J.F., and Schulz, H. (1981). Fatty acid oxidation complex from Escherichia
coli. Methods Enzymol. 71 Pt C:403-411.
Bobik, T.A. (2006). Polyhedral organelles compartmenting bacterial metabolic processes.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 70(5):517-525. doi: 10.1007/s00253-005-0295-0.
Boender, L.G., Almering, M.J., Dijk, M., van Maris, A.J., de Winde, J.H., Pronk, J.T., et
al. (2011). Extreme calorie restriction and energy source starvation in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae represent distinct physiological states. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1813(12):21332144. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.07.008.
Boiteux, A., Hess, B., Sel'kov, E. E. (1980). Creative Functions of Instability and
Oscillations in Metabolic Systems. Curr. Top. Cell. Reg. 17, 171-203.
Bonetta L. (2010). Protein-protein interactions: Interactome under construction. Nature.
468(7325):851-854. doi: 10.1038/468851a.
Bonner, J.T. (2010). Brainless behavior: a myxomycete chooses a balanced diet. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 107(12):5267-5268. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1000861107.
Boruc, J., Van den Daele, H., Hollunder, J., Rombauts, S., Mylle, E., Hilson, P., et al.
(2010). Functional modules in the Arabidopsis core cell cycle binary protein-protein
interaction network. Plant Cell. 22(4):1264-1280. doi: 10.1105/tpc.109.073635.
Bowsher, C.G. (2011). Information processing by biochemical networks: a dynamic
approach. J. R. Soc. Interface. 8(55):186-200. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2010.0287.
Bray, D., Levin, M.D. and Morton-Firth, C.J. (1998). Receptor clustering as a cellular
mechanism to control sensitivity. Nature. 393:85-88. doi: 10.1038/30018.
Briggs, B. and King. T.J. (1959). “Nucleocytoplasmic interactions in egg and embryos”
in The cell, ed. J. Brachet and A.E. Mirsky (Acad. Press N. York), 1:537-617.
Brodsky, V., Boikov, P.Y., Nechaeva, N.V., Yurovitsky, Y.G., Novikova, T.E., Fateeva,
V.I. et al. (1992). The rhythm of protein synthesis does not depend on oscillations of ATP
level. J. Cell Sci. 103(Pt 2):363-370.
Brodsky, V.Y. (2006). Direct cell-cell communication: A new approach derived from
recent data on the nature and self-organisation of ultradian (circahoralian) intracellular
rhythms.
Biol.
Rev.
Camb.
Philos.
Soc.
81(1):143-162.
doi:
10.1017/S1464793105006937.
Buescher, J.M., Liebermeister, W., Jules, M., Uhr, M., Muntel, J., Botella, E., et al.
(2012). Global network reorganization during dynamic adaptations of Bacillus subtilis
metabolism. Science. 335(6072):1099-1103. doi: 10.1126/science.1206871.
Bultema, J.B., Braun, H.P., Boekema, E.J., and Kouril, R. (2009). Megacomplex
organization of the oxidative phosphorylation system by structural analysis of respiratory
supercomplexes from potato. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1787(1):60-67. doi:
10.1016/j.bbabio.2008.10.010.
41

Burgio, G., La Rocca, G., Sala, A., Arancio, W., Di Gesù, D., Collesano, M., et al.
(2008). Genetic identification of a network of factors that functionally interact with the
nucleosome
remodeling
ATPase
ISWI.
PLoS
Genet.
4(6):e1000089.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000089.
Cardone, L., Hirayama, J., Giordano, F., Tamaru, T., Palvimo, J.J., and Sassone-Corsi, P.
(2005). Circadian clock control by SUMOylation of BMAL1. Science. 309(5739):13901394. doi: 10.1126/science.1110689.
Carone, B.R., Fauquier, L., Habib, N., Shea, J.M., Hart, C.E., Li, R., et al. (2010).
Paternally induced transgenerational environmental reprogramming of metabolic gene
expression in mammals. Cell. 143(7):1084-1096. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.12.008.
Carpousis, A.J. (2002). The Escherichia coli RNA degradosome: structure, function and
relationship in other ribonucleolyticmultienzyme complexes. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 30(2):
150-155. doi:10.1042/BST0300150.
Casadesús, J., and Low, D.A. (2013). Programmed heterogeneity: epigenetic mechanisms
in bacteria. J. Biol. Chem. 288(20):13929-13935. doi: 10.1074/jbc.R113.472274.
Causton, H.C., Ren, B., Koh, S.S., Harbison, C.T., Kanin, E., Jennings, E.G., et al.
(2001). Remodeling of yeast genome expression in response to environmental changes.
Mol. Biol. Cell. 12(2):323-337. doi: 10.1091/mbc.12.2.323.
Chabot, J.R., Pedraza, J.M., Luitel, P., and van Oudenaarden, A. (2007). A Stochastic
gene expression out-of-steady-state in the cyanobacterial circadian clock. Nature.
450(7173):1249-1252. doi: 10.1038/nature06395.
Chance, B., Pye, E.K., Ghosh, A.D., and Hess, B. (Eds.) (1973). Biological and
Biochemical Oscillations. New York. Academic Press.
Cheung, C.W., Cohen, N.S. and Raijman, L. (1989). Channeling of urea cycle
intermediates in situ in permeabilized hepatocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 264(7):4038-4044.
Chiam, H.K., and Rajagopal, G. (2007). Oscillations in intracellular signaling cascades.
Phys. Rev. E. 75(6 Pt 1):061901. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.75.061901.
Clegg, J.S., and Jackson, S.A. (1990). Glucose metabolism and the channelling of
glycolytic intermediates in permeabilized L-929 cells. Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
1;278(2):452-460. doi: 10.1016/0003-9861(90)90284-6.
Clémençon, B. (2012). Yeast mitochondrial interactosome model: metabolon membrane
proteins complex involved in the channeling of ADP/ATP. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 13(2):18581885. doi: 10.3390/ijms13021858.
Cohen, P. (2000). The regulation of protein function by multisite phosphorylation - a 25
year update. Trends Bioche. Sci. 25:596-601. doi: 10.1016/S0968-0004(00)01712-6.

42

Cook, A., Bono, F., Jinek, M., and Conti, E. (2007). Structural biology of
nucleocytoplasmic
transport.
Annu.
Rev.
Biochem.
76:647-671.
doi:
10.1146/annurev.biochem.76.052705.161529.
Coulombe, B., Jeronimo, C., Bouchard, A., Thérien, C., Gordon Chua, G., Bergeron, D.,
et al. (2006). A network of protein complexes signaling to the RNA polymerase II
transcription apparatus in human cells. FASEB J. 20:A945.
Crews, D., Gillette, R., Scarpino, S.V., Manikkam, M., Savenkova, M.I., and Skinner,
M.K. (2012). Epigenetic transgenerational inheritance of altered stress responses. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 109(23):9143-9148. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1118514109.
Cubas, P., Vincent, C., Coen, E. (1999). An epigenetic mutation responsible for natural
variation in floral symmetry. Nature. 401(6749):157-161. doi: 10.1038/43657.
Daniel, R., Rubens, J.R., Sarpeshkar, R., and Lu, T.K. (2013). Synthetic analog
computation in living cells. Nature. 497(7451):619-623. doi: 10.1038/nature12148.
Dano, S., Sorensen, P., and Hynne, F. (1999). Sustained oscillations in living cells.
Nature. 402(6759):320-322. doi: 10.1038/46329.
Das, M., Gebber, G.L., Barman, S.M., Lewis, C.D. (2003). Fractal properties of
sympathetic nerve discharge. J Neurophysiol. 89(2):833-40.
D'Avino, P.P., Archambault, V., Przewloka, M.R., Zhang, W., Laue, E.D., and Glover,
D.M. (2009). Isolation of protein complexes involved in mitosis and cytokinesis from
Drosophila cultured cells. Methods Mol. Biol. 545:99-112. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327993-2_6.
De Forest, M., and Wheeler, C.J. (1999). Coherent oscillations in membrane potential
synchronize impulse bursts in central olfactory neurons of the crayfish. J. Neurophysiol.
81(3):1231-1241.
De la Fuente, M.I., Martinez, L., Veguillas, J., Aguirregabiria, J.M. (1996).
Quasiperiodicity Route to Chaos in a Biochemical System. Biophys J. 71:2375–2379.
doi: 10.1016/S0006-3495(96)79431-6.
De la Fuente, I.M., Martínez, L., Aguirregabiria, J.M., and Veguillas, J. (1998a). R/S
analysis in strange attractors. Fractals. 6(2):95-100.
De la Fuente, I.M., Martínez, L., Benitez, N., Veguillas, J., and Aguirregabiria, J.M.
(1998b). Persistent behavior in a phase-shift sequence of periodical biochemical
oscillations. Bull. Mathemat. Biol. 60(4):689-702.
De la Fuente, M.I. (1999). Diversity of temporal self-organized behaviors in a
biochemical system. BioSystems 50: 83–97. doi:10.1016/S0303-2647(98)00094-X.
De la Fuente, I.M., Benítez, N., Santamaría, A., Veguillas, J., and Aguirregabiria J.M.
(1999). Persistence in metabolic nets. Bull. Mathemat. Biol. 61(3):573-595.

43

De la Fuente, I.M., Pérez-Samartín, A., Martínez, L., García, M.A., and Vera-López A.
(2006). Long-range correlations in rabbit brain neural activity. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 34:
295-299.
De la Fuente, I.M., Martínez, L., Pérez-Samartín, A.L., Ormaetxea, L., Amezaga, C.,
and Vera-López, A. (2008). Global self-organization of the cellular metabolic structure.
PLoS One. 3(8):e3100. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003100.
De la Fuente, I.M., Vadillo, F., Pérez-Pinilla, M.B., Vera-López, A., and Veguillas J.
(2009). The number of catalytic elements is crucial for the emergence of metabolic cores.
PLoS One. 4(10):e7510. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007510.
De la Fuente, I.M. (2010). Quantitative analysis of cellular metabolic dissipative, selforganized structures. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 11(9):3540-3599. doi: 10.3390/ijms11093540.
De La Fuente, I.M., Vadillo, F., Pérez-Samartín, A.L., Pérez-Pinilla, M-B., Bidaurrazaga,
J. (2010) Global self-regulations of the cellular metabolic structure. PloS One. 5,
e9484:1–e9484:15. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0009484.
De la Fuente, I.M., Cortés, J., Pérez-Pinilla, M., Ruiz-Rodríguez, V., and Veguillas, J.
(2011). The metabolic core and catalytic switches are fundamental elements in the selfregulation of the systemic metabolic structure of cells. PLoS One. 6:e2722.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0027224.
De la Fuente, I.M., and Cortés, J.M. (2012). Quantitative analysis of the effective
functional structure in yeast glycolysis. PLoS One. 7(2):e30162. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0030162.
De la Fuente, I.M., Cortes, J.M., Pelta, D.A., and Veguillas, J. (2013). Attractor
metabolic networks. PLoS One. 8(3):e58284. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058284.
De la Fuente, I.M. (2014). “Metabolic Dissipative Structures”, in Systems Biology of
Metabolic and signaling Networks: Energy, Mass and Information Transfer, eds. M.A.
Aon, V. Saks & U. Schlattner (Springer Books, New York), 179-212.
De la Fuente, I.M., Cortés, J.M., Valero, E., Desroches, M., Rodrigues, S., Malaina I., et
al. (2014). On the dynamics of the adenylate energy system: homeorhesis vs homeostasis.
PLoS One. 9(10):e108676. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108676.
Dekhuijzen, A., and Bagust, J. (1996). Analysis of neural bursting: Nonrhythmic and
rhythmic activity in isolated spinal cord. J. Neurosci. Methods. 67(2):141-147. doi:
10.1016/S0165-0270(96)00033-7.
Deribe, Y.L., Pawson, T., and Dikic, I. (2010). Post-translational modifications in signal
integration. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 17(6):666-672. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1842.
Deutscher, J., Francke, C., and Postma, P.W. (2006). How phosphotransferase systemrelated protein phosphorylation regulates carbohydrate metabolism in bacteria. Microbiol.
Mol. Biol. Rev. 70(4):939-1031. doi: 10.1128/mmbr.00024-06.

44

Distler, A.M., Kerner J., Lee, K., and Hoppel, C.L. (2009). Post-translational
modifications of mitochondrial outer membrane proteins. Methods Enzymol. 457:97-115.
doi: 10.1016/S0076-6879(09)05006-X.
Doherty, M.K., and Beynon, R.J. (2006). Protein turnover on the scale of the proteome.
Expert Rev. Proteomics. 3(1):97-110. doi: 10.1586/14789450.3.1.97.
Doherty, M.K., Hammond, D.E., Clague, M.J., Gaskell, S.J., and Beynon, R.J. (2009).
Turnover of the human proteome: determination of protein intracellular stability by
dynamic SILAC. J. Proteome Res. 8(1):104-12. doi: 10.1021/pr800641v.
Dong, J., Jiang, G., Asmann, Y.W., Tomaszek, S., Jen, J., Kislinger, T., et al. (2010).
MicroRNA networks in mouse lung organogenesis. PLoS One. 5(5):e10854. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0010854.
Dussutour, A., Latty, T., Beekman, M., and Simpson, S.J. (2010). Amoeboid organism
solves complex nutritional challenges. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107(10):4607-4611. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0912198107.
Dwivedi, G., and Kemp, M.L. (2012). Systemic redox regulation of cellular information
processing. Antioxidant. Redox Signal. 16(4):374. doi: 10.1089/ars.2011.403.
Eggan, K., Baldwin, K., Tackett, M., Osborne, J., Gogos, J., Chess, A., et al. (2004).
Mice cloned from olfactory sensory neurons. Nature. 428(6978):44-49. doi:
10.1038/nature02375.
Ehmsen, J., Poon, E., and Davies, K. (2002). The dystrophin-associated protein complex.
J. Cell. Sci. 115(Pt 14): 2801-2803.
Emonet, T., and Cluzel, P. (2008). Relationship between cellular response and behavioral
variability in bacterial chemotaxis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 105:3304-3309. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0705463105.
Faber, J., Portugal, R., and Rosa, L.P. (2006). Information processing in brain
microtubules. Biosystems. 83(1):1-9.
Fan, C., Cheng, S., Liu, Y., Escobar, C.M., and Crowley, C.S. (2010). Short N-terminal
sequences package proteins into bacterial microcompartments. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 107(16):7509-7514. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0913199107.
Forlemu, N.Y., Njabon, E.N., Carls.on, K.L., Schmidt, E.S., Waingeh, V.F., and
Thomasson, K.A. (2011). Ionic strength dependence of F-actin and glycolytic enzyme
associations: a Brownian dynamics simulations approach. Proteins. 79(10):2813-2827.
doi: 10.1002/prot.23107.
Fromme, P., and Mathis, P. (2004). Unraveling the photosystem I reaction center: a
history, or the sum of many efforts. Photosyn. Res. 80(1-3):109-124.
doi:10.1023/B:PRES.0000030657.88242.e1.

45

Fuentes, J.M., Pascual, M.R., Salido, G., and Soler, J.A. (1994). Oscillations in rat liver
cytosolic enzyme activities of the urea cycle. Arch. Int. Physiol. Biochim Biophys.
102(5):237-241.
Fusi, S., Drew, P.J. and Abbott L.F. (2005). Cascade models of synaptically stored
memories. Neuron. 45:599-611. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.02.001.
Garmendia-Torres, C., Goldbeter, A., and Jacquet, M. (2007). Nucleocytoplasmic
Oscillations of the Yeast Transcription Factor Msn2: Evidence for Periodic PKA
Activation. Curr. Biol. 17(12):1044-1049. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2007.05.032.
Gasch, A.P., and Werner-Washburne, M. (2002). The genomics of yeast responses to
environmental stress and starvation. Funct. Integr. Genomics. 2(4-5):181-192. doi:
10.1007/s10142-002-0058-2.
Gautam, V.K., Costantini, S., Paladino, A. and Colonna, G. (2012). Interactomic and
pharmacological
insights
on
human
Sirt-1.
Front.
Pharmacol.
3:40.
doi:10.3389/fphar.2012.00040.
Gavin, A.C., Bosche, M., Krause, R., Grandi, P., Marzioch., M., Bauer, A., et al. (2002).
Functional organization of the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein
complexes. Nature 415: 141–147. doi:10.1038/415141a.
Gavin, A.C., and Superti-Furga, G. (2003). Protein complexes and proteome organization
from yeast to man. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 7(1):21-27. doi: 10.1016/S13675931(02)00007-8.
Gennarino, V.A., D'Angelo, G., Dharmalingam, G., Fernandez, S., Russolillo, G.,
Sanges, R., et al. (2012). Identification of microRNA-regulated gene networks by
expression analysis of target genes. Genome Res. 22(6):1163-1172. doi:
10.1101/gr.130435.111.
Gerhäuser, C. (2012). Cancer cell metabolism, epigenetics and the potential influence of
dietary components - A perspective. Biomed. Res. 23(1):1-21.
Geryk, J., and Slanina, F. (2013). Modules in the metabolic network of E. coli with
regulatory interactions. Int. J. Data Min. Bioinform. 8(2):188-202. doi:
10.1504/IJDMB.2013.055500.
Getty, L., Panteleon, A.E., Mittelman, S.D., Dea, M.K., and Bergman, R.N. (2000).
Rapid oscillations in omental lipolysis are independent of changing insulin levels in vivo.
J. Clin. Invest. 106(3):421-430. doi: 10.1172/JCI7815.
Getty-Kaushik, L., Richard, A.M., and Corkey, B.E. (2005). Free fatty acid regulation of
glucose-dependent intrinsic oscillatory lipolysis in perifused isolated rat adipocytes.
Diabetes. 54(3):629-637. doi: 10.2337/diabetes.54.3.629.
Gloire, G., and Piette, J. (2009). Redox regulation of nuclear post-translational
modifications during NF-kappaB activation. Antioxid. Redox. Signal. 11(9):2209-22. doi:
10.1089/ARS.2009.2463.
46

Gluckman, P.D., Hanson, M.A. and Beedle, A.S. (2007). Non-genomic transgenerational
inheritance of disease risk. Bioessays. 29(2):145-154. doi: 10.1002/bies.20522.
Gnad, F., Ren, S., Cox, J., Olsen, J.V., Macek, B., Oroshi, M., et al. (2007). PHOSIDA
(phosphorylation site database): management, structural and evolutionary investigation,
and prediction of phosphosites. Genome Biol. 8(11):R250. doi: 10.1186/gb-2007-8-11r250.
Goldbeter, A. (2002). Computational approaches to cellular rhythms. Nature.
420(6912):238-245. doi:10.1038/nature01259.
Goldbeter, A. (2007). Biological rhythms as temporal dissipative structures. Adv. Chem.
Phys. 135:253-295. doi: 10.1002/9780470121917.ch8.
Goldbeter, A. (2013). Oscillatory enzyme reactions and Michaelis-Menten kinetics. FEBS
Lett. 587, 2778-2784. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.07.031.
Gonzalez, D., Kozdon, J.B., McAdams, H.H., Shapiro, L., and Collier, J. (2014). The
functions of DNA methylation by CcrM in Caulobactercrescentus: a global approach.
Nucleic Acids Res. 42(6):3720-3735. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1352.
Gough, J., Jones, G., Lovell, C., Macey, P., Morgan, H., Revilla, F.D., et al. (2009).
Integration of cellular biological structures into robotic systems. Acta Futura. 3:43-49.
Graciet, E., Lebreton, S., and Gontero, B. (2004). Emergence of new regulatory
mechanisms in the Benson-Calvin pathway via protein-protein interactions: a
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase/CP12/phosphoribulokinase complex. J. Exp.
Bot. 55(400):1245-1254. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erh107.
Graham, J. W., Williams, T. C., Morgan, M., Fernie, A. R., Ratcliffe, R.G., and
Sweetlove L.J. (2007). Glycolytic enzymes associate dynamically with mitochondria in
response to respiratory demand and support substrate channeling. Plant Cell.
19(11):3723-3738. doi: 10.1105/tpc.107.053371.
Greenfield, D., McEvoy, A.L., Shroff, H., Crooks, G.E., Wingreen, N.S., Betzig E., et al.
(2009). Self-organization of the escherichia colichemotaxis network imaged with superresolution
light
microscopy.
PLoS
Biol.
7(6):e1000137.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000137.
Grossniklaus, U. (2011). Plant germline development: a tale of cross-talk, signaling, and
cellular interactions. Sex. Plant Reprod. 24(2):91-95. doi: 10.1007/s00497-011-0170-3.
Gurdon, J.B., and Weir, R.S. (1969). Cytoplasmic proteins and the control of nuclear
activity in early amphibian development. Biochem. J. 114(4):52-53.
Gurdon, J.B. (1971). Transplant of nuclei and cell differentiation. Moscow: Znanie,
Series 10 (Biology).

47

Halbach, F., Reichelt, P., Rode, M., and Conti, E. (2013). The yeast ski complex: crystal
structure and RNA channeling to the exosome complex. Cell. 154(4):814-826. doi:
10.1016/j.cell.2013.07.017.
Halley, J.D., and Winkler, D.A. (2008). Consistent concepts of self-organization and selfassembly. Complexity. 14(2): 10-17. doi: 10.1002/cplx.20235.
Hamadeh, A., Roberts, M.A.J, August, E., McSharry, P.E., Maini, P.K., Armitage, J.P., et
al. (2011). Feedback control architecture and the bacterial chemotaxis network. PLoS
Comput. Biol. 7(5):e1001130. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001130.
Hanna, C.W., and Kelsey, G. (2014). The specification of imprints in mammals. Heredity
(Edinb). 113(2):176-83. doi: 10.1038/hdy.2014.54.
Hans, M.A., Heinzle, E., and Wittmann, C. (2003). Free intracellular amino acid pools
during autonomous oscillations in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnol. Bioeng.
82(2):143-151. doi: 10.1002/bit.10553.
Hao, D., Ren, C., and Li, C. (2012). Revisiting the variation of clustering coefficient of
biological networks suggests new modular structure. BMC Syst. Biol. 6:34. doi:
10.1186/1752-0509-6-34.
Harrington, H.A., Ho, K.L., Ghosh, S., and Tung, K.C. (2008). Construction and analysis
of a modular model of caspase activation in apoptosis. Theor. Biol. Med. Model. 5:26.
doi: 10.1186/1742-4682-5-26.
Hartig, K., and Beck, E. (2005). Endogenous cytokinin oscillations control cell cycle
progression of tobacco BY-2 cells. Plant. Biology. 7(1):33-40. doi: 10.1055/s-2004830474.
Hartwell, L.H., Hopfield, J.J., Leibler, S., and Murray, A.W. (1999). From molecular to
modular cell biology. Nature. 402(6761 Suppl):C47-52.
Hatakeyama. T.S., Kaneko, K. (2014). Kinetic Memory Based on the Enzyme-Limited
Competition. PLoS Comput Biol 10(8): e1003784. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003784
Hayashi, T., G. Rumbaugh, et al. (2005). Differential Regulation of AMPA Receptor
Subunit Trafficking by Palmitoylation of Two Distinct Sites. Neuron 47(5): 709-723.
Hazelbauer, G.L., Falke, J.J., and Parkinson, J.S. (2008). Bacterial chemoreceptors: highperformance signaling in networked arrays. Trends Biochem. Sci. 33:9-19. doi:
10.1016/j.tibs.2007.09.014.
Hazen, S.P., Wu, Y., and Kreps, J.A. (2003). Gene expression profiling of plant
responses to abiotic stress. Funct. Integr. Genomics. 3(3):105-111.
Heinrich, R., Schuster, S. (1996). The Regulation of Cellular Systems. New York:
Chapman and Hall.

48

Heo, I., and Kim, V.N. (2009). Regulating the regulators: post-translational modifications
of RNA silencing factors. Cell. 139(1):28-31. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.09.013.
Hertz, J., Krogh, A. and Palmer, R.G. (1991). Introduction to the theory of neural
computation. Boston: Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co.
Ho, Y., Gruhler, A., Heilbut, A., Bader, G.D., Moore, L., Adams, S.L., et al. (2002).
Systematic identification of protein complexes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by mass
spectrometry. Nature. 415(6868):180-183. doi: 10.1038/415180a.
Holdsworth, J.E., and Ratledge, C. (1988). Lipid turnover in oleaginous yeasts. J. Gen.
Microbiol. 134(2):339-346. doi: 10.1099/00221287-134-2-339.
Holz, G.G., Heart, E., and Leech, C.A. (2008). Synchronizing Ca2+ and cAMP
oscillations in pancreatic beta cells: a role for glucose metabolism and GLP-1 receptors?
Focus on “Regulation of cAMP dynamics by Ca2+ and G protein-coupled receptors in
the pancreatic β-cell: a computational approach”. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.
294(1):C4-6. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00522.2007.
Hopfield, J.J. (1982). Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective
computational abilities. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA. 79(8):2554-2558. doi:
10.1073/pnas.79.8.2554.
Hsu, J.T., Peng, C.H., Hsieh, W.P., Lan, C.Y., and Tang, C.Y. (2011). A novel method to
identify cooperative functional modules: study of module coordination in the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle. BMC Bioinformatics. 12:281. doi: 10.1186/14712105-12-281.
Hungerbuehler, A.K., Philippsen, P., and Gladfelter, A.S. (2007). Limited functional
redundancy and oscillation of cyclins in multinucleated ashbyagossypii fungal cells.
Eukaryot. Cell. 6(3):473-486. doi: 10.1128/EC.00273-06.
Impens, F., Radoshevich, L., Cossart, P., and Ribet, D. (2014). Mapping of SUMO sites
and analysis of SUMOylation changes induced by external stimuli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 111(34):12432-12437. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1413825111.
Inoue M, and Kaneko, K. (2013). Cooperative adaptive responses in gene regulatory
networks with many degrees of freedom. PLoS Comput. Biol. 9(4): e1003001.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003001.
Ishii, K., Hirose, K., and Iino, M. (2006). Ca2+ shuttling between endoplasmic reticulum
and mitochondria underlying Ca2+ oscillations. EMBO Rep. 7(4):390-396. doi:
10.1038/sj.embor.7400620.
Ishikawa, M., Tsuchiya, D., Oyama, T., Tsunaka, Y., and Morikawa, K. (2004).
Structural basis for channelling mechanism of a fatty acid bold beta-oxidation
multienzyme complex. EMBO J. 23(14):2745-2754. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600298.
Islam, M.M., Wallin, R., Wynn, R.M., Conway, M., Fujii, H., Mobley, J.A., et al. (2007).
A novel branched-chain amino acid metabolon. Protein-protein interactions in a
49

supramolecular
complex.
10.1074/jbc.M700198200.

J.

Biol.

Chem.

282(16):11893-11903.

doi:

Ito, T., Chiba, T., Ozawa, R., Yoshida, M., Hattori, M., and Sakaki, Y. (2001). A
comprehensive two-hybrid analysis to explore the yeast protein interactome. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 98(8):4569-4574. doi: 10.1073/pnas.061034498.
Itskov, V., Hansel, D., and Tsodyks, M. (2011). Short-term facilitation may stabilize
parametric working memory trace. Front. Comp. Neurosci. 5:40. doi:
10.3389/fncom.2011.00040.
Janke, C., and Bulinski J.C. (2011). Post-translational regulation of the microtubule
cytoskeleton: mechanisms and functions. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12(12):773-786. doi:
10.1038/nrm3227.
Jennings, H.S. (1905). Behavior of Lower Organisms. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, Reprint Edition.
Jia, H., Wang, X., Anderson, J.T., and Jankowsky, E. (2012). RNA unwinding by the
Trf4/Air2/Mtr4 polyadenylation (TRAMP) complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
109(19):7292-7297. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1201085109.
Jiminez-Chirallon, J.C., Isganaitis, E., Charalambous, M., Gesta, S., Pentinat-Pelegrin, T.,
Faucette, R.R., et al. (2009). Intergenerational transmission of glucose intolerance and
obesity by in utero undernutrition in mice. 58(2):460-468. doi: 10.2337/db08-0490.
Jorgensen, K., Rasmussen, A.V., Morant, M., Nielsen, A.H., Bjarnholt, N., and
Zagrobelny, M. (2005). Metabolon formation and metabolic channeling in the
biosynthesis of plant natural products. Curr. Opin. Plant. Biol. 8(3):280-291. doi:
10.1016/j.pbi.2005.03.014.
Jovanović, S., Jovanović, A., and Crawford, M.R. (2007). M-ldh serves as a regulatory
subunit of the cytosolic substrate-channelling complex in vivo. J. Mol. Biol. 371(2):349361. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.05.081.
Jules, M., Francois, J., and Parrou, J.L. (2005). Autonomous oscillations in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae during batch cultures on trehalose. FEBS J. 272(6):1490-1500.
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04588.x.
Kaati, G., Bygren, L.O., Pembrey, M., and Sjöström, M. (2007). Transgenerational
response to nutrition, early life circumstances and longevity. Eur. J. Hum. Genet.
15(7):784-790. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201832.
Kaltenbach, H.M., and Stelling, J. (2012). Modular analysis of biological networks. Adv.
Exp. Med. Biol. 736:3-17. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-7210-1_1.
Kamimura, A., and Kobayashi, T.J. (2012). Information processing and integration with
intracellular dynamics near critical point. Front. Physiol. 3:203. doi:
10.3389/fphys.2012.00203.

50

Kanehisa, M. (2013). Chemical and genomic evolution of enzyme-catalyzed reaction
networks. FEBS Lett. 587(17):2731-2737. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.06.026.
Kashtan, N., and Alon, U. (2005). Spontaneous evolution of modularity and network
motifs.
Proc.
Natl.
Acad.
Sci.
USA.
102(39):13773-13778.
doi:
10.1073/pnas.0503610102.
Katz, E., and Privman, V. (2010). Enzyme-based logic systems for information
processing. Chem. Soc. Rev. 39(5):1835-1857. doi: 10.1039/b806038j.
Kazachenko, V.N., Astashev, M.E., and Grinevic, A.A. (2007). Multifractal analysis of
K+ channel activity. Biochemistry. 2:169-175.
Kessler, D. (1982). Plasmodial structure and motility, in Cell biology of Physarum and
Didymium, eds. H. C. Aldrich and J. W. Daniel. Australia: Academic Press. Sydney.
Khoury, G.A., Baliban, R.C., and Floudas, C.A. (2011). Proteome-wide post-translational
modification statistics: frequency analysis and curation of the swiss-prot database. Sci.
Rep. 1(90). doi:10.1038/srep00090.
Kindzelskii, A.L., Zhou, M.J., Haugland, P.R., Boxer, A.L., and Petty, R.H. (1998).
Oscillatory pericellular proteolysis and oxidant deposition during neutrophil locomotion.
Biophys. J. 74(1):90-97. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3495(98)77770-7.
Klevecz, R.R., and Murray, D.B. (2001). Genome wide oscillations in expression –
Wavelet analysis of time series data from yeast expression arrays uncovers the dynamic
architecture of phenotype. Mol. Biol. Rep. 28(2):73-82. doi: 10.1023/A:1017909012215.
Klevecz, R.R., Bolen, J., Forrest, G., and Murray, D.B. (2004). A genomewide oscillation
in transcription gates DNA replication and cell cycle. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
101(5):1200-1205. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0306490101.
Koc, E.C., and Koc, H. (2012). Regulation of mammalian mitochondrial translation by
post-translational modifications. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1819(9-10):1055-1066. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.03.003.
Kollmann, M., Løvdok, L., Bartholomé, K., Timmer J. and Sourjik V. (2005). Design
principles of a bacterial signalling network. Nature. 438(7067):504-507.
doi:10.1038/nature04228.
Korcsmáros, T., Kovács, I.A., Szalay, M.S., and Csermely, P. (2007). Molecular
chaperones: the modular evolution of cellular networks. J. Biosci. 32(3):441-446. doi:
10.1007/s12038-007-0043-y.
Kreps, J.A., Wu, Y., Hur-Song, C., Zhu, T., Wang, X., and Harper, J.F. (2002).
Transcriptomic changes for Arabidopsis in response to salt, osmotic, and cold stress.
Plant Phys. 130(4):2129-2141. doi: 10.1104/pp.008532.
Kuersten, S., Ohno, M., and Mattaj, I.W. (2001). Nucleocytoplasmic transport: Ran, beta
and beyond. Trends Cell Biol. 11(12):497-503. doi: 10.1016/S0962-8924(01)02144-4.
51

Kuzin, A.M. (1970). Structural – metabolic hypothesis in radiobiology. Moscow: Nauka.
Lacroix, V., Fernandes, C.G., and Sagot, M.F. (2006). Motif search in graphs: application
to metabolic networks. IEEE/ACM Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinform. 3(4):360-368. doi:
10.1109/TCBB.2006.55.
Lallemand, B., Erhardt, M., Heitz, T., and Legrand M. (2013). Sporopollenin biosynthetic
enzymes interact and constitute a metabolon localized to the endoplasmic reticulum of
tapetum cells. Plant. Physiol. 162(2):616-625. doi: 10.1104/pp.112.213124.
Lange, G., Mandelkow, E.M., Jagla, A., and Mandelklow, E. (1988). Tubulin oligomers
and microtubule oscillations Antagonistic role of microtubule stabilizers and
destabilizers. Eur. J. Biochem. 178(1):61-69. doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1988.tb14429.x.
Latty, T., and Beekman, M. (2011). Speed-accuracy trade-offs during foraging decisions
in the acellular slime mouldPhysarumpolycephalum. Proc. Biol. Sci. 278(1705):539-545.
doi: 10.1098/rspb.2010.1624.
Li, C., Cao, L.G., Wang, Y.L., and Baril, E.F. (1993). Further purification and
characterization of a multienzyme complex for DNA synthesis in human cells. J. Cell.
Biochem. 53(4):405-419. doi: 10.1002/jcb.240530418.
Li, L., Nørrelykke, S.F., and Cox, E.C. (2008). Persistent cell motion in the absence of
external signals: a search strategy for eukaryotic cells. PLoS One. 3(5):e2093. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0002093.
Li, Q. (2010). Advances in protein turnover analysis at the global level and biological
insights. Mass Spectrom. Rev. 29 (5):717-736. doi: 10.1002/mas.20261.
Li, Z., and Stock, J.B. (2009). Protein carboxyl methylation and the biochemistry of
memory. Biol. Chem. 390(11):1087-1096. doi: 10.1515/BC.2009.133.
Lin J., Lu, J., Feng, Y., Sun, M., and Ye, K. (2013). An RNA-binding complex involved
in ribosome biogenesis contains a protein with homology to tRNA CCA-adding enzyme.
PLoS Biol. 11(10): e1001669. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001669.
Linnaeus, C. (1749). De Peloria, Diss. Ac. Amoenitates Academicae III, Uppsala.
Liu, F., VanToai, T., Moy, L.P., Bock, G., Linford, L.D., and Quackenbush, J. (2005).
Global transcription profiling reveals comprehensive insight into hypoxic response in
Arabidopsis. Plant Phys. 137(3):1115-1129. doi: 10.1104/pp.104.055475.
Lloyd, D., Eshantha, L., Salgado, J., Turner, M.P., and Murray, D.B. (2002). Respiratory
oscillations in yeast: clock-driven mitochondrial cycles of energization. FEBS Lett.
519(1-3):41-44. doi: 10.1016/S0014-5793(02)02704-7.
Lloyd, D. and Murray, D.B. (2005). Ultradian metronome: timekeeper for orchestration
of
cellular
coherence.
Trends
Biochem.
Sci.
30(7):373-377.
doi:
10.1016/j.tibs.2005.05.005.
52

Lloyd, D., and Murray, D.B. (2006). The temporal architecture of eukaryotic growth.
FEBS Lett. 580(12):2830-2835. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.02.066.
Ludington, W.B., Wemmer, K.A., Lechtreck, K.F., Witman, G.B., and Marshall, W.F.
(2013). Avalanche-like behavior in ciliary import. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
110(10):3925-3930. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1217354110.
Lunn, E.J. (2007). Compartmentation in plant metabolism. J. Exp. Bot. 58(1):35-47. doi:
10.1093/jxb/erl134.
Luo, J., Ashikaga E., Rubin, P.P., Heimann, M.J., Hildick, K.L., Bishop, P., et al. (2013).
Receptor trafficking and the regulation of synaptic plasticity by SUMO. Neuromolecular
Medicine. 15(4):692-706. doi: 10.1007/s12017-013-8253-y.
MacDonald, M.J., Fahien, L.A., Buss, J.D. , Hasan, N.M., Fallon, M.J., Kendrick, M.A.,
et al. (2003). Citrate oscillates in liver and pancreatic beta cell mitochondria and in INS-1
insulinoma cells. J. Biol. Chem. 278(51):51894-51900. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M309038200.
Makino, D.L., Baumgärtner, M., and Conti, E. (2013). Crystal structure of an RNAbound 11-subunit eukaryotic exosome complex. Nature. 495(7439):70-75. doi:
10.1038/nature11870.
Maquat, L.E., and Gong C. (2009). Gene expression networks: competing mRNA decay
pathways in mammalian cells. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 37(Pt 6):1287-92. doi:
10.1042/BST0371287.
Marquez, S., Crespo, P., Carlini, V., Garbarino-Pico, E., Baler, R., Caputto, B.L., et al.
(2004). The metabolism of phospholipids oscillates rhythmically in cultures of fibroblasts
and is regulated by the clock protein PERIOD 1. FASEB J. 18(3):519-521. doi:
10.1096/fj.03-0417fje.
Marwan, W. (2010). Systems biology. Amoeba-inspired network design. Science.
327(5964):419-420. doi: 10.1126/science.1185570.
Masoudi-Nejad, A., Schreiber, F., and Kashani, Z.R. (2012). Building blocks of
biological networks: a review on major network motif discovery algorithms. IET Syst.
Biol. 6(5):164-174. doi: 10.1049/iet-syb.2011.0011.
Merriam, R.W. (1969). Movement of cytoplasmic proteins into nuclei induced to enlarge
and initiate DNA or RNA synthesis. J. Cell Sci. 5(2):333-349.
Mijaljica, D., Prescott, M., and Devenish, R.J. (2006). Endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi
complex: Contributions to, and turnover by, autophagy. Traffic. 7(12):1590-1595. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0854.2006.00495.x.
Milani, M., Pesce, A., Bolognesi, M., Bocedi, A., and Ascenzi, P. (2003). Substrate
channeling: Molecular bases. Biochem. Mol. Biol. Educ. 31:228-233.
doi: 10.1002/bmb.2003.494031040239.

53

Milo, R., Shen-Orr, S., Itzkovitz, S., Kashtan, N., Chklovskii, D., and Alon, U. (2002).
Network motifs: simple building blocks of complex networks. Science. 298(5594):824827. doi: 10.1126/science.298.5594.824.
Mirouze, M., and Paszkowski, J. (2011). Epigenetic contribution to stress adaptation in
plants. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 14(3):267-274. doi: 10.1016/j.pbi.2011.03.004.
Missiuro, P.V., Liu, K., Zou, L., Ross, B.C., Zhao, G., Liu, J.S., et al. (2009). Information
flow analysis of interactome networks. PLoS Comput. Biol. 5(4):e1000350.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000350.
Misteli, T. (2009). Self-organization in the genome. PNAS. 106(17):6885-6886. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0902010106.
Mitchell, C.G. (1996). Identification of a multienzyme complex of the tricarboxylic acid
cycle enzymes containing citrate synthase isoenzymes from Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Biochem. J. 313(Pt 3):769-774.
Miyaji, T., and Ohnishi, I. (2008). Physarum can solve the shortest path problem on
riemannian surface mathematically rigourously. Int. J. Pure App. Math. 47(3):353-369.
Molinier, J., Ries, G., Zipfel, C., and Hohn, B. (2006). Trasngeneration memory of stress
in plants. Nature. 442:1046-1049. doi:10.1038/nature05022.
Møller, A.C., Hauser, M.J.B., and Olsen, L.F. (1998). Oscillations in peroxidasecatalyzed reactions and their potential function in vivo. Biophys. Chem. 72(1-2):63-72.
doi: 10.1016/S0301-4622(98)00123-9.
Monge, C., Beraud, N., Kuznetsov, A.V., Rostovtseva, T., and Sackett, D. (2008).
Regulation of respiration in brain mitochondria and synaptosomes: Restrictions of ADP
diffusion in situ, roles of tubulin, and mitochondrial creatine kinase. Mol. Cell. Biochem.
318(1-2):147-165. doi: 10.1007/s11010-008-9865-7.
Monge, C., Grichine, A., Rostovtseva, T., Sackett, P., and Saks, V.A. (2009).
Compartmentation of ATP in cardiomyocytes and mitochondria. Kinetic studies and
direct measurements. Biophys. J. 96:241a. doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2009.03.024.
Mongillo, G., Barak, O., and Tsodyks, M. (2008). Synaptic theory of working memory.
Science. 319:1543-1546. doi: 10.1126/science.1150769.
Mooney, R.A., Artsimovitch, I., and Landick, R. (1998). Information processing by RNA
polymerase: recognition of regulatory signals during RNA chain elongation. J. Bacteriol.
180(13):3265-3275.
Murata, S., Yashiroda, H., and Tanaka, K. (2009). Molecular mechanisms of proteasome
assembly. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 10(2):104-115. doi: 10.1038/nrm2630.
Murray, D., Beckmann, M., and Kitano, H. (2007). Regulation of yeast oscillatory
dynamics.
Proc.
Natl.
Acad.
Sci.
USA.
104(7):2241-2246.
doi:
10.1073/pnas.0606677104.
54

Murthy, V., and Pasupathy, K. (1994). Isolation and characterization of a multienzyme
complex containing DNA replicative enzymes from mitochondria of S. cerevisiae.
Multienzyme complex from yeast mitochondria. Mol. Biol. Rep. 20(3):135-141. doi:
10.1007/BF00990545.
Muto, A., Kotera, M., Tokimatsu, T., Nakagawa, Z., Goto, S., and Kanehisa, M. (2013).
Modular architecture of metabolic pathways revealed by conserved sequences of
reactions. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 53(3):613-622. doi: 10.1021/ci3005379.
Nadeau, J.H. (2009). Transgenerational genetic effects on phenotypic variation and
disease risk. Hum. Mol. Genet. 18(R2):R202-R210. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp366.
Nakagaki, T., Yamada, H., and Toth, A. (2000). Maze-solving by an amoeboid organism.
Nature. 407:470-470.
Nakagaki, T. (2001). Smart behavior of true slime mold in a labyrinth. Res. Microbiol.
152(9):767-770. doi: 10.1016/S0923-2508(01)01259-1.
Nakagaki, T., Yamada, H., and Toth, A. (2001). Path-finding by tube morphogenesis in
an amoeboid organism. Biophys. Chem. 92:47-52.
Nakagaki, T., Kobayashi, R., Ueda, T., and Nishiura, Y. (2004a). Obtainning multiple
separate food sources: Behavioural intelligence in the Physarum plasmodium. Proc. Biol.
Sci. 271: 2305-2310. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2004.2856.
Nakagaki, T., Yamada, H., and Hara, M. (2004b). Smart network solutions in an
amoeboid organism. Biophys. Chem. 107(1):1-5. doi: 10.1016/S0301-4622(03)00189-3.
Nakagaki, T., and Guy, R.D. (2008). Intelligent behaviors of amoeboid movement based
on complex dynamics of soft matter. Soft Matter. 4:57-67. doi: 10.1039/b706317m.
Nakamura, N., Wei, J.H., and Seemann, J. (2012). Modular organization of the
mammalian Golgi apparatus. Curr. Opin. Cell. Biol. 24(4):467-474. doi:
10.1016/j.ceb.2012.05.009.
Neher, S.B., Sauer, R.T., and Baker, T.A. (2003). Distinct peptide signals in the UmuD
and UmuD′ subunits of UmuD/D′ mediate tethering and substrate processing by the
ClpXP protease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 100(23):13219-13224. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2235804100.
Neph, S., Stergachis, A.B., Reynolds, A., Sandstrom, R., Borenstein, E., and
Stamatoyannopoulos, J.A. (2012). Circuitry and dynamics of human transcription factor
regulatory networks. Cell. 150(6):1274-1286. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.04.040.
Nicolis, G., and Prigogine, I. (1977). Self-organization in nonequilibrium systems. From
dissipative structures to order through fluctuations. Wiley. New York.

55

Noble, D., Jablonka, E., Joyner, M.J., Müller, G.B., and Omholt, S.W. (2014). Evolution
evolves: physiology returns to centre stage. J. Physiol. 592(Pt 11):2237-2244. doi:
10.1113/jphysiol.2014.273151.
Novak, B., Tyson, J.J., Gyorffy, B., Csikasz-Nagy, A. (2007). Irreversible cell-cycle
transitions are due to systems-level feedback. Nat Cell Biol. 9(7):724-8.
doi:10.1038/ncb0707-724.
Nurse, P. (2008).
10.1038/454424a.

Life,

logic

and

information.

Nature.

454:424-426.

doi:

Oliva, A., Rosebrock, A., Ferrezuelo, F., Pyne, S., Chen, H., Skiena, S., et al. (2005). The
cell cycle-regulated genes of Schizosaccharomyces pombe. PLoS Biol. 3(7):e225. doi:
10.1371/journal.pbio.0030225.
Ovadi, J., and Srere, P.A. (2000). Macromolecular compartmentation and channeling. Int.
Rev. Cytol. 192:255-280.
Ozalp, V.C., Pedersen, T.R., Nielsen, L.J., and Olsen, L.F. (2010). Time-resolved
measurements of intracellular ATP in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae using a new
type
of
nanobiosensor.
J.
Biol.
Chem.
285(48):37579-37588.
doi:
10.1074/jbc.M110.155119.
Pang, C.N., Krycer, J.R., Lek, A., and Wilkins, M.R. (2008). Are protein complexes
made of cores, modules and attachments? Proteomics. 8(3):425-434. doi
:10.1002/pmic.200700801.
Papp, B., Pál, C., and Hurst, L.D. (2004). Metabolic network analysis of the causes and
evolution of enzyme dispensability in yeast. Nature. 429(6992):661-664. doi:
10.1038/nature02636.
Parker, A., and Engel, P.C. (2000). Preliminary evidence for the existence of specific
functional assemblies between enzymes of the beta-oxidation pathway and the respiratory
chain. Biochem. J. 345(Pt 3):429-435. doi: 10.1042/0264-6021:3450429.
Petrovic, A., Mosalaganti, S., Keller, J., Mattiuzzo, M., Overlack, K., Krenn, V. (2014).
Modular assembly of RWD domains on the Mis12 complex underlies outer kinetochore
organization. Mol Cell. 53(4):591-605. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.01.019.
Pecinka, A., and Mittelsten Scheid, O. (2012). Stress-induced chromatin changes: a
critical view on their heritability. Plant Cell Physiol. 53(5):801-808. doi:
10.1093/pcp/pcs044.
Pembrey, M.E., Bygren, L.O., Kaati, G., Edvinsson, S., Northstone, K., and Sjöström,
M., et al. (2006). Sex-specific, male-line transgenerational responses in humans. Eur. J.
Hum. Genet. 14(2):159-66. doi:10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201538.
Pershin, Y.V., La Fontaine, S., and Di Ventra, M. (2009). Memristive model of amoeba
learning. Phy. Rev. E. Stat. Nonlin. Soft Matter Phys. 80:021926. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevE.80.021926.
56

Pestov, D.G., and Shcherbik, N. (2012). Rapid cytoplasmic turnover of yeast ribosomes
in response to rapamycin inhibition of TOR. Mol. Cell. Biol. 32(11):2135-2144. doi:
10.1128/MCB.06763-11.
Petty, H.R., and Kindzelskii, A.L. (2001). Dissipative metabolic patterns respond during
neutrophil transmembrane signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 98(6):3145-3149. doi:
10.1073/pnas.061014298.
Pflieger, D., Bigeard, J., and Hirt, H. (2011). Isolation and characterization of plant
protein complexes by mass spectrometry. Proteomics. 11(9):1824-1833. doi:
10.1002/pmic.201000635.
Placantonakis, D.G, and Welsh, J.P. (2001). Two distinct oscillatory states determined by
the NMDA receptor in rat inferior olive. J. Physiol. 534(Pt 1):123-140. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001.t01-1-00123.x.
Postma, M., Bosgraaf, L., Loovers, H.M., and Van Haastert, P.J. (2004). Chemotaxis:
signalling modules join hands at front and tail. EMBO Rep. 5(1):35-40. doi:
10.1038/sj.embor.7400051.
Purvis, J.E., and Lahav, G. (2013). Encoding and decoding cellular information through
signaling dynamics. Cell. 152(5):945-956. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.005.
Qi, H., Blanchard, A., and Lu, T. (2013). Engineered genetic information processing
circuits. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Syst. Biol. Med. 5(3):273-287. doi: 10.1002/wsbm.1216.
Ramakrishnan, N., and Bhalla, U.S. (2008). Memory Switches in Chemical Reaction
Space. PLoS Comput. Biol. 4(7):e1000122. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000122.
Ramanujan, V.K., Biener, G., and Herman, B. (2006). Scaling behavior in mitochondrial
redox fluctuations. Biophys. J. 90:L70-L72. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.106.083501.
Ramisetty, S.R., and Washburn, M.P. (2011). Unraveling the dynamics of protein
interactions with quantitative mass spectrometry. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol.
46(3):216-228. doi: 10.3109/10409238.2011.567244.
Ravasz, E., Somera, A.L., Mongru, D.A., Oltvai, Z.N., and Barabási, A.L. (2002).
Hierarchical organization of modularity in metabolic networks. Science. 297(5586):15511555. doi: 10.1126/science.1073374.
Ravasz, E. (2009). Detecting hierarchical modularity in biological networks. Methods
Mol. Biol. 541:145-160. doi: 10.1007/978-1-59745-243-4_7.
Rengan, R., and Omann, G.M. (1999). Regulation of Oscillations in Filamentous Actin
Content in Polymorphonuclear Leukocytes Stimulated with Leukotriene B4 and PlateletActivating Factor. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 262(2):479-486. doi:
10.1006/bbrc.1999.1222.

57

Rimsky, S., and Travers, A. (2011). Pervasive regulation of nucleoid structure and
function by nucleoid-associated proteins. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 14(2):136-141. doi:
10.1016/j.mib.2011.01.003.
Rohila, J. S., Chen, M., Chen, S., Chen, J., Cerny R.L., Dardick, C., et al. (2009). Proteinprotein interactions of tandem affinity purified protein kinases from rice. PLoS One.
4(8):e6685. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006685.
Romani, S., Pinkoviezky, I., Rubin, A., and Tsodyks, M. (2013). Scaling laws of
associative
memory
retrieval.
Neural
Comput.
25:2523-2544.
doi:
10.1162/NECO_a_00499.
Roper, S.D. (2007). Signal transduction and information processing in mammalian taste
buds. Pflugers Arch. 454(5):759-776. doi: 10.1007/s00424-007-0247-x.
Rosenspire, A.J., Kindzelskii, A.L., and Petty, H. (2001). Pulsed DC electric fields couple
to natural NAD(P)H oscillations in HT-1080 fibrosarcoma cells. J. Cell. Sci. 114(Pt
8):1515-1520.
Roussel, M.R., Ivlev, A.A., and Igamberdiev, A.U. (2006). Oscillations of the internal
CO2 concentration in tobacco leaves transferred to low CO2. J. Plant Physiol.
34(9):1188-1196. doi:10.1016/j.jplph.2006.08.004.
Routtenberg, A., and Rekart, J.L. (2005). Post-translational protein modification as the
substrate for long-lasting memory. Trends Neurosci. 28(1):12-9. doi:
10.1016/j.tins.2004.11.006.
Routtenberg, A. (2008). The substrate for long-lasting memory: if not protein synthesis,
then what?. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 89(3):225-233. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2007.10.012.
Running, M.P. (2014). The role of lipid post-translational modification in plant
developmental processes. Front. Plant Sci. 5:50. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00050.
Saigusa, T., Tero, A., Nakagaki, T., and Kuramoto, Y. (2008). Amoebae anticípate
periodic events. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100(1):018101. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.01810.
Saks, V., Dzeja, P., Schlattner, U., Vendelin, M., Terzic, A., and Wallimann, T. (2006).
Cardiac system bioenergetics: metabolic basis of the Frank-Starling law. J. Physiol.
571(Pt 2):253-273. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2005.101444.
Saks, V., Monge, C., and Guzun, R. (2009). Philosophical basis and some historical
aspects of systems biology: From hegel to noble - Applications for bioenergetic research.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 10(3):1161-1192. doi: 10.3390/ijms10031161.
San Román, M., Cancela, H., and Acerenza, L. (2014). Source and regulation of flux
variability in Escherichia coli. BMC Syst. Biol. 8:67. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-8-67.
Sánchez-Armáss, S., Sennoune, S.R., Maiti, D., Ortega, F., and Martínez-Zaguila, R.
(2006). Spectral imaging microscopy demonstrates cytoplasmic pH oscillations in glial
cells. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 290(2):C524-538. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00290.2005.
58

Sasidharan, K., Tomita, M., Aon, M., Lloyd, D., and Murray, D.B. (2012). Timestructure of the yeast metabolism in vivo. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 736:359-379.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-7210-1_21.
Schägger, H. (2002). Respiratory chain supercomplexes of mitochondria and bacteria.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1555(1-3):154-159. doi: 10.1016/S0005-2728(02)00271-2.
Schibler, U. and Sassone-Corsi, P. (2002). A web of circadian pacemakers. Cell.
111(7):919-922. doi: 10.1016/S0092-8674(02)01225-4.
Schott, J., and Stoecklin, G. (2010). Networks controlling mRNA decay in the immune
system. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. RNA. 1(3):432-456. doi: 10.1002/wrna.13.
Schreiber, T. (2000). Measuring information transfer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85(2):461-464.
Schubert, V. (2014). RNA polymerase II forms transcription networks in rye and
arabidopsis nuclei and its amount increases with endopolyploidy. Cytogenet. Genome
Res. 143(1-3):69-77. doi: 10.1159/000365233.
Schulz, M.H., Pandit, K.V., Lino Cardenas, C.L., Ambalavanan, N., Kaminski, N., and
Bar-Joseph, Z. (2013). Reconstructing dynamic microRNA-regulated interaction
networks.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 110(39):15686-15691. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1303236110.
Schwarz, L.A., Hall B.J., and Patrick, G.N. (2010). Activity-dependent ubiquitination of
GluA1 mediates a distinct AMPA receptor endocytosis and sorting pathway. J. Neurosci.
30(49):16718-16729. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3686-10.2010.
Schwechheimer, C. (2004). The COP9 signalosome (CSN): an evolutionary conserved
proteolysis regulator in eukaryotic development. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1695(1-3):4554. doi:10.1016/j.bbamcr.2004.09.023.
Segura, M.P., Lilley, K.S., and Dupree, P. (2010). Proteomic complex detection using
sedimentation (ProCoDeS): screening for proteins in stable complexes and their
candidate interaction partners. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 38(4):923-927. doi:
10.1042/BST0380923.
Seisenberger, S., Andrews, S., Krueger, F., Arand, J., Walter, J., Santos, F., et al. (2012).
The dynamics of genome-wide DNA methylation reprogramming in mouse primordial
germ cells. Mol. Cell. 48(6):849-62. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.11.001.
Seong, K.H., Li, D., Shimizu, H., Nakamura, R., and Ishii, S. (2011). Inheritance of
stress-induced, ATF-2-dependent epigenetic change. Cell. 145(7):1049-1061. doi:
10.1016/j.cell.2011.05.029.
Shankaran, H., Ippolito, D.L., Chrisler, W.B., Resat, H., Bollinger, N., Opresko, L.K., et
al. (2009). Rapid and sustained nuclear–cytoplasmic ERK oscillations induced by
epidermal growth factor. Mol. Syst. Biol. 5:332. doi: 10.1038/msb.2009.90.

59

Sharma, A., Costantini, S., and Colonna, G. (2013). The protein-protein interaction
network of the human Sirtuin family. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1834(10):1998-2009. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2013.06.012.
Shaul, O., Mironov, V., Burssens, S., Van Montagu, M., and Inze, D. (1996). Two
Arabidopsis cyclin promoters mediate distinctive transcriptional oscillation in
synchronized tobacco BY-2 cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 93(10):4868-4872. doi:
10.1073/pnas.93.10.4868.
Shimizu, T.S, Tu, Y., and Berg, H.C. (2010). A modular gradient-sensing network for
chemotaxis in Escherichia coli revealed by responses to time-varying stimuli. Mol. Syst.
Biol. 6:382. doi:10.1038/msb.2010.37.
Shintani, T., and Klionsky, D.J. (2004). Autophagy in health and disease: a double-edged
sword. Science. 306(5698):990-995.
Shirakawa, T., and Gunji Y.P. (2007). Emergence of morphological order in the network
formation of Physarumpolycephalum. Biophys. Chem. 128(2-3):253-260.
Sidiropoulou, K., Lu, F.M., Fowler, M.A., Xiao, R., Phillips, C., Ozkan, E.D, et al.
(2009). Dopamine modulates an mGluR5-mediated depolarization underlying prefrontal
persistent activity. Nat. Neurosci. 12(2):190-199. doi: 10.1038/nn.2245.
Sims, R. J., and Reinberg, D. (2008). Is there a code embedded in proteins that is based
on post-translational modification?. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 9:815-820. doi:
10.1038/nrm2502.
Smrcinová, M., Sørensen, P.G., Krempasky, J., and Ballo, P. (1998). Chaotic oscillations
in a chloroplast system under constant illumination. Inter. J. Bifurcation Chaos. 8:24672470.
Sourjik, V., and Berg, H. (2002). Receptor sensitivity in bacterial chemotaxis. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 99:123-127. doi: 10.1073/pnas.011589998.
Sourjik, V., and Berg, H. (2004). Functional interactions between receptors in bacterial
chemotaxis. Nature. 428:437-441. doi: 10.1038/nature02406.
Srere, P.A. (1972). “Is there an organization of Krebs cycle enzymes in the mitochondiral
matrix?”, in Energy Metabolism and the Regulation of Metabolic Processes in
Mitochondria, eds. R.W. Hanson and W.A. Mehlman, (New York: Academic Press), 7991.
Srere, P.A. (1985). The metabolon.
doi:10.1016/0968-0004(85)90266-X.

Trends.

Biochem.

Sci.

10:109-110.

.

Stern, S., Dror, T., Stolovicki, E., Brenner, N., and Braun, E. (2007). Genome-wide
transcriptional plasticity underlies cellular adaptation to novel challenge. Mol. Syst. Biol.
3:106. doi: 10.1038/msb4100147.

60

Stock, J.B., Levit, M.N., and Wolanin, P.M. (2002). Information processing in bacterial
chemotaxis. Sci. STKE. 2002(132):pe25. doi: 10.1126/stke.2002.132.pe25.
Stock, J.B., and Zhang, S. (2013). The biochemistry of memory. Curr. Biol.
23(17):R741-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.08.011.
Storlien, L., Oakes, N.D., and Kelley, D.E. (2004). Metabolic flexibility. Proc. Nutr. Soc.
63(2):363-368.
Stuart, R.A. (2008). Supercomplex organization of the oxidative phosphorylation
enzymes in yeast mitochondria. J. Bioenerg. Biomembr. 40(5):411-417. doi:
10.1007/s10863-008-9168-4.
Sunyer, B., Diao, W., and Lubec, G. (2008). The role of post-translational modifications
for learning and memory formation. Electrophoresis. 29(12):2593-2602. doi:
10.1002/elps.200700791.
Suss K.H., Arkona, C., Manteuffel, R., and Adler, K. (1993). Calvin cycle multienzyme
complexes are bound to chloroplast thylakoid membranes of higher plants in situ. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 90(12):5514-5518. doi: 10.1073/pnas.90.12.5514.
Sutter, M., Boehringer, D., Gutmann, S., Günther, S., Prangishvili, D., Loessner, M.J., et
al. (2008). Structural basis of enzyme encapsulation into a bacterial nanocompartment.
Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 15(9): 939-947. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1473.
Swindell, W.R., Huebner, M., and Weber, A.P. (2007). Plastic and adaptive gene
expression patterns associated with temperature stress in Arabidopsis thaliana. Heredity
(Edinb). 99(2):143-150. doi: 10.1038/sj.hdy.6800975.
Takeda, T., Yun, C-S., Shintani, M., Yamane, H., and Nojiri, H. (2011). Distribution of
genes encoding nucleoid-associated protein homologs in plasmids. Int. J. Evol. Biol.
2011:685015. doi: 10.4061/2011/685015.
Takeuchi, T., Duszkiewicz, A.J., and Morris, R.G. (2014). The synaptic plasticity and
memory hypothesis: encoding, storage and persistence. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B.
Biol. Sci. 369(1633):20130288. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2013.0288.
Tamura, K., and Hara-Nishimura, I. (2014). Functional insights of nucleocytoplasmic
transport in plants. Front. Plant Sci. 5:118. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00118.
Tay, S., Hughey, J.J., Lee, T.K., Lipniacki, T., Quake, S.R., and Covert, M.W. (2010).
Single-cell NF-kappaB dynamics reveal digital activation and analogue information
processing. Nature. 466(7303):267-71. doi: 10.1038/nature09145.
Taylor, E. W., K. Wang K, Nelson, A.R., Bredemann, T.M., Fraser, K.B., Clinton, S.M.,
et al. (2014). O-GlcNAcylation of AMPA Receptor GluA2 Is Associated with a Novel
Form of Long-Term Depression at Hippocampal Synapses. The Journal of Neuroscience
34(1): 10-21. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4761-12.2014.

61

Tero, A., Takagi, S., Saigusa, T., Ito, K., Bebber, D.P., Fricker, M.D., et al. (2010). Rules
for biologically inspired adaptive network design. Science. 327:439-442. doi:
10.1126/science.1177894.
Thomson, M., and Gunawardena, J. (2009). Unlimited multistability in multisite
phosphorylation systems. Nature. 460(7252):274-277. doi: 10.1038/nature08102.
Tian, B., Nowak, D.E., and Brasier, A.R. (2005). A TNF-induced gene expression
program under oscillatory NF-κB control. BMC Genomics. 6:137. doi:10.1186/14712164-6-137.
Tonozuka, H., Wang, J., Mitsui, K., Saito, T., Hamada, and Tsurugi, K. (2001). Analysis
of the upstream regulatory region of the GTS1 gene required for its oscillatory
expression. J. Biochem. 130(5):589-595. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a003023.
Tsuda, S., Zauner, K.P., and Gunji, Y.P. (2007). Robot control with biological cells.
Biosystems. 87(2-3):215-223.
Tu, B.P., Kudlicki, A., Rowicka, M., and McKnight, S.L. (2005). Logic of the yeast
metabolic cycle: temporal compartmentalization of cellular processes. Science.
310(5751):1152-1158. doi: 10.1126/science.1120499.
Tu, Y., Shimizu, T.S., and Berg, H.C. (2008). Modeling the chemotactic response of
Escherichia coli to time-varying stimuli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 105(39):1485514860. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0807569105.
Tu, Y. (2013). Quantitative modeling of bacterial chemotaxis: signal amplification and
accurate adaptation. Annu Rev Biophys. 42:337-59. doi: 10.1146/annurev-biophys083012-130358.
Tucholski, J., Pinner, A.L., Simmons, M.S., and Meador-Woodruff, J.H. (2014).
Evolutionarily conserved pattern of AMPA receptor subunit glycosylation in mammalian
frontal cortex. PLoS One. 9(4):e94255. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094255.
Turner, B.M. (2005). Reading signals on the nucleosome with a new nomenclature for
modified histones. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 12(2):110-112. doi: 10.1038/nsmb0205-110.
Tyson, J.J. (1991). Modeling the cell division cycle: cdc2 and cyclin interactions. PNAS
88: 7328–7332. doi: 10.1073/pnas.88.16.7328.
Ueda, T., Matsumoto, K., and Kobatake, Y. (1986). Spatial and temporal organization of
intracellular adenine nucleotides and cyclic nucleotides in relation to rhythmic motility in
physarum plasmodium. Exp. Cell. Res. 162(2):486-494. doi: 10.1016/00144827(86)90352-6.
Uetz, P., Giot, L., Cagney, G., Mansfield, T.A., Judson, R.S., Knight, J.R., et al. (2000).
A comprehensive analysis of protein-protein interactions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Nature. 403(6770):623-627. doi:10.1038/35001009.

62

Van Leene, J., Stals, H., Eeckhout, D., Persiau, G., Van De Slijke, E., Van Isterdael, G.,
et al. (2007). A tandem affinity purification-based technology platform to study the cell
cycle interactome in Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol. Cell. Proteomics. 6(7):1226-1238. doi:
10.1074/mcp.M700078-MCP200.
Varanda, W.A., Liebovitch, L.S., Figueiroa, J.N., and Nogueira, R.A. (2000). Hurst
analysis applied to the study of single calcium-activated potassium channel kinetics. J.
Theor. Biol. 206(3):343-353. doi: 10.1006/jtbi.2000.2131.
Veliky, M.M., Starikovich, L.S., Klimishin, N.I., and ChaykaYa, P. (2007). Molecular
mechanisms in the integration of metabolism, ed. Lviv National University, (Lviv,
Ukraine), 229.
Verkman, A.S. (2002). Solute and macromolecule diffusion in cellular aqueous
compartments. Trends Biochem. Sci. 27(1):27-33. doi: 10.1016/S0968-0004(01)02003-5.
Vlasova-St Louis, I., and Bohjanen, P.R. (2011). Coordinate regulation of mRNA decay
networks by GU-rich elements and CELF1. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 21(4):444-451. doi:
10.1016/j.gde.2011.03.002.
Völkel, P., Le Faou, P., and Angrand, P.O. (2010). Interaction proteomics:
characterization of protein complexes using tandem affinity purification-mass
spectrometry. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 38(4):883-887. doi: 10.1042/BST0380883.
von Dassow, G., Meir, E., Munro, E.M., and Ordell, G.M. (2000). The segment polarity
network is a robust developmental module. Nature. 406:188-191. doi: 10.1038/35018085.
Wadhams, G.H., and Armitage, J.P. (2004). Making sense of it all: bacterial chemotaxis.
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 5(12):1024-1037. doi: 10.1038/nrm1524.
Waingeh, V.F., Gustafson, C.D., Kozliak, E.I., Lowe, S.L., Knull, H.R., and Thomasson,
K.A. (2006). Glycolytic enzyme interactions with yeast and skeletal muscle F-actin.
Biophys J. 90(4):1371-1384. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.105.070052.
Walhout, A.J. (2006). Unraveling transcription regulatory networks by protein-DNA and
protein-protein interaction mapping. Genome Res. 16(12):1445-1454. doi:
10.1101/gr.5321506.
Wang, J.Q., Arora A., Yang, L., Parelkar, N.K., Zhang, G., Liu, X., et al. (2005).
Phosphorylation of AMPA receptors: mechanisms and synaptic plasticity. Mol.
Neurobiol. 32(3):237-249.
Wang, Z., and Zhang, J. (2009). Abundant indispensable redundancies in cellular
metabolic networks. Genome Biol. Evol. 1:23-33. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evp002.
Waterland, R.A., Travisano, M., and Tahilianim K.G. (2007). Diet-induced
hypermethylation at agouti viable yellow is not inherited transgenerationally through the
female. FASEB J. 21(12):3380-3385. doi: 10.1096/fj.07-8229com.

63

Wawrzkiewicz, A., Pawelek, K., Borys, P., Dworakowska, B., and Grzywna, Z.J. (2012).
On the simple random-walk models of ion-channel gate dynamics reflecting long-term
memory. Eur. Biophys. J. 41(6):505-526. doi: 10.1007/s00249-012-0806-8.
Weber, J., Kayser, A., and Rinas, U. (2005). Metabolic flux analysis of Escherichia coli
in glucose-limited continuous culture. II. Dynamic response to famine and feast,
activation of the methylglyoxal pathway and oscillatory behaviour. Microbiology. 151(pt
3):707-716. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.27482-0.
Will, C.L., and Lührmann, R. (2011). Spliceosome structure and function. Cold Spring
Harb. Perspect. Biol. 3(7). doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a003707.
Willshaw, D.J., Buneman, O.P., and Longuet-Higgins, H.C. (1969). Non-holographic
associative memory. Nature. 222:960-962. doi: 10.1038/222960a0.
Willshaw, D.J, Longuet-Higgins, H.C., and Buneman, O.P. (1970). Models for the brain.
Nature. 225:177-178. doi:10.1038/225177a0.
Wilmut, I., Schnieke, A.E., McWhir, J., Kind, A.J., and Campbell, K.H. (1997). Viable
offspring derived from fetal and adult mammalian cells. Nature. 385(6619):810-3.
Wilson, D.N., and Nierhaus, K.H. (2007). The weird and wonderful world of bacterial
ribosome
regulation.
Crit.
Rev.
Biochem.
Mol.
Biol.
42(3):187-219.
doi:10.1080/10409230701360843.
Wilson, W.A., Roach, P.J., Montero, M., Baroja-Fernández, E., Muñoz F.J., and Eydallin,
G. (2010). Regulation of glycogen metabolism in yeast and bacteria. FEMS Microbiol.
Rev. 34(6):952-985. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2010.00220.x.
Wimmer, C., Platzer, S., Hillen, W., and Klotzsche, M. (2013). A novel method to
analyze nucleocytoplasmic transport in vivo by using short peptide tags. J. Mol. Biol.
425(10):1839-1845. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.02.007.
Wittmann, C., Hans, M., Van Winden, A.W., Ras, C., and Heijnen, J.J. (2005). Dynamics
of intracellular metabolites of glycolysis and TCA cycle during cell-cycle-related
oscillation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 89(7):839-847. doi:
10.1002/bit.20408.
Wuichet, K., Alexander, R.P., and Zhulin, I.B. (2007). Comparative genomic and protein
sequence analyses of a complex system controlling bacterial chemotaxis. Methods
Enzymol. 422:1-31. doi:10.1016/S0076-6879(06)22001-9.
Yeates, T.O., Tsai, Y., Tanaka, S., Sawaya, M.R., and Kerfeld, C.A. (2007). Selfassembly in the carboxysome: A viral capsid-like protein shell in bacterial cells.
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 35(Pt 3):508-511. doi: 10.1042/BST0350508.
Yeates, T.O., Kerfeld, C.A., Heinhorst, S., Cannon, G.C., and Shively, J.M. (2008).
Protein-based organelles in bacteria: Carboxysomes and related microcompartments. Nat.
Rev. Microbiol. 6(9):681-691. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro1913.

64

Yoon, J., Si, Y., Nolan, R., and Lee, K. (2007). Modular decomposition of metabolic
reaction networks based on flux analysis and pathway projection. Bioinformatics.
23(18):2433-2440. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btm374.
Ytting, C.K., Fuglsang, A.T., Hiltunen, J.K., Kastaniotis, A.J., Özalp, V.C., Nielsen, L.J.,
et al. (2012). Measurements of intracellular ATP provide new insight into the regulation
of glycolysis in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Integr. Biol. (Camb). 4(1):99-107.
doi: 10.1039/c1ib00108f.
Zetterberg, A. (1966). Protein migration between cytoplasm and cell nucleus during
interphase in mouse fibroblasts in vitro. Expl. Cell Res. 43(3), 526-536. doi:
10.1016/0014-4827(66)90023-1.
Zhang, S., Hulver, M.W., McMillan, R.P., Cline, M.A., and Gilbert, E.R. (2014). The
pivotal role of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinases in metabolic flexibility. Nutr. Metab.
(Lond). 11(1):10. doi: 10.1186/1743-7075-11-10.
Zhao, H., French, J.B., Fang, Y., and Benkovic, S.J. (2013). The purinosome, a multiprotein complex involved in the de novo biosynthesis of purines in humans. Chem.
Commun (Camb). 49(40):4444-4452. doi: 10.1039/c3cc41437j.
Zhao, R., Bodnar, M.S. and Spector, D.L. (2009). Nuclear neighborhoods and gene
expression. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 19(2):172-919. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2009.02.007.
Zhaojun, X.U., So-ichi, Y., and Kunio, T. (2004). Gts1p stabilizes oscillations in energy
metabolism by activating the transcription of TPS1 encoding trehalose-6-phosphate
synthase 1 in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biochem. J. 383(Pt 1):171-178. doi:
10.1042/BJ20040967.
Zheng, C.L., Sumizawa, T., Che, X.F., Tsuyama, S., Furukawa, T., and Haraguchi M.
(2005). Characterization of MVP and VPARP assembly into vault ribonucleoprotein
complexes.
Biochem.
Biophys.
Res.
Commun.
326(1):100-107.
doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.11.006.
Zhou, L., Cortassa, S., Wei, A.C., Aon, M.A., Winslow, R.L., O'Rourke, B. (2009).
Modeling cardiac action potential shortening driven by oxidative stress-induced
mitochondrial oscillations in guinea pig cardiomyocytes. Biophys J. 7;97(7):1843-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bpj.2009.07.029.
Zhu, L., Aono, M., Kim, S.-J., and Hara, M. (2011). Problem-sizes calability of amoebabased neurocomputer for traveling salesman problem. Proc. NOLTA. 108-11.

65

