A Mathematical Model for Lymphangiogenesis
in Normal and Diabetic Wounds

arXiv:1501.00421v1 [q-bio.TO] 2 Jan 2015

Arianna Bianchia , Kevin J. Paintera , Jonathan A. Sherratta
a

Department of Mathematics and Maxwell Institute for Mathematical Sciences,
Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, Scotland, EH14 4AS, UK

Abstract
Several studies suggest that one possible cause of impaired wound healing
is failed or insufficient lymphangiogenesis, that is the formation of new lymphatic capillaries. Although many mathematical models have been developed
to describe the formation of blood capillaries (angiogenesis) very few have
been proposed for the regeneration of the lymphatic network. Moreover, lymphangiogenesis is markedly distinct from angiogenesis, occurring at different
times and in a different manner. Here a model of five ordinary differential equations is presented to describe the formation of lymphatic capillaries
following a skin wound. The variables represent different cell densities and
growth factor concentrations, and where possible the parameters are estimated from experimental and clinical data. The system is then solved numerically and the results are compared with the available biological literature.
Finally, a parameter sensitivity analysis of the model is taken as a starting
point for suggesting new therapeutic approaches targeting the enhancement
of lymphangiogenesis in diabetic wounds. The work provides a deeper understanding of the phenomenon in question, clarifying the main factors involved.
In particular, the balance between TGF-β and VEGF levels, rather than their
absolute values, is identified as crucial to effective lymphangiogenesis. In addition, the results indicate lowering the macrophage-mediated activation of
TGF-β and increasing the basal lymphatic endothelial cell growth rate, inter alia, as potential treatments. It is hoped the findings of this paper may
be considered in the development of future experiments investigating novel
lymphangiogenic therapies.
Email address: ab584@hw.ac.uk (Arianna Bianchi)

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

January 5, 2015

Keywords:
mathematical model, lymphangiogenesis, wound healing
1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
Much effort has been spent in order to better understand and potentially treat the impairment of wound healing in diabetic patients. In this
regard, one phenomenon that has recently gained attention from biologists
is lymphangiogenesis; that is, the formation or reformation of lymphatic vasculature [1, 2, 3, 4]. Insufficient lyphangiogenesis, as observed in diabetic
subjects, appears to correlate with failed or delayed wound healing.
Impaired wound healing is a major health problem worldwide and in
recent decades has attracted the attention of both biologists and mathematicians. In many cases unresolved wound healing correlates with prolonged
infection, which negatively affects the patient’s quality of life, causing pain
and impairing their physical abilities. Particularly serious infection may even
require the amputation of an affected limb [5]. Furthermore, impaired wound
healing also constitutes a major problem for health care systems, accounting
for approximately 3% of all health service expenses in the UK and 20 billion
dollars annually in the USA [6, 7, 8, 9]. Several systemic factors contribute to
the delay or complete failure of the wound healing process [10, 11, 12, 13, 14].
In particular, diabetic patients exhibit a slower and sometimes insufficient
response to infection after injury. Such a delay often results in a chronic
wound; that is, the wound fails to progress through the normal stages of
healing and usually remains at the inflammation stage [15, 16].
Interest in lymphangiogenesis in reference to wound healing is very recent:
for example in the Singer & Clark 1999 review [17] the process is not mentioned. Nevertheless, lymphatic vessels have recently become regarded as a
crucial factor in wound healing [18, 19]. They mediate the immune response
and maintain the right pressure in the tissues [20], thus playing a very important role in inflammation and contributing to the healing of a wound [21, 22].
Moreover, failed restoration of a lymphatic network (observed, for example,
in diabetic patients) is now thought to be a major cause of impairment to
wound healing [10, 23, 24].
Mathematical modelling has proven a useful tool in understanding the
mechanisms behind numerous biological processes. It is therefore of interest,
2

and potentially great utility, to build a model describing lymphangiogenesis
in wound healing, considering both the normal and pathological (diabetic)
cases.
1.2. Biology
Wound healing is a very complex process involving a number of entwined
events, which partially overlap in time and influence one another. For simplicity and educational purposes, it is often divided into four different phases:
hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation and remodeling. Here the key events
in each of the phases are summarised; for further details, see for instance
[6, 25, 26, 17, 27]). A few minutes after injury, the contact between blood
and the extracellular matrix (ECM) causes a biochemical reaction that leads
to the formation of a blood clot. This “crust” has the double function of
stopping the bleeding (hemostasis) and providing a “scaffold” for other cells
involved in the process to be described below. Concurrently, chemical regulators (such as Transforming Growth Factor β, or TGF-β) are released,
which attract cells such as neutrophils and monocytes to the wound site.
These cells clean the wound of debris and neutralise any infectious agents
that have invaded the tissue. This stage is called inflammation; in a normal wound inflammation begins a couple of hours after wounding and lasts
a few weeks. Monocytes metamorphose into macrophages, which complete
the removal of the pathogens and also secrete some proteins (like Vascular
Endothelial Growth Factor, or VEGF). This leads to the next stage: the
proliferation or reepithelialisation phase. At this point VEGF and other
substances stimulate the growth and aggregation of the surrounding cells,
restoring the different tissue functions. The clot is slowly substituted by a
“temporary skin” called granulation tissue and the interrupted blood and
lymphatic capillary networks are restored in processes named (blood) angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis, respectively. After a lengthy period the
granulation tissue is replaced by normal skin; this happens during the final,
long phase of remodeling, which can take up to one or two years.
Although wound healing has been studied extensively and the main underlying mechanisms are well understood, little is known about how lymphangiogenesis takes place. Far more biological (and mathematical) literature has been produced about its sibling process, blood angiogenesis; it
was not until the 1990s that lymphangiogenesis received significant attention
from researchers [28, 29, 30]. This discrepancy was mainly due to the previous lack of markers and information on the growth factors involved in the
3

lymphangiogenesis process; such a dearth of biochemical tools impeded a detailed and quantifiable study of lymphatic dynamics [30, 21]. For biological
reviews about lymphangiogenesis see [3, 31, 4] and for particularly significant
biological research papers see [32, 33, 34].
Naively, lymphatic vessels may appear “interchangeable” with their blood
equivalents from a modelling perspective. However, it is stressed that the
two vasculatures are quite different; for biological papers comparing lymphangiogenesis with (blood) angiogenesis see [28, 35, 36]. First of all, the
capillary structure is completely distinct: while blood vessel walls are relatively thick, surrounded by smooth muscles which pump the blood around
the body, lymphatic capillaries are made of a single layer of endothelial cells
known as lymphatic endothelial cells (LEC) [31]. Moreover, the formation
of new lymphatic capillaries, or the restoration of preexisting ones, is very
different from blood angiogenesis. While growing blood capillaries are known
to sprout from existing interrupted ones, several studies suggest that lymphangiogenesis occurs in a different way [29, 37]. For instance, in [34] it
is observed that LECs migrate as single cells in the direction of interstitial
flow and after sufficient numbers have congregated in the wound region, they
organise into vessels (see Figure 1).
We are therefore facing a new process whose mathematical description
cannot be drawn from any previous model for blood angiogenesis. In the
following section more details are given about the lymphangiogenesis process
and a mathematical model is proposed.
1.3. Outline
Clearly, successful lymphangiogenesis is an essential element in the wound
healing process. Yet, as a novel and developing area of attention, its mechanistic basis, relation to other components of wound healing and impairment
during diabetes remain unclear. With the aim of furthering our understanding of lymphangiogenesis, in this paper a mathematical model is developed
to describe this process.
This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 a brief review of mathematical modelling of wound healing and lymphangiogenesis is given, followed
by a detailed description of how the terms in our model were chosen. At the
end of the section, a list of the model parameters and initial conditions is
provided (a detailed description of parameter estimation can be found in
Appendix A). In Section 3 a typical solution of the model is shown and

4

Figure 1: The photo is taken from [32, Figure 2] and shows lymphatic channels formation in the mouse tail. Note that at day 10 (a) fluid channeling
is not observed, but at day 25 (b) discrete channels are present and at day
60 (c) a hexagonal lymphatic network is nearly complete. Notice also that
lymph and interstitial fluid flows from left (tail tip) to right (tail base): this is
in contrast to what happens during blood angiogenesis, which occurs equally
from both sides of the implanted tissue equivalent. In [32] the authors use a
new model of skin regeneration consisting of a collagen implant in a mouse
tail (whose location is indicated by the dashed lines in the picture). The aim
of the experiment is mainly to characterise the process of lymphatic regeneration. Lymph fluid is detected (green in the photograph) and in [32] it is
shown that LECs follow this fluid. Therefore, this photo can be seen as the
migration of LECs into the wound. (Bar=1mm)
compared with real biological datasets. Furthermore, the diabetic case is introduced and modelled by changing specific parameters. The simulations for
normal and diabetic cases are then run together and compared with available data. Finally, a steady state analysis (detailed in Appendix B) and
parameter sensitivity analysis of the model are performed. In Section 4 three
existing experimental treatments aimed at enhancing lymphangiogenesis are
presented and simulated; then, potential therapeutic targets are identified
based on observations from the parameter sensitivity analysis. Finally, Section 5 briefly summarises the main results of the work and possible future
extensions of the present model are mentioned.

5

2. Modelling
2.1. Brief review of existing models
Being of such a complicated nature and evident medical interest, wound
healing has been the subject of mathematical modelling for decades; see for
instance [38, 39] for the first models in the 1990s, [40] for a 2002 review and
[41] for a 2010 review. A variety of mathematical formalisms have been involved in wound models: from classical PDEs [42, 43, 38], often derived from
bio-mechanical considerations [44, 45], to stochastic models [46], to discrete
models [47]. Some authors have used moving boundary methods to study
the movement of the wound edge during healing [48], and attempts have
been made to understand more specific aspects of the healing process, for
example macrophage dynamics in diabetic wounds [49] and the resolution of
the inflammatory phase [50]. One aspect of wound healing that has received
considerable attention from mathematicians is (blood) angiogenesis (see, for
instance, [51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58]). A comprehensive review of mathematical models for vascular network formation can be found in Scianna et
al’s 2013 review [59]. Little work has been done with regards to modelling
lymphangiogenesis and, indeed, [59] cites only a limited number of mathematical works concerning this topic. Of these a representative sample is
given by [60, 61] which deal with tumor lymphangiogenesis and the collagen
pre-patterning caused by interstitial fluid flow, respectively. More specifically, [61] uses the physical theory of rubber materials to develop a model
explaining the morphology of the lymphatic network in collagen gels, following the experimental observations of [32]. This is the only existent model for
lymphangiogenesis in wound healing known to the authors. A further brief
review of lymphatic modelling can be found in [62], where the phenomenon
is approached from an engineering perspective.
In summary, a small number of papers have considered modelling the
lymphangiogenesis process in the context of tumors; the modelling of lymphangiogenesis in wound healing is confined to [61], where two fourth order
PDEs are used to describe the evolution of the collagen volume fraction and
of the proton concentration in a collagen implant. That work does not address the healing process as a whole which is the aim of the present paper.
Here a simple model (comprised of a system of ODEs) is presented that
provides an effective description of the main dynamics observed in wound
healing lymphangiogenesis.

6

2.2. Model development
In the present model five time-dependent variables are considered: two
chemical concentrations (TGF-β and VEGF) and three cell densities (macrophages, LECs and lymphatic capillaries). Their interactions are described in
Figure 2 and the formulation of the ODE model is based on the following set
of processes (the full system is given by the set of equations (10)). The initial (or pre-wounding) state is altered when latent TGF-β is activated (thus
becoming active TGF-β, denoted in the sequel by T ) by macrophages and
enzymes released immediately after wounding. This active form of TGFβ attracts more macrophages (M ) to the wound site, through chemotaxis.
Macrophages in turn produce VEGF (V ), a growth factor that chemoattracts
and stimulates the proliferation of LECs (L). Note that LEC growth is also
inhibited by TGF-β. In the final stage of the process, LECs cluster in a
network structure, transdifferentiating into lymphatic capillaries (C). This
latter process happens spontaneously, although it is enhanced by VEGF.

In the following the time-dependent variables introduced above are discussed in detail. In particular, the derivation of the corresponding evolution
equation is individually presented for each variable.
TGF-β
This chemical is normally stored in an inactive or latent form in the
body; however, only active TGF-β plays an important role in wound healing
lymphangiogenesis, and therefore we will only consider the dynamics of the
active chemical. Effectively, the active TGF-β protein is bound to a molecule
called Latency Associated Peptide, forming the so-called Small Latent TGFβ Complex. This in turn is linked to another protein called Latent TGF-β
Binding Protein, overall forming the Large Latent TGF-β Complex [63].
Hence, the two “peptide shells” must be removed before the organism can
use the TGF-β.
Another feature of this growth factor is that it exists in at least three
isoforms (TGF-β1, 2 and 3) which play different roles at different stages of
wound healing [64]. The isoform of primary interest in our application is
TGF-β1.
The differential equation describing (active) TGF-β concentration has the
following form:
7

Latent
TGF-β

Active
TGF-β

VEGF

Macrophages

LECs

Capillaries

Figure 2: A schematic representation of the model dynamics. The five timedependent variables correspond to the levels of the factors in each of the
rectangular boxes; the quantity in the circle (latent TGF-β) is assumed constant. Concerning the arrows, dashed red denotes chemotactic attraction,
solid green denotes activation/transdifferentiation, dotted blue denotes
production/enhancement and dash-dotted orange denotes inhibition.
change in
TGF-β
concentration

=

activation by
enzymes and
macrophages

×

latent TGF-β

−

decay.

A review of the activation process is presented in [63] where it is reported
that TGF-β can be activated in two ways. The first is enzyme-mediated activation whereby enzymes, mainly plasmin, release the Large Latent TGF-β
Complex from the ECM and then the Latency Associated Peptide binds to
surface receptors. The second form of activation is receptor-mediated activation. Here cells bind the Latency Associated Peptide and later deliver active
TGF-β to their own TGF-β-Receptors or to the receptors of another cell.
This behaviour is often observed in activated macrophages [65, 66].
Thus both enzyme concentration and macrophage density M are influential in the activation process and thereby appear in the activation term,
8

ap p0 e−ap TL t + aM M . Here ap and aM denote the activation rates by enzymes and by macrophages, respectively. TL denotes the (constant) amount
of available latent TGF-β (more details in the next paragraph). In addition,
the enzyme/plasmin concentration is assumed to decrease exponentially from
the initial value p0 , as in [67]; this reproduces quite well the enzyme dynamics
in real wounds [68].
It is widely accepted that a variety of cells have the potential to secrete
latent TGF-β, including platelets, keratinocytes, macrophages, lymphocytes
and fibroblasts [69, 70, 63]. Moreover, this latent complex is stored in the
ECM in order to be constantly available to the surrounding cells [71]. This
fact is manifested in a constant production rate TL in our model equation.
Furthermore, it is well known that macrophages secrete latent TGF-β [70],
we assume that this occurs at a constant rate r1 . Together these considerations imply that the amount of available latent TGF-β in the wound will be
modelled by TL + r1 M . Finally, TGF-β naturally decays at rate d1 , so the
term −d1 T will be included in the differential equation. Therefore, the full
equation for active TGF-β is
dT
= [ap p0 exp(−ap TL t) + aM M ] · [TL + r1 M ] − d1 T .
(1)
dt
Macrophages
These are a type of white blood cell that removes debris, pathogenic
microorganisms and cancer cells through phagocytosis. They are produced
by the differentiation of monocytes and are found in most of the tissues,
patrolling for potential pathogens.
Perversely, in addition to enhancing inflammation and stimulating the
immune system, macrophages can also contribute to decreased immune reactions. For this reason they are classified either as M1 (or inflammatory)
macrophages if they encourage inflammation, or as M2 (or repair ) macrophages if they decrease inflammation and encourage tissue repair [72]. Henceforth we restrict attention to inflammatory macrophages, since they are the
most involved in lymphangiogenesis-related processes. A useful review of
the multifaceted and versatile role of macrophages in wound healing can be
found in [73].
The following scheme will be considered for macrophage dynamics:
change in
macrophage
density

=

constant
source

+

chemotaxis
by TGF-β

9

+

logistic
growth

−

removal
and metamorphoses.

The various terms appearing in the right-hand side of this equation are discussed below.
The number of inflammatory macrophages increases due to their migration into the wound, in part due to movement of existing inflammatory
macrophages from the surrounding tissue, as well as by chemotaxis of monocytes up gradients of TGF-β [74], a fraction α of which differentiate into
inflammatory macrophages [75]. The former is modelled by assuming a constant source sM dictated by the non-zero level of inflammatory macrophages
[76], and the latter by the term αh1 (T ) = αb1 T 2 /(b2 + T 4 ). Here h1 (T ) is
the “chemotactic function”, whose form is discussed in detail in Appendix
A. Only a (small) percentage β of macrophages undergo mitosis [77]; we
thus assume the logistic growth term βr2 M (1 − M/k1 ) where r2 denotes the
macrophage growth rate and k1 the carrying capacity of the wound. Notice that here only M appears over the carrying capacity and the other cell
types L and C are omitted. However, since the logistic term is small overall,
adding L and C here would just increase the numerical complexity of the
system without adding any significant contribution to the dynamics of the
problem. This is reflected in the parameter sensitivity analysis provided later
in the paper, and simulations (not shown) including all populations showed
no appreciable difference. Finally, inflammatory macrophages can die, metamorphose into repair macrophages or be washed away by the lymph flow.
This is embodied in the removal term −(d2 + ρC)M , where d2 denotes the
constant death rate. Here metamorphosis and removal are considered to be
linearly proportional to the capillary density C through the coefficient ρ: in
particular, capillary formation is an index of progression through the healing
process and, to reflect the decreased requirement for inflammatory macrophages as wounding proceeds, we assume the metamorphosis/removal rate
increases with the size of C. Combining these observations one derives the
macrophage equation


M
b1 T 2
dM
= sM + α
+ βr2 M 1 −
− (d2 + ρC)M .
(2)
dt
b2 + T 4
k1
VEGF
This is a signal protein whose main function is to induce the formation of vascular networks by stimulating proliferation, migration and selforganisation of cells after binding to specific receptors on their surface. There
are many kinds of VEGF: while VEGF-A and VEGF-B are involved mainly in
10

blood angiogenesis, VEGF-C and VEGF-D are the most important biochemical mediators of lymphangiogenesis via the receptor VEGFR3 (although
VEGF-C can also stimulate angiogenesis via VEGFR2). For a comprehensive
description of the growth factors involved in lymphangiogenesis see [78, 79].
Henceforth “VEGF” refers to VEGF-C (and, to a lesser extent, VEGF-D),
unless otherwise stated. For VEGF we assume the following dynamics:
change in
VEGF concentration

=

constant
source

+

production by
macrophages

−

decay

−

use by
LECs.

Since the normal VEGF level in the skin is nonzero [80, 81], it is assumed
there is a constant source sV of this growth factor from the surrounding
tissues. VEGF is produced by several cells, but macrophages are considered
to be one of its main sources in the context of wound healing [82, 83]. It is
therefore natural to add the production term +r3 M to the VEGF equation,
where r3 is the production rate of the chemical by macrophages. On the
other hand, the VEGF level is reduced by natural decay at constant rate d3 ,
taken into account by the term −d3 V . In addition VEGF is internalised by
cells: effectively, LECs use VEGF to divide and form capillaries [84, 85]; it is
assumed this process occurs at a constant rate γ, leading to the term −γV L.
Thus, in this model the equation for VEGF dynamics is
dV
= sV + r3 M − d3 V − γV L .
dt

(3)

LECs
As discussed above, lymphatic vessel walls are made of (lymphatic) endothelial cells. The equation describing the presence of LECs in the wound
consists of the following terms:

change in
LEC
density

=

growth,
upregulated by
VEGF and
downregulated
by TGF-β

+

inflow and
chemotaxis
by VEGF

−

crowding
effect and
apoptosis

−

transdifferentiation into
capillaries.

LEC growth is upregulated by VEGF [86, 87, 85] and downregulated by
TGF-β [88, 89]. The former observation is described mathematically by
augmenting the normal/basal constant growth rate c1 with V in an increasing
11

saturating manner through the parameters c2 and c3 . To account for the
latter, the growth term is multiplied by a decreasing function of T . Explicitly,
the whole proliferation term is



1
V
L
(4)
c1 +
c2 + c3 V
1 + c4 T
where c4 takes into account the “intensity” of the TGF-β inhibition on LEC
growth.
It is assumed that LECs are brought into the wound by lymph flow at a
constant rate sL and are chemoattracted by VEGF [86, 4]. Considering
a chemotactic function h2 (V ) of the same form as that used for TGF-βmediated chemotaxis (see Appendix A), these phenomena are captured by
the terms
b3 V 2
.
sL + h2 (V ) = sL +
b4 + V 4
Since both of these movements originate from the interrupted lymphatic
vasculature at the edges of the wound, this flow will tend to decrease as the
lymphatic network is restored. Hence, supposing a linear correlation between
the term above and the lymphatic regeneration, the former is multiplied by
the piecewise linear function f (C) defined by

1 − CC∗ if C < C ∗
.
(5)
f (C) =
0
if C ≥ C ∗
Here C ∗ is a capillary density threshold value above which the lymphatic
network is functional and uninterrupted and LEC flow stops. Hence the final
term for LEC inflow and chemotaxis is


b3 V 2
sL +
f (C) .
(6)
b4 + V 4
LEC growth is limited by over-crowding of the wound space, a fact that is
taken into account by the negative term −L(M + L + C)/k2 where k2 relates
to the carrying capacity. Finally, individual or small clusters of LECs migrate
into the wound and later form multicellular groups that slowly connect to one
another, organising into vessel structures [32, 34]. Here it is assumed that
when LECs are sufficiently populous (that is, their density becomes larger
than a threshold value L∗ ) they self-organise into capillaries at a rate which
depends linearly on VEGF concentration via the term δ2 V . In particular,
12

endothelial cells tend to form network structures spontaneously (at a constant
rate δ1 , say) but the rate is increased by the presence of VEGF [90]. These
observations result in the transdifferentiation term −σ(L, C) · (δ1 + δ2 V )L
where σ(L, C) is the step function

1 if L + C ≥ L∗
σ(L, C) =
.
(7)
0 if L + C < L∗
Note that σ depends both on L and C: this is justified by the observation
that the self-organisation process begins when L reaches the threshold L∗
and then continues as LECs start forming the first capillaries. Therefore the
complete LEC equation is





V
1
b3 V 2
dL
=
c1 +
L + sL +
f (C)
dt
c2 + c3 V
1 + c4 T
b4 + V 4
M +L+C
L − σ(L, C) · (δ1 + δ2 V )L.
(8)
−
k2
Lymphatic capillaries
We assume that the lymphatic capillaries form simply from the selforganisation of LECs into a network structure. Thus the capillary formation
term is just the transdifferentiation term from the LEC equation above and
the dynamics of C is modelled by
dC
= σ(L, C) · (δ1 + δ2 V )L .
dt
The full system of equations is therefore given by

13

(9)

dT
dt

= [ap p0 exp(−ap TL t) + aM M ] · [TL + r1 M ] − d1 T
|
{z
} | {z } |{z}
latent TGF-β

activation by
enzymes & MΦs

dM
dt



M
b1 T 2
+ βr2 M 1 −
=
sM + α
− (d2 + ρC)M
|{z}
{z
}
|
b2 + T 4
k1
{z
}
|
{z
}
|
constant
removal and
source

dV
dt

=

sV +
|{z}

constant
source

dL
=
dt

chemotaxis
by TGF-β

r3 M
|{z}

production
by MΦs

logistic growth

− d3 V −
|{z}
decay

use by LECs






b3 V 2
V
1
c1 +
L + sL +
f (C) (10)
c2 + c3 V
1 + c4 T
b4 + V 4
{z
} |
{z
}
|
−

inflow and
chemotaxis by VEGF

M +L+C
L − σ(L, C) · (δ1 + δ2 V )L
|
{z
}
k2
|
{z
}
transdifferentiation
crowding effect
and apoptosis

=

metamorphoses

γV L
| {z }

growth upregulated by VEGF
and downregulated by TGF-β

dC
dt

decay

into capillaries

σ(L, C) · (δ1 + δ2 V )L
|
{z
}

transdifferentiation of LECs

where f (C) and σ(L, C) are defined in (5) and (7), respectively.
2.3. Parameters and initial conditions
Parameters
Table 1 gives a full list of parameter values, their units and the sources
used for their estimation in the normal (non-diabetic) case. It is remarked
that great care was put into assessing the parameter values, and of the 31
parameters listed in the table, 25 have been estimated from biological data.
A detailed description of the estimation of each parameter can be found in
Appendix A.
Initial conditions
In the present model, the initial time-point t = 0 corresponds to the
release of enzymes by platelets within the first hour after wounding [68, 17].
14

parameter
ap
p0
aM
TL
r1
d1
sM
α
b1
b2
β
r2
k1
d2
ρ
sV
r3
d3
γ
c1
c2
c3
c4
sL
b3
b4
C∗
k2
L∗
δ1
δ2

value
2.9 × 10−2
2.5 × 105
0.45
18
3 × 10−5
5 × 102
5.42 × 102
0.5
8 × 108
8.1 × 109
5 × 10−3
1.22
6 × 105
0.2
10−5
1.9
1.9 × 10−3
11
1.4 × 10−3
0.42
42
4.1
0.24
5 × 102
107
8.1 × 109
104
4.71 × 105
104
5 × 10−2
10−3

units

mm3 pg−1 day−1
pg mm−3
mm3 cells−1 day−1
pg mm−3
pg cells−1 day−1
day−1
cells mm−3 day−1
1
cells pg2 (mm3 )−3 day−1
(pg mm−3 )4
1
day−1
mm3 cells−1
day−1
day−1 cells−1
cells day−1
pg cells−1 day−1
day−1
3
mm cells−1 day−1
day−1
day
pg day mm−3
mm3 pg−1
cells day−1
cells pg2 (mm3 )−3 day−1
(pg mm−3 )4
cells mm−3
cells day mm−3
cells mm−3
day−1
3
mm pg−1 day−1

source
[91]
no data found
[65, 66]
([92])
[70]
[93]
([76])
[49]
([94])
[74, 95]
[77]
[96]
[96]
[97]
[34]
([80, 81])
([82, 98])
[99]
[100]
[101]
[87]
[87]
[88]
no data found
no data found
estimated ≈ b2
[34]
[101]
[34]
no data found
no data found

Table 1: A list of all the parameters appearing in the model equations (details of the estimation are provided in Appendix A). Each one is supplied
with its estimated value, units and source used (when possible) to assess it.
References in brackets mean that although the parameter was not directly
estimated from a dataset, its calculated value was compared with the biological literature; the caption “no data found” signifies that no suitable data
were found to estimate the parameter. Concerning the VEGF value corresponding to maximum LEC chemotaxis b4 , it was assumed that its value is
similar to its TGF-β correspondent b15
2 ; this choice was dictated by the lack
of relevant/applicable biological data, to the authors’ knowledge.

The initial amounts of active TGF-β, macrophages and VEGF are taken to
be their equilibrium values, estimated from experimental data as shown in
Table 2. It is assumed that there are no endothelial cells or capillaries at
t = 0.
init.value
T (0)
M (0)
V (0)
L(0)
C(0)

value
30
1875
0.5
0
0

units
pg/mm3
cells/mm3
pg/mm3
cells/mm3
cells/mm3

source
[95]
[76]
[80, 81]
assumption
assumption

Table 2: Values of the model variables at t = 0.

3. Results and analysis
We now present a typical solution of the system (10) and compare it with
biological data. The system is solved numerically with the MatLab standard
ODE solver ode45 with relative tolerance 10−6 and absolute tolerance 10−9
over a time interval of 100 days. It is remarked that the present model chiefly
addresses inflammation and the early proliferation stage of the wound healing
process. In healthy subjects the inflammatory phase starts a few hours after
injury and lasts approximately 1 or 2 weeks, but it is prolonged in diabetic
patients. Moreover, lymphangiogenesis occurs between 25 and 60 days after
wounding, much later than blood angiogenesis which is observed between
day 7 and day 17 [29, 34]. Thus, the equations are expected to realistically
describe the phenomenon for about the first 100 days post-wounding.
The TGF-β level is expected to display a rapid spike in the first day
post injury before returning to its equilibrium value [95]. In Figure 3 the
simulation output is compared with a biological dataset. Both demonstrate
the expected initial spike, but in the data a second peak is visible around day
5, reported also in [94]. We recall that TGF-β exists in at least three known
isoforms: TGF-β1, TGF-β2 and TGF-β3; the biological data set concerns all
kinds of TGF-β involved in other wound healing processes, such as collagen
deposition, which are not modelled here (the time dynamics of the different
TGF-β isoforms can be found in [102]). Nevertheless, the overall predicted
trend of TGF-β concentration in the wound matches the biological reality
fairly well.
16

Figure 3: A comparison of the simulation output for the time course of TGFβ concentration with data from [95, Figure 2], showing the time course of
active TGF-β generation during wound repair in rats.
Macrophage levels are observed to reach a peak approximately 5 days
after injury before returning to their equilibrium level [94]. Again the model
prediction is consistent with the biological literature, as can be seen in Figure 4.

Figure 4: A comparison between model and experimental data for the time
course of macrophage density. Experimental data taken from [94, Figure
3c]: note that the time-course comparison here is against the black bars,
representing macrophage numbers in normal (wild-type) mice.
VEGF is also reported to reach its maximum concentration 5 days after
wounding [98]. This is unsurprising given the above macrophage dynamics
and the fact that macrophages are understood to be primarily responsible
for the production of the protein. Once again there is a strong correlation
17

between the results of the theoretical model and experimental observations,
as shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5: A comparison of the simulation output for the time course of VEGF
concentration with data from [98, Figure 2], where VEGF was measured in
rat wound fluid (note that the units on the vertical axis are pg/mL, where
1000 pg/mL = 1 pg/mm3 ).
LEC levels are expected to increase immediately after wounding but only
later do the LECs self-organise into capillaries, around day 25 [34]. This
is reflected in the simulation shown in Figure 6. Here LECs proliferate in
the wound space until reaching the threshold level L∗ = 104 around day
20. They then start agglomerating in capillary structures, commencing the
lymphangiogenesis process proper.
3.1. Modelling the diabetic case
In order to simulate the diabetic case, some parameter values are changed
as described in the following. Unfortunately, it is difficult to obtain precise
quantitative assessment of the appropriate changes, and therefore the values
chosen here only have a qualitative significance.
Several studies report that the TGF-β level is significantly lower in diabetic wounds compared with controls. This seems to be caused by impaired
TGF-β activation both by platelets and macrophages and by reduced production of TGF-β by macrophages [103, 104, 102]. These features of the
diabetic case are modelled by applying the following modifications to the

18

Figure 6: Simulation output for the time course of LEC density, lymphatic
capillary density and their sum. Note that the sum density has also been
plotted the sum, since LEC and capillary cells are difficult to differentiate
and any cell counts are likely to reflect the total density of these two cell
types.
parameters:
1
< anorm
adiab
= anorm
p
p
2 p

1 norm
adiab
< anorm
M = aM
M
2

,

.

Furthermore, in diabetic wounds the macrophage density is higher than normal. In particular, the inflammatory macrophage phenotype persists through
several days after injury, showing an impaired transition to the repair phenotype [104]. In addition, macrophage functions (such as phagocytosis and
migration) are impaired in the diabetic case [105, 106]. These differences from
the normal case are reflected in the following choice of parameter changes:
αdiab = 0.8 > αnorm ,
ddiab
=
2

1 norm
d
2 2

< dnorm
,
2

bdiab
=
1

3 norm
b
4 1

< bnorm
,
1

r3diab =

1 norm
r
2 3

< r3norm .

Finally, it is reported that endothelial cell proliferation is markedly re19

duced in diabetic wounds when compared with the normal case [107, 108, 109]
(a detailed discussion of endothelial dysfunction in diabetes can be found in
[110]). This phenomenon is reflected in the model by reducing the basal
proliferation rate of endothelial cells:
1
< cnorm
.
cdiab
= cnorm
1
1
2 1
3.2. Comparison of results in the normal and diabetic cases
Figures 7-10 show numerical simulations of the model comparing the timecourse of the five model variables in the normal (blue solid line) and diabetic
(red dashed line) case.
TGF-β
The level of TGF-β recorded in diabetic wounds is lower than in the
normal case, at least in the first 20 days after injury [103, 104, 102]. Model
simulations are consistent with this (Figure 7).

Figure 7: Time course of TGF-β concentration in normal and diabetic
wounds as predicted by the model and as found empirically in [102, Figures 3G and 3H], where the authors study molecular dynamics during oral
wound healing in normal (blue lines) and diabetic (red lines) mice.

20

Macrophage
Experiments show that the density of macrophages in diabetic wounds is
higher than in the normal case and they persist for longer in the wound site
[104, 73, 106]. Model simulations match these observations (Figure 8).

Figure 8: Time course of macrophage density in the normal and diabetic
cases. We compare the model prediction with [104, Figure 1B]. In the experimental results, the relative height of shaded to solid white bars indicates
the relative macrophage density in diabetic/non-diabetic wounds in mice
(assessed via Ly6C expression, a marker for the macrophage lineage).

VEGF
The VEGF level during wound healing is lower in diabetic patients [103,
104]. In fact, as described below, a key target for the design of new therapies
has been increasing VEGF levels. The simulation output and a biological
dataset are compared in Figure 9.
LECs & Capillaries
In diabetic patients, lymphatic capillary formation is delayed and insufficient [10, 23, 24]. The model simulations are consistent with this (Figure
10).
3.3. Analysis of the model
In this section the steady states of the system are identified and a sensitivity analysis of the model parameters is performed.

21

Figure 9: Time course of VEGF in normal and diabetic case wounds. Compare the simulation with the data reported in [103, Figure 2G], representing VEGF presence in control (white bars) and diabetic (black bars) rats.
In fact, [103] investigates the connection between a defect in resolution of
inflammation and the impairment of TGF-β signaling, resulting in delayed
wound healing in diabetic female rats. The abbreviations in the legend stand
for: C, control; D, diabetic; +E2, diabetic-treated with estrogen; TNFR1,
diabetic treated with the TNF receptor antagonist PEG-sTNF-RI; VEGF,
vascular endothelial growth factor.
3.3.1. Steady States
For the parameter set studied, at t = 0 there are no LECs in the wound,
but subsequently they increase towards a positive value of approximately
2 × 105 cells/mm3 . However, when they reach the “threshold” density L∗ =
104 cells/mm3 , the system steady states change and L starts to decrease
towards zero. In the meantime, lymphatic capillaries start forming; their
final value will depend on the dynamics of the system, but in any case it will
be bigger than C ∗ = 104 cells/mm3 . This “switch” in the steady state values
is due to the presence of two piecewise defined functions (σ and f ) in the
system. On the other hand, there is always one stable steady state for M
which also defines one for T :
aM
(TL + r1 M eq )M eq ≈ 30 pg/mm3 .
M eq ≈ 1875 cells/mm3 and T eq =
d1
Note that the M steady state (and thus also that for T ) is unique for parameters with biologically relevant values. For the V -equilibrium, the following
expression is found:
sV + r3 M eq
V eq =
.
d3 + γLeq
22

Figure 10: Time course of LEC and capillary density in normal and diabetic
cases, compared with [23, Figure 2b]. The study presented in [23] investigates
the role of wound-associated lymphatic vessels in corneal inflammation and
in a skin wound model of wild-type and diabetic mice. The figure shows a
quantification of lymphangiogenesis in the corneal suture model assay in the
wild-type (db/+) and diabetic (db/db) cases. No suitable data were found
in the skin wound model.
Note that V eq depends on L; therefore V will tend to different values according to the current L-steady state; for Leq = 0 it is V eq = 0.5 pg/mm3 . Details
about how these steady states were determined can be found in Appendix
B.
The stability of the steady states is determined numerically. The stability
of M eq is deduced from the shape of the numerically-plotted M -nullcline, and
the stability of the other steady states can be inferred from the simulations
of the full system. See for instance the simulation shown in Figure 11, where
the model is run over a time interval of 250 days: here it is evident that
all the variables tend to stay at a stable value after about 100 days postwounding. Since some of the parameters were modified to simulate diabetesrelated conditions, the steady states for the diabetic case are different than
23

the corresponding “normal” ones. In particular, TGF-β, VEGF and capillary
equilibrium values are lower in the diabetic case, while the macrophage level
is higher than in the normal case. LECs go to zero in both cases.
Although this analysis does not give very profound insights into the understanding of lymphangiogenesis, it provides some extra information about
the dynamics of the system. More specifically, it shows that for realistic parameter values the system has only one steady state, which is in agreement
with experimental observations.
3.3.2. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
Here a numerical parameter sensitivity analysis of the model is presented
which plays two important roles. On the one hand, it demonstrates which
parameters are most significant in the model, and thereby provides a deeper
understanding of the dynamics of the system. On the other hand, it constitutes the first step towards the design of new therapeutic approaches.
To estimate the dependence of the model on a given parameter p, a quantification of the affect of a change in p on the (final) capillary density C at day
100 is calculated. To begin, p is increased by 10% and thereafter the system is
solved over the time interval [0, 100]. The final value of the capillary density
thus obtained, denoted C +10% , is then compared with the reference value
C ref of the corresponding density in the original system. The percentage
change is defined by
percentage change in C = 100 ×

C +10% − C ref
C ref

.

(11)

The same procedure is then repeated, this time substituting the parameter
p with its value decreased by 10% and the corresponding change C −10% is
calculated. The results are summarised in Figure 12.
It is notable that perturbing any parameter does not result in a percentage
change in final capillary density of more than 15%. Thus, the model is quite
robust in terms of dependence on the parameters. Percentage changes over
5% are observed only for eight parameters. Of these, one needs to decrease
aM , TL , sM or c4 to observe an increase in the final capillary density; while
a similar enhancement is obtained by increasing d1 , d2 , c1 or k2 .

24

Figure 11: Simulation of the model in both normal (solid blue) and diabetic
(dashed red) cases over a time period of 250 days.

25

Figure 12: Percentage change in the final capillary density C(100) when every
parameter is increased/decreased by 10%.
4. Therapies
4.1. Existing experimental treatments
Although there is at present no approved therapy for enhancement of
lymphangiogenesis (in wound healing or in any other context), many studies
and experiments have been published exploring potential treatments. In the
following three such experiments are reported and then simulated.
Administration of TGF-β Receptor-Inhibitor
This substance binds to the TGF-β receptors on the surface of surrounding cells, thus making them “insensitive” to TGF-β molecules and their effect.
[111] reports a study of the effect of TGF-β on lymphangiogenesis in which
human LECs are cultured and quantified after treatments with TGF-β1 or
TβR-I inhibitor to assess cell growth, cord formation and cell migration. It is
observed that TGF-β1 treatment decreases cord formation, while TβR-I inhibitor treatment increases it. These results are consistent with those found
26

in [112], where it is reported that a higher level of TGF-β1 is associated
with delayed recruitment and decreased proliferation of LECs during wound
repair.
To simulate the treatment with TβR-I inhibitor, the cell migration assay
is considered. Here, the inhibitor was added at 3 µM = 817 pg/mm3 (the
molecular weight is 272). Since this is significantly bigger than the concentration of TGF-β in our model and in normal skin (in both cases the maximum
level is 300 pg/mm3 ), this treatment is simulated by setting the parameters α
and c4 equal to zero (that is, TGF-β molecules have no effect on cells because
their receptors are “occupied” by the inhibitor). The effect of this “virtual
treatment” are shown in Figure 13, and match well with the described TGFβ inhibitor experiment: LEC and capillary densities are markedly increased
by the treatment.

Figure 13: Time courses of T , M , V , L, C and L + C in a simulation of the
TβR-I inhibitor experiment described in [111].

Macrophage-based treatments
Another therapeutic approach is to add macrophages to the wound, so
that they secrete VEGF and other substances that are known to induce lym27

phangiogenesis. In [113] an “opposite” experiment is implemented: here a
systemic depletion of macrophages is reported to markedly reduce lymphangiogenesis. This is in accordance with [114], in which it is observed that the
induction of macrophage apoptosis inhibits IL-1β-induced lymphangiogenesis. One hypothesis suggested to explain such results is that because of the
reduced level of macrophages, less VEGF is produced and this impairs LEC
proliferation and capillary formation.
We simulated the increase in macrophage apoptosis by taking a bigger (for
instance, the double) value of d2 in the system. The output of the model in
which d2 is doubled (both in normal and diabetic cases) is reported in Figure
14. In this case, the output is in contrast with what is described in the
biological studies: although fewer macrophages and consequently less VEGF
are present, more LECs and capillaries form after the simulated treatment.

Figure 14: Time courses of T , M , V , L, C and L + C in a simulation of the
macrophage-depletion experiment described in [113].
This result could be explained by the fact that, in the model, a reduction
in macrophage density implies a reduction in TGF-β level, so that the inhibition of LEC proliferation is smaller and hence there are more endothelial
cells to form the capillaries. In fact, in the previous section it was found that
28

the system is much more sensitive to c4 than to c2 , c3 or δ2 . It is then natural
to consider the effect of fixing T = 30 pg/mm3 in the LEC growth term (4);
this level of T corresponds to the TGF-β equilibrium. The simulation output
in this case is shown in Figure 15.

Figure 15: Time courses of T , M , V , L, C and L + C in a simulation of
the macrophage-depletion experiment described in [113], where the T in the
LEC growth inhibition term is substituted by T eq = 30 pg/mm3 .
With T fixed, the difference between the treated and untreated cases is
very small, but still an increase in capillary formation is observed in spite of
the lower VEGF level. This may be due to the fact that, with fewer macrophages, the crowding term in the LEC equation is smaller, which facilitates
the growth and accumulation of endothelial cells. In fact, if the M in the
crowding term is fixed at its equilibrium value of 1,875 cells/mm3 , there is no
difference at all between treated and untreated cases. Note that this result
could have been foreseen from the parameter sensitivity analysis (Figure 12)
which predicted that a 10% increase in d2 induces a 5 to 10% increase in
final capillary density.

29

VEGF supply
A third documented approach to enhance lymphangiogenesis consists of
supplying VEGF to the wound, since this protein promotes both LEC growth
and the ability of LECs to form a network-like structure. For instance, in
[115] a wound healing assessment is done in normal and diabetic mice after
a VEGF-treatment. More precisely, two different types of VEGF were studied: VEGF-A164 and VEGF-EN Z7 . The authors observed that the treatment
with VEGF-A164 increased macrophage numbers and the extent of lymphangiogenesis in both wild-type and diabetic cases, while VEGF-EN Z7 does not
induce any significant change.
In order to reproduce the experiment in silico, the amount of supplied
VEGF is estimated in Appendix A.4. Then, a 10 days constant VEGF
supply of 1.8 × 102 pg/mm3 is introduced in the model system. The output
is reported in Figure 16.

Figure 16: Time courses of TGF-β, macrophage, VEGF, LEC and capillary
densities in a simulation of the 10-days VEGF-supply experiment described
in [115]. Here the original model is altered by adding a constant VEGF
supply of 1.8 × 102 pg/mm3 for 0 ≤ t ≤ 10.
There is apparently no difference between capillary formations of treated
30

and untreated cases. Moreover this result is relatively insensitive to the
amount of VEGF supplied. What if the same treatment is applied for 30
days instead of 10? A simulation of this is shown in Figure 17.

Figure 17: Time courses of M , L, C and L + C in a simulation of the 30-days
VEGF-supply experiment.
There is now a clear difference in the treated cases (especially the diabetic
one) showing a lower level of macrophages and an earlier onset of capillary
formation, even if the final capillary density is similar to that in the untreated
case.
Observation
There is an important feature common to all three modelled therapies: in
order to stimulate lymphatic capillary formation one cannot consider TGFβ or VEGF levels individually. A precise balance of TGF-β and VEGF is
necessary for successful lymphangiogenesis. This mutual equilibrium may
be reached in vivo by the production of either of these growth factors by
other cell types not considered in the present work. In particular, this suggests the model does not take into account certain elements of the process.
Nevertheless, the model does effectively describe both normal and diabetic
lymphangiogenesis in wound healing which suggests that the variables considered here are the most relevant. This indicates that potential therapies
should focus on these aspects of the regeneration process.
4.2. Novel therapeutic approaches
As mentioned above, parameter sensitivity analysis proves useful in designing novel therapeutic approaches. Among the “sensitive” parameters
only aM , d2 and c1 vary between the normal and diabetic cases (note that
31

the increasing d2 -case was discussed above in the macrophage-based treatment). Thus, at least theoretically, aM , d2 and c1 are the natural targets
for a therapeutic strategy aiming to increase the final lymphatic capillary
density. The feasibility of each suggested parameter change is now explored.
Decreasing aM
Decreasing aM means lowering the macrophage-mediated activation of
TGF-β. First of all, note that the increase in final capillary density due
to a decrease in aM is explained by the fact that less active TGF-β implies
less TGF-β-inhibition of LEC growth and hence a larger LEC growth term.
For the practical implementation of this change, it is recalled that receptormediated TGF-β activation consists of the binding of Latency Associated
Peptide to the cell surface through receptors such as TSP-1/CD36, M6PR
and multiple αV-containing integrins [63]. Hence, a decrease of aM might be
obtainable by blocking these receptors.
Increasing c1
Increasing c1 would be achieved by increasing the LEC growth rate. Several possible implementations of this are found in the literature. Recombinant human IL-8 induces (human umbilical vein and dermal microvascular)
endothelial cell proliferation and capillary tube organization [116]. DNA
dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) is well known for its importance in repairing DNA double strand breaks; in [117] it is observed that DNA-PKcs
suppression induces basal endothelial cell proliferation. In [118] it is reported
that polydopamine-modified surfaces were beneficial to the proliferation of
endothelial cells. Finally, non-thermal dielectric barrier discharge plasma is
being developed for a wide range of medical applications, including wound
healing; in particular, [119] reports that endothelial cells treated with plasma
for 30s demonstrated twice as much proliferation as untreated cells, five days
after plasma treatment.
Other parameters
To increase the final capillary density, one could also think about targeting
other parameters to which the system is sensitive. In particular:
• Decreasing TL means reducing available (latent) TGF-β and hence reducing the TGF-β-inhibition over LECs. Suppression of TGF-β by

32

antibodies has been proposed as a possible therapy to reduce scar formation [120, 121, 122]. Thus many studies of TGF-β antibodies are
available.
• Decreasing c4 involves reducing the (inhibitory) effect of TGF-β on
LECs, which can be achieved by blocking specific TGF-β-receptors on
the endothelial cell surface. Now, TGF-β signalling is very well studied
[123]; in particular, it is known that TGF-β family proteins act through
two type II and two type I receptors and that ALK-1 antagonizes the
activities of the canonical TGF-β type I receptor, TβRI/ALK-5, in the
control of endothelial function [124]. Moreover, a few studies have been
published which deal with blocking of TGF-β receptors in the specific
case of endothelial cells [125, 126, 127].
• Changes in the other “sensitive” parameters do not appear feasible.
Increasing d1 would mean increasing the TGF-β decay rate; decreasing
sM would mean reducing the constant source of macrophages; increasing k2 requires an increased “carrying capacity” for the wound. We are
not aware of practical approaches that could cause these changes.
• Finally, among the parameters that, when changed by 10% of their
value, induce a change in final capillary density between 2 and 5%
(that is, a bit less than those analysed above), only b1 merits discussion.
Reducing b1 corresponds to reducing macrophage chemotaxis towards
TGF-β, which might be achievable by blocking specific receptors on
the macrophage surface.
5. Conclusions
Our model procures new insights into the mechanisms behind lymphangiogenesis in wound healing. The major contributors to the process have been
identified (TGF-β, macrophages, VEGF and LECs); the self-organisation hypothesis for the lymphatic network formation described in [32, 34] has been
confirmed and the importance of the balance between different factors has
been highlighted. Moreover, the present work suggests novel therapeutic approaches to enhance the lymphangiogenic process in impaired wound healing.
In addition, nearly all of the relevant parameters have been estimated from
biological data and therefore this work provides fairly reliable numerical values for the parameters encountered. However, any parameter estimation is
33

limited by, for example, the specific experimental method used or discrepancies between the system considered here and that studied in a given reference.
The results should therefore be viewed with care. In particular, the numerical values pertaining to the aforementioned balance between the TGF-β and
VEGF may be shifted under an alteration of the parameter set.
This paper is intended as a first step in studying wound healing lymphangiogenesis through mathematical modelling. Further work should include a
spatial variable (and thus involve PDEs rather than ODEs) in order to take
into account the important role of lymph flow in lymphatic capillary network
formation. Introducing a spatial variable would also enable a fuller description of chemotaxis. A PDE model would also be able to reflect further differences between angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. In particular, contrary
to blood angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis is unidirectional: as opposed to
sprouting from both sides of the wound, LECs appear to predominantly migrate downstream to the wound space in the direction of the interstitial flow
[32]. The model could also be extended to include other aspects of wound
healing, such as blood angiogenesis: implemented effectively, this would give
a more detailed overview of the different mechanisms and the time-scales
involved in the various processes.
Acknowledgment
A.B. would like to give special thanks to Jonathan Hickman for carefully proofreading this document and making numerous suggestions which
improved the final presentation.
Appendix A. Parameter estimation
Appendix A.1. Equilibrium values and standard sizes
TGF-β equilibrium T eq
The equilibrium value of active TGF-β is about 30 pg/mm3 [95, Figure
2].
Macrophage equilibrium M eq
The macrophage steady state can be estimated from [76, Figure 1], which
plots typical macrophage density in the skin. This shows that there is an
average of about 15 macrophages per 0.1mm2 field. Assuming a visual depth
of 80 µm, the macrophage density becomes 15 cells/(0.1mm2 × 0.08mm) =
1875 cells/mm3 .
34

VEGF equilibrium V eq
The VEGF equilibrium concentration is estimated to be 0.5 pg/mm3 from
[80, Figure 1] and [81, Figure 2].
Final LEC and Capillary density
In [34] we find that “it was not until day 60, when functional and continuous lymphatic capillaries appeared normal” and “at day 60 the regenerated
region had a complete lymphatic vasculature, the morphology of which appeared similar to that of native vessels”. Hence, if we assume that a capillary
network that can be considered “final” appears at day 60, we will take C f in
(or C eq ) to be the number of LECs present at this time, and since in the normal case all the lymphatic endothelial cells will become part of the capillary
network, we will further assume that Leq = 0. In [34, Figure 2E] we see that
at that time there are about 80 cells. This value corresponds to a 12 µm thin
section. In addition, through [34, Figure 2D] we can calculate the observed
wound area, which is about 5.6 × 105 µm2 . In this way we get a volume of
0.0067 mm3 with 80 cells, which corresponds to C f in = 1.2 × 104 cells/mm3 .
EC size and weight
[128] reports the cross-sectional area of an EC as 10µm×100 µm. In [129]
the thickness of these cells is given as 0.5µm. Hence we can assume a cell
volume of approximately 500µm3 = 5 × 10−7 mm3 . Moreover, if we assume
the density of the cells to be 1 g/mL (the same as that of water), we have
that a cell weighs about 5 × 10−10 g = 500 pg.
VEGF molecular weight
The molecular weight of VEGF is 40kDa = 66.4 × 10−9 pg/mol [130].
Appendix A.2. TGF-β equation
Enzyme-mediated activation rate ap
For ap , it seems reasonable to take the rate at which LAP binds to the
receptors. Now, in [91] we find an estimate for the binding rate to be about
1.7 × 104 M−1 s−1 [91, Tables I and IV]. Considering a protein weight of
approximately 50 kDa (found in the same article) and converting the units
we find: ap ≈ 2 × 10−5 mm3 pg−1 min−1 = 2.9 × 10−2 mm3 pg−1 day−1 .

35

Receptor-mediated activation rate aM
[66] reports that (“activated”) macrophages plated at 2 × 105 cells/well
in a 24-well tissue culture dish (that is, about 102 cells/mm3 ) activated approximately 8% of the total TGF-β secreted after 22 hours. This means that
1 cell/mm3 activated about 0.087% of TGF-β per day. On the other hand,
in [65] we find that macrophages cultured at 1 × 106 cells/dish in 100-mm
plates (that is, about 10 cells/mm3 ) activated 12.2% of total TGF-β1 after
about 36 hours. So 1 cell/mm3 activated approximately 0.8% of the TGF-β
per day. Hence, for aM we will take a value between 0.087 and 0.8, say the
average 0.45.
TGF-β production rate r1
In [70] it is reported that 106 macrophages produced about 30 pg of TGFβ after 24 hours. So one single macrophage produced 30 × 10−6 pg/day of
TGF-β, and we can then take r1 = 3 × 10−5 pg · cells−1 · day−1 .
TGF-β decay rate d1
In [93] it is stated that “free TGF-β has a half life of about 2 min”. We will
therefore take the decay rate d1 of active TGF-β to be d1 = ln 2/(2 min) =
0.35 min−1 = 500 day−1 .
Constant amount of latent TGF-β TL
At the equilibrium, the TGF-β equation becomes: [0 + aM M eq ] · [TL +
r1 M eq ]−d1 T eq = 0 . Substituting the values of the parameters aM , r1 , d1 and
of the equilibrium values T eq and M eq found before, we get an equation for
TL . Solving it, we find TL = 18.0916 pg/mm3 . To compare this value with a
“real” one, we consider [92]. Here, taking an average of 6 pg of TGF-β1 per
mg of skin (from [92, Figure 3]) and assuming a skin density of 1 g/mL (as
for water), we have a concentration of latent TGF-β of 6 pg/mm3 , which is
of the same order as our previous estimate.
Appendix A.3. Macrophage equation
Fraction of monocytes migrating into the wound that differentiate into macrophages α
We follow [49] and take α to be equal to 0.5 in normal wound healing
(reflecting the fact that in this case the number of inflammatory macrophages
is the same of the repair ones), and α = 0.8 in a diabetic wound (since there
are more inflammatory than repair macrophages this time). However, it must
36

be noted that [49] comments that “there is currently no quantitative data on
which the value of α for diabetic wounds can be based”.
Migration of monocytes to the wound in response to TGF-β: shape of h1 (T )
and value of b2
In [74] the authors study the migration of monocytes taken from healthy
volunteers and observe that the motility of the cells depends on the dose
of TGF-β to which they are exposed. Moreover, even if the response varied
with individual donors, they see that “the optimal chemotactic concentration
for TGF-β fell within the range 0.1-1.0 pg/mL”. These findings are shown
in Figure A.18, which shows the dataset reported in [74]. In light of these
observations, it is reasonable to take the chemotactic function h1 (T ) to be
h1 (T ) =

b1 T m
(b2 + T 2m )

where we will take m = 2 from visual comparison with data.
To determine b2 we look for the maximum of h1 (T
√ ). This is located at the
2m
0
b2 . [95] reports that the
point Tmax where h1 (Tmax ) = 0, which is Tmax =
normal level of TGF-β in the skin is about 30 pg/mm3 , and that this amount
increases up to 300 pg/mm3 during wound healing. From this, and from the
observation that macrophage levels also reach a peak soon after this TGF-β
peak [94], we deduce that the maximum monocyte/macrophage migration
occurs when the level of TGF-β in the skin is about 300 pg/mm3 . Thus we
take b2 = 3002m ; for m = 2 this gives b2 = 3004 = 8.1 × 109 pg4 (mm−3 )4 .
This seems to be in contrast with the data reported in [74, Figure 1]: here
Tmax is around 0.5 pg/mL = 0.5 × 10−3 pg/mm3 . However, this value does
not seem realistic and should be considered carefully. In particular, we recall
that chemotaxis occurs through gradients of a chemical, and considering
this directed movement to depend only on the absolute concentration of the
chemoattractant is a simplification. In fact, in the experiment described
in [74] the diluted chemotactic stimuli were placed in the bottom wells of
microchamber plates that were separated from the upper wells by a filter
with 5.0 µm pores; then monocytes were put in the plates with human TGFβ diluted at different concentrations. Chemotactic activity was defined as
the mean number of monocytes that migrated through the pores. Therefore,
we consider the value of Tmax to be a “conventional” one and we keep the
estimate for b2 found above.
37

Figure A.18: Experimental data from [74, Figure 1] reporting a quantification
of monocyte chemotaxis for different concentrations of TGF-β. Chemotactic
activity is defined as the mean number of monocytes that migrated through
the 5-µm pores in three standard fields for each of triplicate filters.
Percentage of monocytes/macrophages undergoing mitosis β
In [77, Figure 4] we see that only about 0.5% of monocytes in vitro show
mitotic activity. Therefore we take β = 0.005.
Macrophage growth rate r2 and carrying capacity k1
To obtain estimates for these parameters, we first consider just the logistic
part of the macrophage equation dM /dt = r2 M (1 − M/k1 ), whose solution
is
k1 M0 er2 t
.
(A.1)
M (t) =
k1 + M0 (er2 t − 1)
In [96] murine macrophage-like cell growth is measured under different conditions. We then fit the data contained in [96, Figure 1] to the curve
(A.1) using the MatLab function nlinfit. Moreover, [96] specifies that
“6 × 106 cells were cultured in 100-mm tissue culture plates in 10 mL of
the (above) medium”. Then, taking M0 = 600 cells/mm3 , we get the estimates rb2 = 1.22, kb1 = 6 × 105 , with 95% confidence intervals (0.82, 1.62) and
(4.40 × 105 , 7.61 × 105 ) respectively (these are calculated using the MatLab
function nlparci).

38

Macrophage constant removal rate d2
[97] presents a mathematical model for keloid and hypertrophic scarring.
Here we find that macrophages are known to exist in a wound for several
days after the initial migration; so based on this we assume a decay rate for
macrophage cells to be of the order of d2 ≈ 0.2 day−1 .
Macrophage capillary-dependent removal rate ρ
We assume that the term ρC becomes of the same order of d2 when
capillaries reach their “final” density, which we have estimated as 1.2 × 104 .
Since we estimate d2 = 0.2, we take ρ = 10−5 .
Migration of monocytes to the wound in response to TGF-β: b1
To find b1 we notice that this parameter determines the maximum level
of macrophages M during healing. To find this value, we refer to [94]. Here
the authors investigate the role of TGF-β activation in wound repair, and
assess several components of wound healing (including inflammatory cell infiltration) over a period of 28 days. [94] reports that at day 5 a maximum
of about 70 macrophages/field (400x) are observed. Assuming a diameter
field of view of 0.4 mm and a depth of field of 80 µm, 1 field corresponds
to (0.2)2 π mm2 × 80 × 10−3 mm ≈ 10−2 mm3 . Then 70 cells/field ≈ 7000
cells/mm3 . Numerical experimentation shows that reproduction of this result requires b1 ≈ 8 × 108 cells mm pg2 /day.
Macrophage constant source sM
At the steady state, the M -equation becomes


M
b1 T 2
+ βr2 M 1 −
− d2 M − ρCM = 0 .
sM + α
b2 + T 4
k1
Substituting the equilibrium values and the parameters found above, we get
sM = 586 − b1 × 5.5 × 10−8 .
Above, we chose b1 = 8×108 cells mm pg2 /day. Therefore sM = 542 cells/day.
Appendix A.4. VEGF equation
VEGF production by macrophages r3
From [82, Figure 1B] we have that human macrophages plated at 106 cells/ml =
3
10 cells/mm3 produced 214 pg/ml = 214 × 10−3 pg/mm3 of VEGF after 24
39

hours of culture. Then r3 ≈ 8.9×10−6 pg·cells−1 ·h−1 = 2.1×10−4 pg·cells−1 ·
day−1 . In fact, this value is a bit smaller than the one we use in the model,
which we take to be 9 × 2.1 × 10−4 ≈ 1.9 × 10−3 pg/cell/day. This “adjustment” is done considering the data shown in [98, Figure 2], which reports
that the VEGF peak (occurring at day 5) corresponds to a level of about
1000 pg/mL = 1 pg/mm3 . Since in our model we assume that the VEGF
peak is due (mainly) to the macrophages, it seems reasonable to adjust the
parameter r3 to meet this observation.
Other estimates were obtained from [83, 131] and one “equivalent” parameter was found in the modelling paper [132]. Although the numerical values
are different, they are all between 10−6 and 10−4 pg/cell/day. This variety is
not surprising because different cell types produce VEGF at different rates
(as clearly shown in [131]). Since in the context of wound healing lymphangiogenesis we are mainly concerned with macrophages, we focus more on the
values for these cells [82, 83].
VEGF decay rate d3
The half-life for VEGF165 (the most common and biologically active
VEGF protein) at room temperature is 90 minutes [99]. It follows that
d3 = 11 day−1 . To compare this value with those used in other modelling
articles, we see that in [133] the VEGF decay rate is taken to be µv =
0.456 h−1 = 10.9 day−1 , while in [58] the VEGF natural decay/neutralization
rate is µc = 0.65 h−1 = 15.6 day−1 .
VEGF consumption/internalization by ECs γ
In [100] the VEGF internalization by a cell is described in the way schematised in Figure A.19. In that figure and the following text, V stays for VEGF,
R for receptor and V R for the ligand-receptor complex.
We will not distinguish between the two kinds of receptors R1 and R2, so we
will just take the average of the above parameters. That is, we will take
kon = 2.5 × 106 M−1 s−1 ,
kint,R = 10−5 s−1 ,

koff = 2.5 × 10−4 s−1 ,
kint,V R = 2.8 × 10−4 s−1 .

(A.2)

According to this reaction scheme, the corresponding equation for V (for a
single cell) is
dV
= −kon · V · R + koff · (V R) .
(A.3)
dt
40

parameter values
kon,V,R1 = 3.8 × 106 M−1 s−1
kon,V,R2 = 1.2 × 106 M−1 s−1
koff,V,R1 = 95 × 10−6 s−1
koff,V,R2 = 410 × 10−6 s−1
kint,R1 = kint,R2 = 1 × 10−5 s−1
kint,V R1 = kint,V R2 = 28 × 10−5 s−1

Figure A.19: A schematic representation of the dynamics considered in [100].
V stands for VEGF, R for Receptor and V R for the ligand-receptor complex.
Here the dimensions of R are moles per unit volume. Similarly the equation
for the ligand-receptor complex (V R) (per cell) is
d(V R)
= +kon · V · R − koff · (V R) − kint,V R · (V R) .
dt
So, at equilibrium:
kon · V · R − koff · (V R)eq − kint,V R · (V R)eq = 0
kon · R
⇒ (V R)eq =
·V .
koff + kint,V R

(A.4)

To determine the value of R, we note that human endothelial cells (cultured
in vitro) display 1,800 VEGFR1/cell and 5,800 VEGFR2/cell [134], giving a
total of 7.6 × 103 receptors/cell. Assuming a cell volume of 500 µm3 we take
R = 2.5 × 10−14 mol/mm3 . Substituting this value for R and replacing the
parameters with the values given in (A.2), the equation (A.4) gives (V R)eq ≈
d
118 · V = V
Req · V . Substituting this value for (V R) in (A.3) we have


dV
d
= − kon · R − koff · V Req ·V · L
dt
|
{z
}
=2.9×103

day−1

Then, again assuming a cell volume of 500µm3 , we have that our parameter
(per cell) is
γ = 5 × 10−7 mm3 × 2.9 × 103 day−1 cells−1 = 1.4 × 10−3 mm3 · day−1 · cells−1 .
41

VEGF constant source sV
At equilibrium, the V -equation becomes
sV + r3 M − d3 V − γV L = 0
Substituting the equilibrium values and the parameters gives sV = 1.9 cells/day.
VEGF supply in [115]
In [115] control medium with or without growth factors was injected into
wounded mice at a dose of 2 µg/wound/10 days. Since the experimental
wounds are full-thickness with a 5-mm diameter, and assuming a skin thickness of 0.56 mm [135], this amount corresponds approximately to 1.8 × 104
pg/mm3 /day. Now, since the experiment is performed in vivo, it is reasonable
to assume that the vast majority of the VEGF is washed away and dispersed
by body fluids. In the absence of quantitative data, we assume that only 1%
of the added VEGF is therapeutically active in the wound, giving a delivery
of 1.8 × 102 pg/mm3 /day.
Appendix A.5. LECs equation
We consider first the parameter c1 , then k2 , and then the remaining parameters. For c1 and k2 we focus on the “logistic” part of the equation


L2
L
dL
= c1 L −
= c1 L 1 −
.
(A.5)
dt
k2
c1 k2
Recalling that the volume of an EC is approximately 500 µm3 , closely packed
cells have a density of 1 cell/500µm3 = 2 × 106 cells/mm3 . We assume the
carrying capacity to be 10% of this, so that c1 k2 ≈ 2 × 105 cells/mm3 . In the
following, we will fit experimental data to the solution of (A.5), which is
L(t) =

c1 k2 L0 ec1 t
.
c1 k2 + L0 (ec1 t − 1)

(A.6)

“Normal” proliferation rate c1
In [101] the different responses of lymphatic, venous and arterial endothelial cells to angiopoietins is studied; note that the cells were isolated and cultured from bovine mesenteric vessels. [101, Figure 4B] shows the evolution
of LEC density in time. After converting these data (in particular, those corresponding to control, or 10% FBS) into cells/mm3 , we can fit the function
42

(A.6) to them, obtaining the estimate cb1 = 0.42 day−1 with 95% confidence
interval (0.15, 0.70). Again, we can compare this value with other estimates
obtained from different biological sources, such as [88, 136, 87]; also, a similar
parameter is estimated in [58]. Although the numerical values for c1 found
in these other references are all different, it is noticeable that they are all
around 10−1 . This make us very confident in estimating this parameter.
Maximum density of cells (per unit time) k2
In the previous section we found different possible values for c1 . Since
c1 k2 = 2 × 105 cells/mm3 , we can easily obtain k2 :
• From [101] we get k2 ≈ 4.71 × 105 cells · day/mm3 (this is the value
used in our model);
• From [88] we get k2 ≈ 4.77 × 105 cells · day/mm3 for bovine cornea
and k2 ≈ 5.43 × 105 cells · day/mm3 for bovine fetal heart;
• From [136] we get k2 ≈ 3.13 × 105 cells · day/mm3 ;
• From [87] we get k2 ≈ 4.48 × 105 cells · day/mm3 for 10% FBS
and k2 ≈ 18.52 × 105 cells · day/mm3 for 2% FBS.
VEGF-dependence of LECs growth c2 , c3
To estimate c2 and c3 , we consider only the exponential VEGF-dependent
part of the LEC equation, that is


V
dL
= c1 +
·L,
(A.7)
dt
c2 + c3 V
whose solution is

L(t) = L0 · exp

V
c1 +
c2 + c3 V




·t

.

(A.8)

Recall that we already have an estimate for c1 . Also, notice that, if time is
fixed, (A.8) can be seen as a function of V only.
[87, Figure 7A] shows the response of rat mesenteric LECs to VEGF-A
and VEGF-C at low serum conditions (2% FBS). The cells were seeded at
the density of 16,000 per well in 24-well plates. Then, VEGF165 and mature
VEGF-C (2-100 ng/mL) were added 4 hours after seeding. Finally, cells were
counted 72 hours later. This provides a set of data giving the cell densities for
43

different concentrations of VEGF-A and C. These data refer to time t = 72
hours = 3 days, and our approach is to fit the function (A.8) as a function of
V (with t fixed at 3 days) to the experimental data. Recalling that 1 ng/mL
= 1 pg/mm3 , and considering a standard well of 1 mL = 103 mm3 (for a
24-well cell culture plate), we can convert these data into suitable units and
use the MatLab function nlinfit to fit (A.8) to them. This gives cb2 = 42
days and cb3 = 4.1 pg/day/mm3 , with 95% confidence intervals (−7.7, 92) and
(2.9, 5.3) respectively.
TGFβ-dependence of LECs growth c4
We estimate c4 using experimental data obtained in the absence of VEGF.
Therefore we consider only the part of the LEC equation concerning TGF-β
regulation of cell growth:


c1
dL
=
L
(A.9)
dt
1 + c4 T
whose solution is

L(t) = L0 · exp

c1
1 + c4 T




·t

.

(A.10)

In [88] the inhibitory action of TGF-β on bovine endothelial cells is studied.
[88, Figures 1(a) and 1(b)] demonstrate the growth in time of bovine cornea
and fetal heart endothelial cells respectively, while [88, Figure 1(c)] shows
the inhibition on cell growth by TGF-β. We can thus use these figures in
different ways:
• In [88, Figures 1(a) and 1(b)] the amount of TGF-β is fixed, so we
can consider (A.10) as a function of t only. Recalling that previously
we found the value c1 = 0.42 day−1 for [88, Figure 1(a)], and c1 =
0.37 day−1 for [88, Figure 1(b)], we can fit the function (A.10) to the
data corresponding to T = 2 ng/mL = 2 pg/mm3 to find the parameter
c4 . The MatLab functions nlinfit and nlparci give us the estimate
cb4 = 0.16 and its 95% confidence interval (−0.25, 0.58) for cornea ECs,
and cb4 = 0.22 with 95% confidence (−0.50, 0.95) for fetal heart ECs.
• Another strategy is to use the data contained in [88, Figure 1(c)], fixing
the time (t = 4 days) and considering (A.10) as a function of T only. For
bovine cornea ECs, in this case we have cb4 = 0.32 with 95% confidence
44

interval (0.12, 0.51). Similarly the data for fetal heart ECs gives cb4 =
1.3 with 95% confidence interval (−0.66, 3.2).
Looking at the confidence interval for each of the estimates found above, we
argue that the most “reliable” values for c4 are the first three: cb4 = 0.16,
cb4 = 0.22 and cb4 = 0.32. Hence, in our model we chose to take the average
of these numbers, that is cb4 = 0.24 mm3 /pg.
To compare this number with a similar estimate found in another source,
we consider [89, Figure 1], which also shows how cell growth is influenced
by TGF-β. Here bovine retinal and aortic endothelial cells were plated at
25 cells/cm2 and TGFβ-1 was added at different proliferation stages. Cell
numbers were determined 5 days after the addition of different concentrations
of TGFβ-1. Considering the data in [89, Figure 1B] and assuming a dish of
10mm height, we can fit the function (A.10) to the data with the MatLab
function nlinfit, taking L0 ≈ 10 cells/mm3 (estimated from [89, Figure
1A]) and consequently c1 = (1/t) ln(L(t)/L0 ) = 0.37 day−1 , since t = 5 days.
This gives the estimate cb4 = 6 with 95% confidence interval (−2.5, 14).
Threshold levels L∗ ,C ∗
In [34] it is observed that in a wound space LECs begin to organize in a
network-fashion after about 25 days. Hence, we take L∗ to be the number of
LECs present at day 25 during normal repair. In [34, Figure 2E] we see that
at that time there are about 80 cells. This value corresponds to a section
of width 12 µm. In addition, through [34, Figure 2D], we can calculate the
observed wound area, which results to be 5.6 × 105 µm2 . In this way we get a
volume of 0.0067 mm3 which contains 80 cells, which corresponds to 1.2×104
cells/mm3 . We take L∗ to be 104 cells/mm3 .
For C ∗ , we assume that LECs stop coming into the wound when capillaries
reach a level which is not far from the final one, that we have estimated to
be C f in = 1.2 × 104 cells/mm3 . Therefore we take C ∗ = 104 cells/mm3 . Note
that our estimate for L∗ and C f in are the same because in [34, Figure 2E] it
happens that the cell numbers counted at day 25 and at day 60 are about
the same.
Appendix B. Calculation of the steady states
For T we have immediately
aM
(TL + r1 M eq )M eq ,
T eq =
d1
45

(B.1)

since the exponential tends to zero as t → ∞. It follows that there is one
T -steady state for every M -steady state.
For M the situation is more complicated. Writing down the equation (2)
at the equilibrium and rearranging the terms one finds
−β

b1 T 2
r2 2
M + (βr2 − d2 − ρC)M + sM + α
=0.
k1
b2 + T 4

(B.2)

Plugging in the expression for T found in (B.1), the equation (B.2) becomes
a polynomial in M of degree 10. Plotting this polynomial for M ∈ [0, 104 ]
and M ∈ [0, 107 ] gives the graphs shown in Figure B.20. The graphs are
strongly indicative that there is only one stable steady state for (at least)
M < 107 and this is around 2000. This finding is in agreement with the
estimate M eq = 1875 cells/mm3 from the biological literature.
The equilibrium equation for V is
sV + r3 M − d3 V − γV L = 0

⇒

V

eq

sV + r3 M eq
.
=
d3 + γLeq

(B.3)

So there is one V -equilibrium for every M , L equilibrium.
At this point, it is more convenient to look at the capillary equation
first, and afterwards consider the LEC one. There are two different cases to
consider in the C-equation:
• if L + C < L∗ , then σ = 0 and dC/dt = 0 always;
• if L + C ≥ L∗ , then σ = 1 and the equilibrium equation becomes
(δ1 + δ2 V )L = 0 ,
whose only solution is L = 0 (since V cannot be negative).
Coming to the L-equation, it is necessary to consider a number of different
cases, since there are two piecewise-defined functions involved:
CASE
I
II
III
IV

CONDITIONS
L + C ≥ L∗ and
L + C ≥ L∗ and
L + C < L∗ and
L + C < L∗ and

C
C
C
C

∗

≤C
≥ C∗
≤ C∗
≥ C∗

FNs VALUE
σ(L, C) = 1 and
σ(L, C) = 1 and
σ(L, C) = 0 and
σ(L, C) = 0 and
46

f (C) = 1 − C/C ∗
f (C) = 0
f (C) = 1 − C/C ∗
f (C) = 0

Figure B.20: Plots of the M -expresson at the equilibrium. The different lines
refer to different representative values of C.
Note that case IV seems to be not realistic, since the estimates for the thresholds are L∗ ≈ C ∗ .
case I Since we must have L = 0 in order to have a steady state in the Cequation, the equilibrium L-equation reduces to



C
b3 V 2
sL +
1− ∗ =0,
b4 + V 4
C
which implies
C eq = C ∗ .
47

case II Again, we must have L = 0 for the equilibrium in the fifth equation.
This time the steady state L-equation is automatically satisfied and
therefore any value of C corresponds to a steady state.
case III In this case, rearranging the fourth equation for L one gets




V
1
M +C
1 2
−
L
− L + c1 +
k2
c2 + c3 V
1 + c4 T
k2



b3 V 2
C
+ sL +
1− ∗ =0
b4 + V 4
C

(B.4)

where V depends on L and this dependence is given by the expression
(B.3). Notice that if γ = 0 then V does not depend on L. Hence, if we
set γ = 0 the expression (B.4) becomes a simple quadratic equation for
L. In order to study how the system changes as V depends on L, we
gradually increase γ and see how the roots change. The function (B.4)
is therefore plotted numerically versus L and the resulting graphs are
reported in Figure B.21. These show that increasing γ does not have a
significant effect on the roots of (B.4): the function is always concave
for 0 ≤ L ≤ 4 × 105 and intercepts the horizontal axis once. Thus for
C < C ∗ (which is the case we are studying) there is only one intersection
for L > 0 at about L = 2 × 105 .
References
[1] R. Huggenberger, S. S. Siddiqui, D. Brander, S. Ullmann, K. Zimmermann, M. Antsiferova, S. Werner, K. Alitalo, M. Detmar, An important role of lymphatic vessel activation in limiting acute inflammation,
Blood 117 (17) (2011) 4667–4678.
[2] R. Huggenberger, M. Detmar, The cutaneous vascular system in
chronic skin inflammation, J. Investig. Dermatol. Symp. Proc. 15 (1)
(2011) 24–32.
[3] H. Kim, R. P. Kataru, G. Y. Koh, Regulation and implications of
inflammatory lymphangiogenesis, Trends Immunol. 33 (7) (2012) 350–
356.
[4] T. Tammela, K. Alitalo, Lymphangiogenesis: Molecular mechanisms
and future promise, Cell 140 (2010) 460–476.
48

Figure B.21: Plots of the expression (B.4) as a function of L for different
values of γ (more precisely, γ = 0, 10−4 , 10−2 , 1, 102 , 104 ). In each picture the
function is plotted for three different representative values of C, in particular
0, C ∗ /2 and C ∗ .

49

[5] A. Langer, W. Rogowski, Systematic review of economic evaluations of
human cell-derived wound care products for the treatment of venous
leg and diabetic foot ulcers, BMC Health Serv. Res. 9 (2009) 115.
[6] J. I. de la Torre, J. A. Chambers, Chronic wounds, Medscape
(http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1298452-overview).
[7] C. Dowsett, Use of TIME to improve community nurses’ wound care
knowledge and practice, Wounds UK 5 (3) (2009) 14–21.
[8] P. Drew, J. Posnett, L. Rusling, The cost of wound care for a local
population in England, Intl. Wound. J. 4 (2) (2007) 149–155.
[9] J. Posnett, P. J. Franks, The burden of chronic wounds in the UK,
Nurs Times 104 (3) (2008) 44–45.
[10] J. Asai, H. Takenaka, S. Hirakawa, J. Sakabe, A. Hagura, S. Kishimoto, K. Maruyama, K. Kajiya, S. Kinoshita, Y. Tokura, N. Katoh,
Topical simvastatin accelerates wound healing in diabetes by enhancing
angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis, Am. J. of Pathol. 181 (6) (2012)
2217–2224.
[11] G. P. Fadini, M. Albiero, L. Menegazzo, E. Boscaro, E. Pagnin, E. Iori,
C. Cosma, A. Lapolla, V. Pengo, M. Stendardo, C. Agostini, P. G.
Pelicci, M. Giorgio, A. Avogaro, The redox enzyme p66Shc contributes
to diabetes and ischemia-induced delay in cutaneous wound healing,
Diabetes 59 (9) (2010) 2306–2314.
[12] W. J. Jeffcoate, K. G. Harding, Diabetic foot ulcers, Lancet 361 (9368)
(2003) 1545–1551.
[13] O. Z. Lerman, R. D. Galiano, M. Armour, J. P. Levine, G. C. Gurtner,
Cellular dysfunction in the diabetic fibroblast: impairment in migration, vascular endothelial growth factor production, and response to
hypoxia, Am. J. Pathol. 162 (1) (2003) 303–312.
[14] M. E. Swift, A. L. Burns, K. L. Gray, L. A. DiPietro, Age-related
alterations in the inflammatory response to dermal injury, J. Invest.
Dermatol. 117 (5) (2001) 1027–1035.

50

[15] H. Brem, M. Tomic-Canic, Cellular and molecular basis of wound healing in diabetes, J. Clin. Invest. 117 (5) (2007) 1219–1222.
[16] G. F. Pierce, Inflammation in nonhealing diabetic wounds: the spacetime continuum does matter, Am. J. Pathol. 159 (2) (2001) 399–403.
[17] A. J. Singer, R. A. Clark, Cutaneous wound healing, N. Engl. J. Med.
341 (10) (1999) 738–746.
[18] C.-H. Cho, H.-K. Sung, K.-T. Kim, H. G. Cheon, G. T. Oh, H. J. Hong,
O.-J. Yoo, G. Y. Koh, COMP-angiopoietin-1 promotes wound healing
through enhanced angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, and blood flow in
a diabetic mouse model, PNAS 103 (13) (2006) 4946–4951.
[19] R. C. Ji, Characteristics of lymphatic endothelial cells in physiological
and pathological conditions, Histol. Histopathol. 20 (2005) 155–175.
[20] M. A. Swartz, The physiology of the lymphatic system, Adv. Drug
Deliv. Rev. 50 (1-2) (2001) 3–20.
[21] G. Oliver, M. Detmar, The rediscovery of the lymphatic system: old
and new insights into the development and biological function of the
lymphatic vasculature, Genes Dev. 16 (7) (2002) 773–783.
[22] M. H. Witte, M. J. Bernas, C. P. Martin, C. L. Witte, Lymphangiogenesis and lymphangiodysplasia: from molecular to clinical lymphology,
Microsc. Res. Tech. 55 (2001) 122–145.
[23] K. Maruyama, J. Asai, M. Ii, T. Thorne, D. W. Losordo, P. A.
D’Amore, Decreased macrophage number and activation lead to reduced lymphatic vessel formation and contribute to impaired diabetic
wound healing, Am. J. Pathol. 70 (2007) 1178–1191.
[24] A. Saaristo, T. Tammela, A. Farkkila, M. Karkkainen, E. Suominen,
S. Yla-Herttuala, K. Alitalo, Vascular endothelial growth factor-C accelerates diabetic wound healing, Am. J. Pathol. 169 (2006) 1080–1087.
[25] A. Gabriel, J. Mussman, L. Z. Rosenberg, J. I. de la
Torre,
Wound healing and growth factors,
Medscape
(http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1298196-overview).

51

[26] N. J. Park, L. Allen, V. R. Driver, Updating on understanding and
managing chronic wound, Dermatol. Ther. 26 (3) (2013) 236–256.
[27] W. K. Stadelmann, A. G. Digenis, G. R. Tobin, Physiology and healing
dynamics of chronic cutaneous wounds, Am. J. Surg. 176 (2A Suppl)
(1998) 26S–38S.
[28] R. H. Adams, K. Alitalo, Molecular regulation of angiogenesis and
lymphangiogenesis, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8 (6) (2007) 464–478.
[29] A. V. Benest, S. J. Harper, S. Y. Herttuala, K. Alitalo, D. O. Bates,
VEGF-C induced angiogenesis preferentially occurs at a distance from
lymphangiogenesis, Cardiovasc. Res. 78 (2) (2008) 315–323.
[30] I. Choi, S. Lee, Y. K. Hong, The new era of the lymphatic system:
no longer secondary to the blood vascular system, Cold Spring Harb.
Perspect. Med. 2 (4) (2012) a006445.
[31] C. Norrmen, T. Tammela, T. V. Petrova, K. Alitalo, Biological basis of
therapeutic lymphangiogenesis, Circulation 123 (12) (2011) 1335–1351.
[32] K. C. Boardman, M. A. Swartz, Interstitial flow as a guide for lymphangiogenesis, Circ. Res. 92 (2003) 801–808.
[33] F. Bruyere, A. Noel, Lymphangiogenesis: in vitro and in vivo models,
FASEB J. 24 (1) (2010) 8–21.
[34] J. M. Rutkowski, K. C. Boardman, M. A. Swartz, Characterization
of lymphangiogenesis in a model of adult skin regeneration, Am. J.
Physiol. Heart. Circ. Physiol. 291 (2006) H1402–H1410.
[35] M. Lohela, M. Bry, T. Tammela, K. Alitalo, VEGFs and receptors
involved in angiogenesis versus lymphangiogenesis, Curr. Opin. Cell
Biol. 21 (2) (2009) 154–165.
[36] R. S. Sweat, P. C. Stapor, W. L. Murfee, Relationships between lymphangiogenesis and angiogenesis during inflammation in rat mesentery
microvascular networks, Lymphat. Res. Biol. 10 (4) (2012) 198–207.
[37] S. Nakao, K. Maruyama, S. Zandi, M. I. Melhorn, M. Taher, K. Noda,
E. Nusayr, T. Doetschman, A. Hafezi-Moghadam, Lymphangiogenesis
52

and angiogenesis: concurrence and/or dependence? Studies in inbred
mouse strains, FASEB J. 24 (2) (2010) 504–513.
[38] J. A. Sherratt, J. D. Murray, Models of epidermal wound healing, Proc.
R. Soc. Lond. B 241 (1990) 29–36.
[39] R. T. Tranquillo, J. D. Murray, Continuum model of fibroblast-driven
wound contraction: inflammation-mediation, J. Theor. Biol. 158 (2)
(1992) 135–172.
[40] J. A. Sherratt, J. C. Dallon, Theoretical models of wound healing: past
successes and future challenges, C. R. Biol. 325 (5) (2002) 557–564.
[41] L. Geris, A. Gerisch, R. C. Schugart, Mathematical modeling in wound
healing, bone regeneration and tissue engineering, Acta Biotheor. 58 (4)
(2010) 355–367.
[42] P. D. Dale, L. Olsen, P. K. Maini, J. A. Sherratt, Travelling waves in
wound healing, Forma 10 (3) (1995) 205–222.
[43] L. Olsen, P. Maini, J. A. Sherratt, A mechanochemical model for normal and abnormal dermal wound repair, in: Nonlinear Analysis Theory
Methods Appl., Vol. 30, 1997, pp. 3333–3338.
[44] A. Friedman, C. Xue, A mathematical model for chronic wounds, Math.
Biosci. Eng. 8 (2) (2011) 253–261.
[45] K. E. Murphy, C. L. Hall, P. K. Maini, S. W. McCue, D. L. S. McElwain, A fibrocontractive mechanochemical model of dermal wound closure incorporating realistic growth factor kinetics, Bull. Math. Biol.
74 (5) (2012) 1143–1170.
[46] A. Boyarsky, A stochastic model for wound healing, Math. Modelling
7 (1986) 371–375.
[47] J. C. Dallon, J. A. Sherratt, P. K. Maini, Mathematical modelling of
extracellular matrix dynamics using discrete cells: fiber orientation and
tissue regeneration, J. Theor. Biol. 199 (4) (1999) 449–471.
[48] E. Javierre, F. J. Vermolen, C. Vuik, S. van der Zwaag, A mathematical
analysis of physiological and morphological aspects of wound closure,
J. Math. Biol. 59 (5) (2009) 605–630.
53

[49] H. V. Waugh, J. A. Sherratt, Macrophage dynamics in diabetic wound
healing, Bull. Math. Biol. 68 (2006) 197–207.
[50] J. L. Dunster, H. M. Byrne, J. R. King, The resolution of inflammation:
a mathematical model of neutrophil and macrophage interactions, Bull.
Math. Biol. 76 (8) (2014) 1953–1980.
[51] H. M. Byrne, M. A. J. Chaplain, D. L. Evans, I. Hopkinson, Mathematical modelling of angiogenesis in wound healing: Comparison of
theory and experiment, J. Theor. Med. 2 (3) (2000) 175–197.
[52] M. A. J. Chaplain, Mathematical modelling of angiogenesis, J. NeuroOncol. 50 (1-2) (2000) 37–51.
[53] J. A. Flegg, H. M. Byrne, M. B. Flegg, D. L. S. McElwain, Wound
healing angiogenesis: the clinical implications of a simple mathematical
model, J. Theor. Biol. 300 (2012) 309–316.
[54] E. A. Gaffney, K. Pugh, P. K. Maini, F. Arnold, Investigating a simple
model of cutaneous wound healing angiogenesis, J. Math. Biol. 45 (4)
(2002) 337–374.
[55] M. J. Machado, M. G. Watson, A. H. Devlin, M. A. Chaplain, S. R.
McDougall, C. A. Mitchell, Dynamics of angiogenesis during wound
healing: a coupled in vivo and in silico study, Microcirculation 18 (3)
(2011) 183–197.
[56] G. Pettet, M. A. Chaplain, D. L. McElwain, H. M. Byrne, On the rôle
of angiogenesis in wound healing, Proc. Biol. Sci. 263 (1376) (1996)
1487–1493.
[57] R. C. Schugart, A. Friedman, R. Zhao, C. K. Sen, Wound angiogenesis
as a function of tissue oxygen tension: a mathematical model, PNAS
105 (7) (2008) 2628–2633.
[58] X. Zheng, G. Y. Koh, T. Jackson, A continuous model of angiogenesis:
initiation, extension, and maturation of new blood vessels modulated
by vascular endothelial growth factor, angiopoietins, platelet-derived
growth factor-B, and pericytes, Discr. Cont. Dyn. Syst. Series B 18 (4)
(2013) 1109–1154.

54

[59] M. Scianna, C. G. Bell, L. Preziosi, A review of mathematical models
for the formation of vascular networks, J. Theor. Biol. 333 (2013) 174–
209.
[60] A. Friedman, G. Lolas, Analysis of a mathematical model of tumor
lymphangiogenesis, Math. Models Methods Appl. Sci. 15 (1) (2005)
95–107.
[61] T. Roose, A. C. Fowler, Network development in biological gels: role
in lymphatic vessel development, Bull. Math. Biol. 70 (6) (2008) 1772–
1789.
[62] K. N. Margaris, R. A. Black, Modelling the lymphatic system: challenges and opportunities, J. R. Soc. Interf. 9 (69) (2012) 601–612.
[63] A. W. Taylor, Review of the activation of TGF-β in immunity, J.
Leukocyte Biol. 85 (2009) 29–33.
[64] S. Cheifetz, H. Hernandez, M. Laiho, P. ten Dijke, K. K. Iwata, J. Massague, Distinct transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) receptor
subsets as determinants of cellular responsiveness to three TGF-beta
isoforms, J. Biol. Chem. 265 (33) (1990) 20533–20538.
[65] A. Gosiewska, C. Yi, O. Blanc-Brude, J. C. Geesin, Characterization
of a macrophage-based system for studying the activation of latent
TGF-β, Meth. Cell Sci. 21 (1999) 47–56.
[66] I. Nunes, R. L. Shapiro, D. B. Rifkin, Characterization of latent TGF-β
activation by murine peritoneal macrophages, J. Immunol. 155 (1995)
1450–1459.
[67] P. D. Dale, J. A. Sherratt, P. K. Maini, A mathematical model for
collagen fibre formation during foetal and adult dermal wound healing,
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 263 (1996) 653–660.
[68] R. D. Sinclair, T. J. Ryan, Proteolytic enzymes in wound healing: the
role of enzymatic debridement, Australas. J. Dermatol. 35 (1) (1994)
35–41.
[69] S. Barrientos, O. Stojadinovic, M. Golinko, H. Brem, M. Tomic-Canic,
Growth factors and cytokines in wound healing, Wound Rep. Reg. 16
(2008) 585–601.
55

[70] N. Khalil, C. Whitman, L. Zuo, D. Danielpour, A. Greenberg, Regulation of alveolar macrophage transforming growth factor-β secretion by
corticosteroids in bleomycin-induced pulmonary inflammation in the
rat, J. Clin. Invest. 92 (1993) 1812–1818.
[71] M. Shi, J. Zhu, R. Wang, X. Chen, L. Mi, T. Walz, T. A. Springer,
Latent TGF-β structure and activation, Nature 474 (2011) 343–351.
[72] F. O. Martinez, S. Gordon, M. Locati, A. Mantovani, Transcriptional
profiling of the human monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation and polarization: new molecules and patterns of gene expression, J. Immunol.
177 (10) (2006) 7303–7311.
[73] M. P. Rodero, K. Khosrotehrani, Skin wound healing modulation by
macrophages, Intl. J. Clin. Exp. Pathol. 3 (7) (2010) 643–653.
[74] S. M. Wahl, D. A. Hunt, L. M. Wakefield, N. McCartney-Francis, L. M.
Wahl, A. B. Roberts, M. B. Sporn, Transforming growth factor type β
induces monocyte chemotaxis and growth factor production, PNAS 84
(1987) 5788–5792.
[75] A. Mantovani, A. Sica, S. Sozzani, P. Allavena, A. Vecchi, M. Locati,
The chemokine system in diverse forms of macrophage activation and
polarization, Trends Immunol. 25 (12) (2004) 677–686.
[76] K. Weber-Matthiesen, W. Sterry, Organization of the monocyte/macrophage system of normal human skin, J. Invest. Dermatol.
95 (1990) 83–89.
[77] B. Greenwood, The mitosis of sheep blood monocytes in tissue culture,
Quart. J. Exp. Physiol. 58 (1973) 369–377.
[78] L. Jussila, K. Alitalo, Vascular growth factors and lymphangiogenesis,
Physiol. Rev. 82 (3) (2002) 673–700.
[79] M. Lohela, A. Saaristo, T. Veikkola, K. Alitalo, Lymphangiogenic
growth factors, receptors and therapies, Thromb. Haemost. 90 (2)
(2003) 167–184.
[80] E. Hormbrey, C. Han, A. Roberts, D. A. McGrouther, A. L. Harris,
The relationship of human wound vascular endothelial growth factor
56

(VEGF) after breast cancer surgery to circulating vegf and angiogenesis, Clin. Cancer Res. 9 (2003) 4332–4339.
[81] A. I. Papaioannou, E. Zakynthinos, K. Kostikas, T. Kiropoulos,
A. Koutsokera, A. Ziogas, A. Koutroumpas, L. Sakkas, K. I. Gourgoulianis, Z. D. Daniil, Serum VEGF levels are related to the presence
of pulmonary arterial hypertension in systemic sclerosis, BMC Pulm.
Med. (2009) 9:18.
[82] S. Kiriakidis, E. Andreakos, C. Monaco, B. Foxwell, M. Feldmann,
E. Paleolog, VEGF expression in human macrophages is NF-κBdependent: studies using adenoviruses expressing the endogenous NFκB inhibitor IκBα and a kinase-defective form of the IκB kinase 2, J.
Cell Sci. 116 (4) (2003) 665–674.
[83] M. Xiong, G. Elson, D. Legarda, S. J. Leibovich, Production of vascular endothelial growth factor by murine macrophages, Am. J. Pathol.
153 (2) (1998) 587–598.
[84] T. Matsumoto, L. Claesson-Welsh, VEGF receptor signal transduction,
Science STKE 2001 (112) (2001) re21.
[85] I. Zachary, G. Gliki, Signaling transduction mechanisms mediating biological actions of the vascular endothelial growth factor family, Cardiovasc. Res. 49 (2001) 568–581.
[86] P. N. Bernatchez, S. Soker, M. G. Sirois, Vascular endothelial growth
factor effect on endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and plateletactivating factor synthesis is Flk-1-dependent, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (43)
(1999) 31047–31054.
[87] B. Whitehurst, C. Eversgerd, M. Flister, C. M. Bivens, B. Pickett,
D. C. Zawieja, S. Ran, Molecular profile and proliferative responses
of rat lymphatic endothelial cells in culture, Lymph. Res. Biol. 4 (3)
(2006) 119–142.
[88] G. Müller, J. Behrens, U. Nussbaumer, P. Böhlen, W. Birchmeier, Inhibitory action of transforming growth factor β on endothelial cells,
PNAS 84 (1987) 5600–5604.

57

[89] A. B. Sutton, A. E. Canfield, S. L. Schor, M. E. Grant, A. M. Schor,
The response of endothelial cells to TGFβ-1 is dependent upon cell
shape, proliferative state and the nature of the substratum, J. Cell Sci.
99 (1991) 777–787.
[90] S. Podgrabinska, P. Braun, P. Velasco, B. Kloos, M. S. Pepper, D. Jackson, M. Skobe, Molecular characterization of lymphatic endothelial
cells, PNAS 99 (25) (2002) 16069–16074.
[91] G. De Crescenzo, S. Grothe, J. Zwaagstra, M. Tsang, M. D. O’ConnorMcCourt, Real-time monitoring of the interactions of transforming
growth factor-β (TGF-β) isoforms with latency-associated protein and
the ectodomains of the TGF-β type II and III receptors reveals different kinetic models and stoichiometries of binding, J. Biol. Chem.
276 (32) (2001) 29632–29643.
[92] M. Oi, T. Yamamoto, K. Nishioka, Increased expression of TGF-β1
in the sclerotic skin in bleomycin-‘susceptible’ mouse strains, J. Med.
Dent. Sci. 51 (2004) 7–17.
[93] B. Kaminska, A. Wesolowska, M. Danilkiewicz, TGF beta signalling
and its role in tumor pathogenesis, Acta Biochimica Polonica 52 (2)
(2005) 329–337.
[94] J. E. Nör, L. DiPietro, J. E. Murphy-Ullrich, R. O. Hynes, J. Lawler,
P. J. Polverini, Activation of latent TGF-β1 by thrombospondin-1 is
a major component of wound repair, Oral Biosci. Med. 2 (2) (2005)
153–161.
[95] L. Yang, C. X. Qiu, A. Ludlow, M. W. J. Ferguson, G. Brunner, Active
transforming growth factor-β in wound repair – determination using a
new assay, Am. J. Pathol. 154 (1) (1999) 105–111.
[96] J. C. Zhuang, G. N. Wogan, Growth and viability of macrophages continuously stimulated to produce nitric oxide, PNAS 94 (1997) 11875–
11880.
[97] C. A. Cobbold, J. A. Sherratt, Mathematical modelling of nitric oxide
activity in wound healing can explain keloid and hypertrophic scarring,
J. Theor. Biol. 204 (2000) 257–288.
58

[98] A. Y. Sheikh, J. J. Gibson, M. D. Rollins, H. W. Hopf, Z. Hussain,
T. K. Hunt, Effect of hyperoxia on vascular endothelial growth factor
levels in wound model, Arch. Surg. 135 (2000) 1293–1297.
[99] J. Kleinheinz, S. Jung, K. Wermker, C. Fischer, U. Joos, Release kinetics of VEGF165 from a collagen matrix and structural matrix changes
in a circulation model, Head Face Med. (2010) 6:17.
[100] F. Mac Gabhann, A. S. Popel, Model of competitive binding of vascular endothelial growth factor and placental growth factor to VEGF
receptors on endothelial cells, Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 286
(2004) H153–H164.
[101] V. P. K. H. Nguyen, S. H. Chen, J. Trinh, H. Kim, B. L. Coomber,
D. J. Dumont, Differential response of lymphatic, venous and arterial
endothelial cells to angiopoietin-1 and angiopoietin-2, BMC Cell Biol.
(2007) 8:10.
[102] S. Yamano, W. P. Kuo, C. Sukotjo, Downregulated gene expression of
TGF-βs in diabetic oral wound healing, J. Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surg.
41 (2013) e42–e48.
[103] F. Al-Mulla, S. J. Leibovich, I. M. Francis, M. S. Bitar, Impaired TGFβ signaling and a defect in resolution of inflammation contribute to
delayed wound healing in a female rat model of type 2 diabetes, Mol.
BioSyst. 7 (2011) 3006–3020.
[104] R. Mirza, T. J. Koh, Dysregulation of monocyte/macrophage phenotype in wounds of diabetic mice, Cytokine 56 (2011) 256–264.
[105] S. Khanna, S. Biswas, Y. Shang, E. Collard, A. Azad, C. Kauh,
V. Bhasker, G. M. Gordillo, C. K. Sen, S. Roy, Macrophage dysfunction impairs resolution of inflammation in the wounds of diabetic mice,
PLOS ONE 5 (3) (2010) e9539.
[106] F. Xu, C. Zhang, D. T. Graves, Abnormal cell responses and role of
TNF-α in impaired diabetic wound healing, BioMed Res. Intl. 2013
(2013) 1–9.

59

[107] I. A. Darby, T. Bisucci, T. D. Hewitson, D. G. MacLellan, Apoptosis is
increased in a model of diabetes-impaired wound healing in genetically
diabetic mice, Intl. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 29 (1) (1997) 191–200.
[108] F. Curcio, A. Ceriello, Decreased cultured endothelial cell proliferation
in high glucose medium is reversed by antioxidants: new insights on
the pathophysiological mechanisms of diabetic vascular complications,
In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. 28A (11-12) (1992) 787–790.
[109] G. K. Kolluru, S. C. Bir, C. G. Kevil, Endothelial dysfunction and diabetes: effects on angiogenesis, vascular remodeling, and wound healing,
Intl. J. Vasc. Med. 2012 (2012) 918267.
[110] J. Calles-Escandon, M. Cipolla, Diabetes and endothelial dysfunction:
a clinical perspective, Endocr. Rev. 22 (1) (2001) 36–52.
[111] M. Oka, C. Iwata, H. I. Suzuki, K. Kiyono, Y. Morishita, T. Watabe,
A. Komuro, M. R. Kano, K. Miyazono, Inhibition of endogenous TGFbeta signaling enhances lymphangiogenesis, Blood 111 (9) (2008) 4571–
4579.
[112] N. W. Clavin, T. Avraham, J. Fernandez, S. V. Daluvoy, M. A. Soares,
A. Chaudhry, B. J. Mehrara, TGF-β1 is a negative regulator of lymphatic regeneration during wound repair, Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ.
Physiol. 295 (5) (2008) H2113–2127.
[113] R. P. Kataru, K. Jung, C. Jang, H. Yang, R. A. Schwendener, J. E.
Baik, S. H. Han, K. Alitalo, G. Y. Koh, Critical role of CD11b+ macrophages and VEGF in inflammatory lymphangiogenesis, antigen clearance, and inflammation resolution, Blood 113 (22) (2009) 5650–5659.
[114] K. Watari, S. Nakao, A. Fotovati, Y. Basaki, F. Hosoi, B. Bereczky,
R. Higuchi, T. Miyamoto, M. Kuwano, M. Ono, Role of macrophages
in inflammatory lymphangiogenesis: Enhanced production of vascular endothelial growth factor C and D through NF-kappaB activation,
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 377 (3) (2008) 826–831.
[115] Y. Zheng, M. Watanabe, T. Kuraishi, S. Hattori, C. Kai, M. Shibuya,
Chimeric VEGF-ENZ7/PlGF specifically binding to VEGFR-2 accelerates skin wound healing via enhancement of neovascularization, Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 27 (3) (2007) 503–511.
60

[116] A. Li, S. Dubey, M. L. Varney, B. J. Dave, R. K. Singh, IL-8 directly
enhanced endothelial cell survival, proliferation, and matrix metalloproteinases production and regulated angiogenesis, J. Immunol. 170 (6)
(2003) 3369–3376.
[117] H. Mannell, A. Hammitzsch, R. Mettler, U. Pohl, F. Krotz, Suppression of DNA-PKcs enhances FGF-2 dependent human endothelial cell
proliferation via negative regulation of Akt, Cell. Signal. 22 (1) (2010)
88–96.
[118] R. Luo, L. Tang, S. Zhong, Z. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Weng, Q. Tu,
C. Jiang, N. Huang, In vitro investigation of enhanced hemocompatibility and endothelial cell proliferation associated with quinone-rich
polydopamine coating, ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 5 (5) (2013) 1704–
1714.
[119] S. Kalghatgi, G. Friedman, A. Fridman, A. M. Clyne, Endothelial cell
proliferation is enhanced by low dose non-thermal plasma through fibroblast growth factor-2 release, Ann. Biomed. Eng. 38 (3) (2010) 748–
757.
[120] A. Eslami, C. L. Gallant-Behm, D. A. Hart, C. Wiebe, D. Honardoust,
H. Gardner, L. Hakkinen, H. S. Larjava, Expression of integrin alphavbeta6 and TGF-beta in scarless vs scar-forming wound healing, J.
Histochem. Cytochem. 57 (6) (2009) 543–557.
[121] K. W. Finnson, S. McLean, G. M. Di Guglielmo, A. Philip, Dynamics
of Transforming Growth Factor Beta Signaling in Wound Healing and
Scarring, Adv. Wound Care 2 (5) (2013) 195–214.
[122] M. Shah, D. M. Foreman, M. W. Ferguson, Neutralisation of TGF-beta
1 and TGF-beta 2 or exogenous addition of TGF-beta 3 to cutaneous
rat wounds reduces scarring, J. Cell. Sci. 108 ( Pt 3) (1995) 985–1002.
[123] A. C. Mullen, D. A. Orlando, J. J. Newman, J. Loven, R. M. Kumar,
S. Bilodeau, J. Reddy, M. G. Guenther, R. P. DeKoter, R. A. Young,
Master transcription factors determine cell-type-specific responses to
TGF-β signaling, Cell 147 (3) (2011) 565–576.
[124] R. Derynck, R. J. Akhurst, BMP-9 balances endothelial cell fate, PNAS
110 (47) (2013) 18746–18747.
61

[125] S. Liao, J. Liu, P. Lin, T. Shi, R. K. Jain, L. Xu, TGF-β blockade
controls ascites by preventing abnormalization of lymphatic vessels in
orthotopic human ovarian carcinoma models, Clin. Cancer Res. 17 (6)
(2011) 1415–1424.
[126] L. A. van Meeteren, P. ten Dijke, Regulation of endothelial cell plasticity by TGF-β, Cell Tissue Res. 347 (1) (2012) 177–186.
[127] T. Watabe, A. Nishihara, K. Mishima, J. Yamashita, K. Shimizu,
K. Miyazawa, S. Nishikawa, K. Miyazono, TGF-β receptor kinase inhibitor enhances growth and integrity of embryonic stem cell-derived
endothelial cells, J. Cell Biol. 163 (6) (2003) 1303–1311.
[128] T. L. Haas, B. R. Duling, Morphology favors an endothelial cell pathway for longitudinal conduction within arterioles, Microvasc. Res. 53
(1997) 113–120.
[129] B. M. van den Berg, H. Vink, J. A. E. Spaan, The endothelial glycocalyx protects against myocardial edema, Circ. Res. 92 (2003) 592–594.
[130] R. Roskoski Jr., Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling
in tumor progression, Crit. Rev. Onc./Hem. 62 (2007) 179–213.
[131] Q. Zhang, C. J. Magovern, C. A. Mack, K. T. Budenbender, W. Ko,
T. K. Rosengart, Vascular endothelial growth factor is the major angiogenic factor in omentum: Mechanism of the omentum-mediated angiogenesis, J. Surg. Res. 67 (1997) 147–154.
[132] F. Mac Gabhann, J. W. Ji, A. S. Popel, VEGF gradients, receptor activation, and sprout guidance in resting and exercising skeletal muscle,
J. Appl. Physiol. 102 (2007) 722–734.
[133] M. J. Plank, B. D. Sleeman, P. F. Jones, A mathematical model of
tumor angiogenesis, regulated by vascular endothelial growth factor
and the angiopoietins, J. Theor. Biol. 229 (2004) 435–454.
[134] P. I. Imoukhuede, A. S. Popel, Expression of VEGF receptors on
endothelial cells in mouse skeletal muscle, PLOS ONE 7 (9) (2012)
e44791.

62

[135] L. S. Hansen, J. E. Coggle, J. Wells, M. W. Charles, The influence of
the hair cycle on the thickness of mouse skin, Anat. Rec. 210 (4) (1984)
569–573.
[136] S. Tsai, Y. Liu, . Li, T. Huang, C. Lee, Sesamin inhibits vascular
endothelial cell growth and angiogenic activity of lung adenocarcinoma
cells, J. Cancer Mol. 2 (5) (2006) 199–205.

63

