Kinetic Monte Carlo study of the type1/type 2 choice in apoptosis elucidates selective killing of cancer
cells under death ligand induction
Subhadip Raychaudhuri
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Delhi, Delhi 110020, India.
Email: subhadip@iiitd.ac.in

Abstract
	  
Death ligand mediated apoptotic activation is a mode of programmed cell death that is widely used in
cellular and physiological situations. Interest in studying death ligand induced apoptosis has increased due
to the promising role of recombinant soluble forms of death ligands (mainly recombinant TRAIL) in anticancer therapy. A clear elucidation of how death ligands activate the type 1 and type 2 apoptotic pathways
in healthy and cancer cells may help develop better chemotherapeutic strategies. In this work, we use
kinetic Monte Carlo simulations to address the problem of type 1/ type 2 choice in death ligand mediated
apoptosis of cancer cells. Our study provides insights into the activation of membrane proximal death
module that results from complex interplay between death and decoy receptors. Relative abundance of
death and decoy receptors was shown to be a key parameter for activation of the initiator caspases in the
membrane module. Increased concentration of death ligands frequently increased the type 1 activation
fraction in cancer cells, and, in certain cases changes the signaling phenotype from type 2 to type 1. Results
of this study also indicate that inherent differences between cancer and healthy cells, such as in the
membrane module, may allow robust activation of cancer cell apoptosis by death ligand induction. At the
same time, large cell-to-cell variability through the type 2 pathway was shown to provide protection for
healthy cells. Such elucidation of selective activation of apoptosis in cancer cells addresses a key question
in cancer biology and cancer therapy.

	  
	  
Keywords: death receptor, decoy receptor, cell-to-cell variability, TRAIL, FasL

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

1	  

Introduction
Death ligand induced apoptosis is a frequently used mode of cell death activation and is also important for
its potential application in cancer therapy. Tumor necrosis factor related apoptosis inducing ligand
(TRAIL), or recombinant forms of that ligand, has particularly attracted recent attention due to its role as a
promising anti-cancer agent [1-4]. However, a clear mechanistic understanding of such selectivity in
TRAIL induced apoptosis in cancer cells is still lacking. Expression levels of various pro- and antiapoptotic molecules in the membrane proximal and other signaling modules (in the apoptotic pathway) may
modulate selectivity in cancer cell apoptosis. In a more general manner, the systems level regulatory
mechanisms (such as the type 1/type 2 choice) of death ligand induced activation of the apoptotic death
pathway needs to be clearly elucidated. Presence of decoy receptors that are also capable of engaging the
death ligands makes it difficult to understand the mechanisms of death ligand induced activation of the
membrane proximal module. Moreover, two distinct clustering mechanisms have been indicated for TRAIL
decoy receptors [2, 5] providing additional complexities into the problem.
Death receptor activation, typically by death ligand engagement, is the mode of apoptotic activation in a
wide variety of cellular and physiological situations. Death ligand induced apoptosis has been implicated in
the death of strongly self-reactive immature lymphocytes (also for peripheral tolerance) [6]. In addition,
death ligand mediated apoptosis might be involved in maintaining homeostasis of mature lymphocytes that
have undergone clonal expansion (upon antigenic stimulation) [6]. Killing of pathogen infected cells or
tumor cells by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) and natural killer (NK) cells can be mediated by death
ligands [7]. TRAIL was found to be constitutively expressed on immature NK cells and also on NK cells of
adult liver, and, was shown to be involved in NK cell mediated suppression of tumor metastasis [8]. NK
cell’s TRAIL / Fas mediated killing of tumor cells might play an important role in the elimination of cancer
stem cells as depletion of NK cells led to a significant increase in cancer stem cell population [9]. Role of
TRAIL is also getting increasingly recognized in cancer immunotherapy [10]. In the context of Alzheimer’s
disease (a common form of neurodegenerative disorder), amyloid beta (Aβ) oligomers and aggregates were
shown to engage both the type 1 (extrinsic) and the type 2 (intrinsic) pathways of apoptosis [11-13].
Therefore, a clear elucidation of the death ligand induced apoptosis may have implications for various
important biological problems.
In our previous studies, we addressed the problem of understanding systems level regulation of type 1/type
2 choice in apoptotic activation [14, 15]. Results obtained from our computational studies indicated that
type 1/type 2 choice is regulated at a systems level, both in healthy and cancer cells. In addition, analysis of
our in silico data provided insights [14] into recent experimental studies that explored the type 1/type 2
choice in apoptotic activation. In a recent study, we showed that the concentration of death ligand is a key
determinant of type 1/ type 2 choice in healthy cells [15]. Whether death ligand concentration also impacts
the type 1/type 2 choice in cancer cells (in a manner similar to healthy cells) remains to be investigated.
Such elucidations seem to be crucial for designing cancer therapies that rely on activating the apoptotic
pathways by death ligand (such as TRAIL) induction.
Experimental studies including genomic analysis of cancer cells have indicated that the genome and
proteome of cancer cells are markedly different from that in healthy cells. Anti-apoptotic proteins are
frequently over-expressed in cancer cells making them particularly resistant to apoptotic activation. How it
is then possible to activate the apoptotic pathways selectively in cancer cells in such a manner that healthy
cells remain mostly protected, remains a challenging question that needs to be addressed before successful
anti-cancer therapies can be developed based on apoptotic induction. In our earlier studies we addressed the
mechanisms for selective killing of cancer cells such as by inhibition of Bcl2 family anti-apoptotic proteins
[16-19]. It seems likely that some of the pro-apoptotic molecules (such as Bid and Bax) are also overexpressed in certain cancer cells making them susceptible to apoptotic induction under Bcl2 inhibition [19].
However, over-expressions of anti- and pro-apoptotic molecules are cancer type specific (and possibly
patient-specific), and, also varies within a tumor population. Thus studies need to be carried out to find
suitable strategies for apoptosis induction in a specific case. Cancer cells in which p53 mediated pathway is
defective become resistant to genotoxicity based chemotherapeutic treatments [20] but death ligand
mediated apoptotic activation (possibly in combination with genotoxic or other types of chemotherapeutic
treatments) still remains a viable option [21]. In many cancer types, TRAIL induction seems to induce

	  

2	  

apoptotic activation in cancer cells but normal cells are not significantly impacted [2]. In some of the
earlier studies, TRAIL was found to be selective for cancer cells even though the receptor for TRAIL was
present in many types of healthy cells [22, 23]. Differences in the expression levels of death and/or decoy
receptors between cancer and healthy cells have been implicated in selective targeting of cancer cells [2224]. Naturally found substances such as the medicinal fruit Phyllanthus emblica Linn. also seem to
selectively activate the type 1 pathway in certain cancer cells [25]. Elucidating the precise mechanisms of
such selective targeting of cancer cells through the death receptor mediated pathway is lacking but such
elucidations may allow more effective cancer therapies. One needs to probe the mechanisms for: (i) death
and decoy receptor engagement to death ligands that result in receptor clustering, (ii) selective activation of
the membrane module in cancer cells, and, (iii) synergy between apoptotic vulnerability in the membrane
module and that in type 1/type 2 pathways (in cancer cells).
In this work, we use kinetic Monte Carlo simulations to elucidate the single cell mechanisms of the type
1/type 2 choice in cancer cells in silico. Results obtained from this study indicates that over-expression of
certain anti-apoptotic proteins may make cancer cells prone to either type 1 or type 2 activation. However,
in most cases increased death ligand induction leads to an increase in type 1 activation, as also observed in
our studies for healthy cells [15]. In some situations, increased death ligand concentration may actually
change the signaling phenotype from type 2 to type 1. Consistent with earlier experimental studies, the DR
/ DCR ratio in the membrane module is shown to be a key determinant of the type 1/type 2 choice.
Elucidations of type 1/type 2 choice in cancer cells also seem to provide crucial insights into the
mechanisms of selective killing of cancer cells under TRAIL induction. In this context, single cell analysis
of this study elucidates the role of cell-to-cell variability and slow activation in protecting healthy cells. In
silico approaches can be utilized to find optimal strategies for selective apoptotic activation in cancer cells
under death ligand induction.

	  

	  

	  

3	  

Methods	  
	  
We	  used	  Monte	  Carlo	  simulations	  to	  carry	  out	  computational	  study	  of	  death	  ligand	  induced	  apoptosis	  
in	  cancer	  cells.	  A	  simplified	  network	  model	  of	  apoptotic	  cell	  death	  signaling,	  which	  incorporates	  key	  
regulators	  in	  both	  type	  1	  and	  type	  2	  pathways	  (Figure	  1),	  was	  simulated	  in	  silico.	  The	  extent	  of	  type	  
1/type	  2	  activation	  was	  assessed	  in	  a	  quantitative	  manner	  at	  the	  level	  of	  single	  cells.	  	  
	  
The	  signaling	  model	  for	  apoptotic	  cell	  death	  	  
	  
In	  our	  computational	  model,	  induction	  of	  death	  ligands	  (such	  as	  FasL,	  TRAIL)	  activates	  the	  initiator	  
caspases	  (caspase	  8)	  in	  the	  membrane	  proximal	  death	  module	  and	  thus	  acts	  as	  a	  trigger	  for	  apoptotic	  
activation.	   Once	   caspase	   8	   is	   activated	   in	   the	   membrane	   module	   it	   initiates	   signaling	   through	   both	  
type	   1	   and	   type	   2	   pathways.	   Death	   ligands	   bind	   with	   death	   receptors	   with	   high	   (~	   nanomolar)	  
affinity	   causing	   oligomerization	   of	   death	   receptors	   and	   recruitment	   of	   adaptor	   molecules	   through	  
interaction	  between	  their	  death	  domains	  (DD)	  [2,	  26].	  Binding	  of	  adaptor	  proteins	  with	  ligand-­‐bound	  
death	  receptors	  (through	  death	  domains	  DD)	  has	  been	  estimated	   to	  be	  of	  moderate	  affinity	  (~	  106	  M-­‐
1)	  [27].	  This	  affinity	  might	  be	  higher	  as	  these	  adaptor	  molecules	  bind	  with	  pro-­‐caspase	  8	  with	  high	  
affinity	  ~	  108	  M-­‐1.	  The	  adaptor	  molecules	  may	  also	  bind	  with	  free	  receptors	  but	  the	  binding	  affinity	  
should	  be	  small	  so	  that	  spontaneous	  apoptotic	  activation	  (in	  absence	  of	  death	  ligands)	  does	  not	  occur	  
in	   healthy	   cells	   (this	   binding	   affinity	   is	   set	   to	   zero	   in	   our	   current	   simulations).	   The	   clustered	  
environment	  of	  death	  receptors	  and	  adaptor	  molecules	  is	  known	  as	  death	  inducing	  signaling	  complex	  
(DISC)	   as	   it	   could	   recruit,	   cluster,	   and	   activate	   caspase	   8.	   Death	   effector	   domains	   (DED)	   of	   inactive	  
pro-­‐caspase	   8	   molecules	   bind	   to	   DED	   of	   adaptor	   proteins	   and	   then	   get	   cleaved	   to	   active	   caspase	   8	  
(when	   two	   procaspase	   8	   molecules	   are	   proximal).	   We	   also	   consider	   decoy	   receptors	   (not	   considered	  
in	   our	   earlier	   studies)	   that	   lack	   death	   signaling	   capability	   as	   they	   cannot	   recruit	   adaptor	   proteins.	  
Decoy	  receptors	  for	  TRAIL	  are	  known	  to	  inhibit	  formation	  of	  DISC	  by	  two	  distinct	  mechanisms:	  (i)	  for	  
decoy	  receptor	  1	  (DCR1,	  also	  known	  as	  TRAIL-­‐R3):	  by	  pre-­‐clustering	  (likely	  in	  lipid	  raft	  domains	  [2])	  
and	   then	   recruiting	   significant	   fraction	   of	   death	   ligands	   in	   those	   micro-­‐clusters	   and	   (ii)	   for	   decoy	  
receptor	   2	   (DCR2,	   also	   known	   as	   TRAIL-­‐R4):	   by	   clustering	   with	   DR5	   in	   DISC,	   upon	   death	   ligand	  
engagement,	  but	  preventing	  DR4	  recruitment	  in	  DISC	  [2,	  28].	  	  DR4	  (TRAIL-­‐R1)	  and	  DR5	  (TRAIL-­‐R2)	  
are	   two	   well-­‐studied	   receptors	   for	   TRAIL.	  In	   the	   first	   scenario,	   recruitment	   of	   death	   ligands	   in	   DCR1-­‐
raft	  regions	  supposedly	  leads	  to	  reduction	  in	  available	  death	  ligands	  for	  DR4/DR5	  binding	  and	  thus	  
inhibit	   DISC	   formation.	   In	   the	   second	   case,	   decoy	   receptor	   DCR2	   clustering	   with	   DR5	   seems	   to	  
diminish	   clustering	   of	   caspase	   8	   within	   DISC	   as	   decoy	   receptors	   do	   not	   recruit	   adaptor	   proteins.	  
Clustering	   of	   receptors	   was	   modeled	   through	   an	   effective	   free	   energy	   parameter	   E,	   which	   could	  
capture	   the	   effective	   attraction	   (reduction	   in	   energy)	   when	   two	   receptors	   occupied	   neighboring	  
nodes.	   	   For	   free	   (unbound)	   death	   receptors	   (and	   decoy	   receptors)	   the	   energy	   parameter	   was	  
assumed	  to	  be	  small	  ~	  -­‐KB	  T	  to	  prevent	  spontaneous	  pre-­‐clustering	  of	  receptor	  molecules.	  However,	  
pre-­‐clustering	  in	  lipid	  raft	  domains	  has	  been	  observed	  for	  DCR1	  due	  to	  their	  GPI	  anchor	  [2,	  28].	  We	  
lowered	   the	   value	   of	   the	   free	   energy	   parameter	   to	   E	   =	   	   -­‐3KB	   T	   to	   capture	   such	   ligand	   independent	  
clustering	   of	   receptors.	   Ligand	   binding	   was	   assumed	   to	   enhance	   the	   effective	   attraction	   between	  
neighboring	  receptors	  resulting	  in	  a	  lowering	  of	  the	  free	  energy	  parameter	  from	  its	  basal	  value.	  For	  
initially	   unclustered	   free	   receptors,	   ligand	   binding	   lowered	   the	   value	   of	   the	   free	   energy	   parameter	   to	  
a	   value	   E	   =	   	   -­‐3KB	   T.	   For	   pre-­‐clustered	   receptors,	   ligand	   binding	   resulted	   in	   E	   =	   	   -­‐4KB	   T	   (further	  
lowering	   of	   free	   energy).	   The	   free	   energy	   parameter	   E,	   the	   number	   of	   receptors	   and	   ligands,	   and,	   the	  
ligand	   binding	   affinity	   were	   found	   to	   be	   the	   key	   parameters	   for	   inducing	   receptor	   clustering	   and	  
DISC	  formation.	  	  	  
	  
Active	  caspase	  8	  molecules	  engage	  both	  type	  1	  and	  type	  2	  pathways.	  In	  the	  type	  1	  pathway,	  caspase	  8	  
directly	   activates	   the	   effector	   caspases	   (caspase	   3/7).	   In	   the	   type	   2	   pathway,	   a	   second	   initiator	  
caspase	  (caspase	  9)	  is	  required	  for	  effector	  caspase	  activation	  and	  signal	  amplification.	  Initial	  routing	  
of	  the	  activation	  signal	  through	  type	  1/	  type	  2	  pathways	  is	  governed	  by	  relative	  affinity	  of	  caspase	  8	  
for	  pro-­‐caspase	  3	  (type	  1	  pathway)	  and	  Bid	  (type	  2	  pathway)	  [15].	  Final	  determination	  of	  the	  type	  
1/type	   2	   choice	   depends	   on	   how	   fast	   the	   activation	   signal	   propagates	   through	   each	   of	   those	   two	  
pathways	   to	   finally	   activate	   caspase	   3	   [15].	   In	   the	   type	   2	   pathway,	   signal	   propagation	   is	   regulated	   by	  

	  

4	  

the	  pre-­‐	  and	  post-­‐mitochondrial	  signaling	  modules.	  In	  the	  pre-­‐mitochondrial	  module,	  pro-­‐	  and	  anti-­‐
apoptotic	   Bcl2	   family	   proteins	   determine	   the	   extent	   of	   Bax	   activation	   and	   cytochrome	   c	   release	   from	  
mitochondria.	   In	   the	   post-­‐mitochondrial	   module,	   cytochrome	   c	   binds	   with	   Apaf	   to	   form	   the	   multi-­‐
molecular	   cyto	   c-­‐Apaf-­‐ATP	   complex	   apoptosome.	   In	   the	   clustered	   environment	   of	   apoptosome,	  
initiator	   caspase	   9	   is	   activated	   (similar	   to	   activation	   of	   caspase	   8	   within	   DISC),	   which	   in	   turn,	  
activates	   the	   effector	   caspases.	   Apoptotic	   inhibitor	   XIAP	   binds	   to	   pro-­‐caspase	   9,	   caspase	   9	   and	  
caspase	  3,	  thus	  inhibits	  effector	  caspase	  activation	  in	  both	  type	  1	  and	  type	  2	  pathways.	  Activation	  of	  
effector	   caspases	   (represented	   by	   caspase	   3	   in	   our	   model)	   was	   taken	   as	   a	   downstream	   readout	   of	  
apoptotic	   cell	   death	   signaling	   and	   the	   time-­‐course	   of	   its	   activation	   was	   measured	   (at	   the	   level	   of	  
single	  cells)	  in	  our	  MC	  simulations.	  	  
	  
Earlier	  studies	  indicated	  that	  the	  type	  1/type	  2	  choice	  is	  death	  receptor	  specific	   [15,	  29]	  as	  one	  type	  
of	   death	   ligand	   activates	   a	   specific	   death	   receptor	   (or	   a	   few	   specific	   receptors)	   and	   different	   death	  
receptors	  may	  have	  different	  expression	  levels	  for	  a	  given	  cell	  type.	  	  It	  is	  reasonable	  to	  assume	  that	  
decoy	   receptors	   are	   also	   ligand	   specific	   and	   their	   expression	   level	   varies	   depending	   on	   the	   decoy	  
receptor	  considered.	  DCR1	  and	  DCR2	  (TRAIL-­‐R3	  and	  TRAIL-­‐R4),	  for	  example,	  are	  specific	  for	  TRAIL	  
and	   not	   relevant	   for	   FasL	   induced	   apoptosis	   [5].	   Therefore,	   it	   should	   be	   noted	   that	   the	   death	  
receptors/ligands	  simulated	  here	  capture	  the	  effect	  of	  only	  one	  type	  of	  receptor/ligand	  pairs	  (such	  as	  
Fas/FasL	  or	  DR4-­‐DR5/TRAIL),	  not	  the	  combined	  effect	  of	  all	  the	  death	  receptors/ligands	  on	  a	  given	  
cell	  type.	  As	  we	  include	  DCR	  1/DCR	  2	  in	  our	  current	  simulations	  results	  are	  most	  relevant	  for	  TRAIL	  
induced	  apoptosis.	  
	  
Even	   though	   we	   simulate	   some	   major	   components	   of	   the	   apoptotic	   death	   regulatory	   pathway	   that	  
are	   essential	   for	   addressing	   the	   type	   1/type	   2	   choice	   in	   cancer	   cells,	   it	   has	   several	   simplifying	  
assumptions.	  In	  our	  model,	  functionally	  similar	  molecules	  (pro-­‐	  or	  anti-­‐apoptotic)	  are	  coarse-­‐grained	  
by	  a	  representative	  protein.	  Bcl-­‐2	  (B	  cell	  lymphoma	  protein	  2),	  for	  example,	  represents	  all	  the	  Bcl-­‐2	  
family	   proteins	   (such	   as	   Bcl-­‐2,	   Bcl-­‐xL,	   Mcl-­‐1)	   with	   similar	   anti-­‐apoptotic	   properties.	   The	   present	  
model	   do	   not	   consider	   the	   following:	   (i)	   synthesis	   and	   degradation	   of	   signaling	   molecules	   [30]	   and	  
(ii)	  engagement	  of	  other	  pathways	  (such	  as	  NFκβ)	  by	  components	  of	  the	  apoptotic	  death	  pathway	  [2,	  
31].	  	  	  
	  
	  
Hybrid	  Monte	  Carlo	  (MC)	  simulation	  of	  apoptotic	  cell	  death	  signaling	  
	  
We	   developed	   a	   hybrid	   Monte	   Carlo	   simulation	   that	   combines	   the	   following	   two	   approaches:	   (1)	   a	  
probabilistic	   rate	   constant	   based	   (implicit	   free	   energy)	   kinetic	   Monte	   Carlo	   simulation	   for	   various	  
reaction	   moves	   such	   as	   diffusion,	   binding/unbinding	   and	   catalytic	   cleavage;	   (2)	   an	   explicit	   free-­‐
energy	   based	   kinetic	   Monte	   Carlo	   model	   that	   captures	   clustering	   of	   receptor	   molecules	   utilizing	  
energy	   function	   based	   diffusion	   moves.	   At	   each	   Monte	   Carlo	   (MC)	   step,	   one	   molecule	   was	   sampled	  
(on	   average)	   once	   to	   allow	   for	   either	   diffusion	   or	   a	   reaction	   move.	   Acceptance/Rejection	   of	   the	  
moves	  was	  carried	  out	  based	  on	  either	  through	  the	  probability	  constants	  (in	  implicit	  energy	  MC)	  or	  
by	  the	  Metropolis	  criteria	  (in	  explicit	  energy	  MC)	  and	  ensures	  detailed	  balance	  is	  satisfied.	  	  
	  
A	   simulation	   volume	   of	   1.2	   ×	   1.2	   ×	   1.2	   µm3	   (corresponding	   to	   a	   60	   ×	   60	   ×	   60	   lattice	   with	   lattice	  
spacing	  Δx	  =	  20	  nm)	  is	  chosen	  in	  such	  a	  manner	   that	  the	  number	  of	  molecules	  (for	  each	  molecular	  
species)	   is	   equal	   to	   the	   nanomolar	   concentration.	   Death	   and	   decoy	   receptors	   are	   placed	   on	   one	  
surface	  of	  the	  simulation	  lattice	  where	  they	  engage	  death	  ligands	  placed	  on	  a	  surface	  parallel	  to	  death	  
/	   decoy	   receptor	   surface.	   Cytochrome	   c	   /Smac	   is	   initially	   localized	   in	   an	   18	   ×	   18	   ×	   18	   sub-­‐lattice	  
within	   the	   intracellular	   volume.	   Each	   MC	   step	   (ΔT)	   is	   chosen	   to	   be	   10-­‐4	   s	   based	   on	   known	   mobility	   of	  
cytosolic	  molecules	  [15].	  A	  typical	  simulation	  is	  run	  for	  108	  MC	  steps.	  Kinetic	  reaction	  rates	  (such	  as	  
kon	   /koff	  )	   and	   molecular	   concentrations	   were	   obtained	   from	   values	   reported	   in	   the	   literature	   (mostly	  
from	   [27])[32]	   and	   utilized	   in	   our	   previous	   work	   [14,	   15,	   19,	   33]	   (unless	   specified	   otherwise).	   In	   our	  
studies	   of	   cancer	   cells,	   concentrations	   of	   over-­‐expressed	   molecules	   are	   provided	   (fold	   over-­‐
expression	   was	   defined	   with	   respect	   to	   concentrations	   used	   in	   simulating	   apoptosis	   in	   healthy	   cells).	  
In	   simulating	   selective	   apoptotic	   activation	   in	   cancer	   cells	  the	   following	   death	   receptor	   levels	   were	  

	  

5	  

used:	  100	  (for	  cells	  with	  type	  1	  susceptibility)	  and	  20	  (for	  cells	  with	  type	  2	  susceptibility).	  We	  used	  
20	   molecules	   for	   the	   decoy	   receptors	   (not	   considered	   in	   our	   earlier	   studies)	   except	   for	   one	   set	   of	  
simulations	   where	   it	   was	   set	   to	   zero.	   Death	   ligand	   concentration	   was	   varied	   in	   our	   simulations	   to	  
study	  the	  effect	  of	  its	  variation	  on	  the	  type	  1/type	  2	  choice.	  The	  number	  of	  death	  adaptor	  proteins	  
and	   cFLIP	   was	   taken	   to	   be	   30	   (unless	   stated	   otherwise)	   [27,	   32,	   34],	   which	   is	   comparable	   to	   the	  
expression	  level	  of	  pro-­‐caspase	  8	  molecules	  used	  in	  our	  simulations.	  Such	  a	  kinetic	  MC	  scheme	  allows	  
rigorous	  study	  of	  the	  type	  1/type	  2	  choice	  problem,	  which	  is	  essentially	  a	  dynamical	  problem.	  Details	  
of	  our	  simulation	  method	  can	  be	  found	  in	  our	  earlier	  works.	  	  
	  
	  
Single	  cell	  data	  analysis	  
	  
Each	  run	  of	  our	  Monte	  Carlo	  simulation	  corresponds	  to	  apoptotic	  activation	  in	  a	  single	  cell,	  thus,	  data	  
obtained	   from	   Monte	   Carlo	   runs	   can	   capture	   cell-­‐to-­‐cell	   stochastic	   variability	   (including	   inherent	  
variability)	   in	   signaling	   activation.	   Each	   run	   of	   the	   simulation	   corresponds	   to	   activation	   at	   a	   single	  
cell	  level.	  Statistical	  analysis	  was	  carried	  out	  using	  data	  obtained	  from	  many	  single	  cell	  runs	  (64	  runs	  
were	  used	  in	  current	  simulations).	  We	  define	  the	  following	  parameters	  for	   quantitatively	  assessing	  
the	  extent	  of	  type	  1	  and	  type	  2	  activations:	  Ntype1	  /(Ntype1	  +	  Ntype2	  )	  and	  Ntype2	  /(Ntype1	  +	  	  Ntype2	  ),	  where	  
Ntype1	   	   and	   Ntype2	   represents	   the	   number	   of	   active	   caspase	   3	   molecules	   generated	   by	   caspase	   8	   and	  
caspase	  9,	  respectively.	  In	  our	  simulations,	  the	  type	  1	  (or	  type	  2)	  activation	  was	  estimated	  at	  a	  time	  
when	   caspase	   3	   molecules	   undergone	   half-­‐maximal	   activation.	   Average	   and	   standard	   deviation	  
(measure	  of	  fluctuation)	  in	  type	  1/	  type	  2	  activation	  fraction	  was	  estimated	  based	  on	  64	  single	  cell	  
runs.	  At	  the	  level	  of	  single	  cells,	  a	  cell	  was	  called	  a	  type	  1	  cell	  if	  	  Ntype1	  /(Ntype1	  +	  Ntype2	  )	  >	  0.5	  (more	  
than	  50%	  of	  activation	  was	  through	  the	  type	  1	  pathway).	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

6	  

Results
Increasing death ligand concentration increases type 1 activation in cancer cells
Concentrations of apoptotic and anti-apoptotic molecules in the death signaling pathway is cell type
specific. In cancer cells, such cell type specific variability is presumably much more pronounced as cancer
cells found to exhibit genomic instability and aberrant expression of both pro- and anti-apoptotic molecules
(in a cancer-type specific manner). Such variability may also exist among genetically heterogenous subpopulations within a given tumor cell [35, 36]. However, some of the key anti-apoptotic molecules such as
Bcl2 like proteins and XIAP are over-expressed in a large number of cancers [18, 37] and incorporated in
our simulations of typical cancer cells. We also assume moderate over-expression of apoptotic Bid and Bax
molecules (in many cancers inhibition of Bcl2 like proteins results in mitochondrial cytochrome c release
and apoptosis activation) [19]. We study the effect of variation in death ligands on apoptotic activation
(type 1/type 2 choice) in such representative cancer cells.
When DL concentration is low (~ 2 molecules on 1.2 × 1.2 µm2 cell surface), very high XIAP expression
(~ 3 fold or higher) suppresses type 2 apoptosis as XIAP strongly inhibits caspase 9 activation. Only weak
type 1 activation was observed under such low DL concentrations. Increased DL concentration resulted in
markedly increased apoptosis and also increased activation through the type 1 pathway (Figure 2).
However, the type 1 activation seemed to proceed only after Smac was released from mitochondria and
XIAP was inhibited [14, 38, 39]. In this type 2 assisted type 1 mode of activation, the time to cytochrome
c/Smac release exhibited significant stochastic variability mainly due to cell-to-cell stochastic fluctuations
in activation of the membrane module. In contrast, when cancer cells had regular XIAP levels but
decreased death adaptor proteins and increased cFLIP, death ligands induced weak type 2 activation
(Figure 3) with its characteristics large cell-to-cell variability (Figure 4). Combined effect of decoy
receptors, lower adaptor protein levels and higher cFLIP was to impair DISC formation and pro-caspase 8
processing.
Such weak type 2 activation might explain resistant cancer cells such as DCR2 expressing cells of MCF-7
breast cancer cell line [31]. Here also, increased DL concentration resulted in increased fraction of type 1
activation (Figure 3). In corresponding healthy cells (when over-expressions of pro- and anti- apoptotic
molecules are removed), low level of death ligand induction mainly activated the type 2 pathway but the
activation was switched to type 1 dominant mode with increasing ligand concentrations (Figure 5) [15]. For
healthy cells equipped with low level (~ 10 molecules) of adaptor proteins and comparable amount of death
and decoy receptors (as in Figure 5), the decoy receptors DCR2 [31] had a stronger anti-apoptotic effect
than DCR1 when intermediate level (~ 10 molecules) of death ligand was used in our simulations. In Figure
6, we show distinct clustering mechanisms for DCR1 and DCR2 and this may explain differences in
apoptotic activation observed between DCR1 and DCR2. In cancer cells, when Bcl2 is 10 fold
overexpressed along with moderate over-expression (~ 5 fold) of Bid (BH3 only proteins) and Bax / Bak,
increased concentrations of death ligand induction change the activation from type 2 dominant mode to
type 1 dominant mode (Figure 7).
Mechanisms for selective killing of cancer cells by TRAIL induction (apoptotic vulnerability in the
membrane module of cancer cells)
Genome and proteome of cancer cells are markedly different from that in healthy cells and such differences
may allow selective targeting and elimination of cancer cells. In many cases, the inherent state of the
membrane module (including the death receptor expression) in cancer cells is more susceptible to apoptotic
activation than that in healthy cells. Recent experiments indicated that expression of death receptors DR4
and/or DR5 (TRAIL receptors) can be high in certain cancer cells [31, 40]. In addition, DR4/DR5 and other
death receptors can be upregulated by chemotherapeutic agents and also by genetic mechanisms [40-43]. In
addition, death adaptor proteins might have lower expression levels in healthy cells (such as that are prone
to type 2 activation [27]) and/or its expression can be induced selectively in certain cancer cells [40]. In a
more general manner, it might be possible to alter the inherent proteomic and lipidomic state of the plasma
membrane by chemotherapeutic treatments. For example, XIAP inhibitor embelin has been found to induce
down-regulation of sFLIP in malignant glioma cells [41]. Based on this observation we simulated apoptosis
activation in silico for cancer cells showing highly expressed DR4/DR5 (~ 100 molecules) [41-43] or Apaf

	  

7	  

proteins (~ 100 nanomolar) [44], as well as downregulated cFLIP (~ 10 nanomolar) [41]. In corresponding
normal cells expression levels of DR4 /DR5 and Apaf were assumed to be low-to-moderate. Significant
expression of cFLIP (~ 30 nanomolar) was used for healthy cells. As discussed in the methods section, two
different scenarios for decoy receptors (for DCR1 and DCR2) were simulated for TRAIL induced
clustering of DR4/DR5.
We considered two possible strategies for selectively activating the death receptor induced pathway in
cancer cells. The type 2 pathway can be activated in cells for which DR expression is not very high (DR /
DCR ~ 1), Bid and Bax type proteins are over-expressed to some extent, apoptotic inhibitors Bcl2 and
XIAP are either not highly expressed or those can be inhibited (such as by embelin alone [45] or by
combined treatment of ABT-737 and embelin [18]), and, Apaf expression is significant (compared with
healthy cells) [44]. In contrast, when the type 2 pathway remains strongly resistant to activation (such as
due to low Bid-Bax levels and high Bcl2 like inhibitors) but large concentration of death receptors is either
present or can be induced, activating the type 1 pathway turns out to be a better strategy. In either case, we
observe selective killing of cancer cells while activation in healthy cells remain low. We present
quantitative estimations of type 1 and type 2 activations (based on population averaged fraction of type 1 /
type 2 activation over 64 single cell runs; see Methods). We can also assign a type 1/type 2 activation
phenotype to each cell that has undergone sufficient effector caspase activation. For a single cell, if the type
1 activation exceeds 50% of total, then the cell is called a type 1 cell (see Methods).
(i) Selective killing of cancer cells under high affinity death ligand induction
In certain cancer cells the adaptor protein expression can be higher or it can be induced by genetic
mechanisms (such as done for neural cancer cells [40]). In such a scenario, it seems to be possible to
selectively activate the apoptotic pathway in cancer cells by application of a very low concentration of
death ligands (~ 2 molecules/1.44 µm2). Even when the adaptor protein level in cancer cells is comparable
to that in healthy cells it might still be possible to activate apoptosis in cancer cells using low concentration
of death ligands (such as when DR/DCR ratio is high). In our simulations, DL = 2, DR = 10, DCR = 20 and
adaptor = 10 (molecules) resulted in very weak activation in healthy cells (except for activation in a small
number of cells with majority of cells getting activated through the type 2 pathway) (Figure 8). For cancer
cells, we assumed a 3-fold higher expression level for the death adaptor protein. As before, when the type
2 pathway is susceptible for activation in a cancer cell type (due to overexpressed Apaf and low/inhibited
Bcl2), DR = 20, DCR = 20 and DL = 2 resulted in strong apoptotic induction (67% for DCR1 and 80% for
DCR2 as shown in Figure 8) in the simulation time-scale of ~ 3 hrs. In contrast, when the DR4/DR5
concentration is high, moderately rapid activation of the type 1 pathway is possible even for low death
ligand concentrations DL = 2 (Figure 8). The ratio DR/DCR emerges as a key parameter that determines
the extent of activation in the membrane proximal module as well as the extent of cell-to-cell stochastic
variability in caspase 8 activation. In certain cases the type 1/type 2 choice at the level of single cells may
differ from that estimated based on average over many cells. In our simulations for cancer cells equipped
with high level of Apaf (type 2 susceptibility), type 1/type 2 choice estimated at the level of single cells
(Table 1) differs from the estimation based on average type 1/type 2 activation (Figure 8). Clearly, the type
1/type 2 choice in cancer cells is regulated at a systems level and is dependent on the inherent state of
various signaling modules (Figure 1) in the apoptotic pathway.
We also considered the scenario where negligible amount of decoy receptors were present on cancer cells,
as indicated by some earlier experimental studies [22, 23]. When DCR concentration was set to zero in our
simulations, all of the single cells undergone nearly complete activation even for moderate level of death
receptor (~ 20 molecules) and adaptor protein (~ 10 molecules) presence and low level (~ 2 molecules) of
death ligand induction (data not shown). Such a result should also be relevant for FasL (CD95L) induced
apoptosis if the selectivity is achieved for cancer cells or local application of FasL is possible. We also
observed significant decrease in cell-to-cell variability in casapse 8 activation when DCR = 0 and a
stochastic-to-deterministic transition might be possible to achieve through the type 2 pathway [19].

	  

8	  

Table 1. Type 1/Type 2 choice in cancer cells (under DL = 2 induction) at the level of single cells (based
on 64 single cell runs)
Type of cell

Healthy cells
Cancer cells with
high Apaf
Cancer cells with
high DR

DCR1
Cells undergone
apoptosis
13

3 (23%)

DCR2
Cells undergone
apoptosis
12

43

2 (5%)

51

3 (6%)

55

33 (60%)

48

30 (63%)

Type 1 cell

Type 1 cell
6 (50%)

	  
(ii)	  Selective	  killing	  of	  cancer	  cells	  under	  low	  affinity	  death	  ligand	  induction	  
	  
We	  next	  considered	  the	  case	  when	  TRAIL	  affinity	  for	  death	  receptors	  DR4/DR5	  is	  low	  (Kd	  ~	  10	  µM).	  
The	   affinity	   of	   the	   death	   ligand	   for	   decoy	   receptors	   was	   assumed	   to	   be	   similar	   to	   that	   for	   death	  
receptors.	   Such	   low	   affinity	   death	   ligands	   might	   remain	   protective	   even	   for	   normal	   cells	   that	   have	  
significant	  expression	  levels	  of	  both	  death	  and	  decoy	  receptors	  (as	  well	  as	  other	  membrane-­‐proximal	  
apoptotic	   molecules).	   In	   Figure	   9,	   apoptotic	   activation	   data	   is	   shown	   for	   healthy	   and	   cancer	   cells.	  
Irrespective	  of	  the	  pathway	  (type	  1/type	  2)	  of	  activation,	  we	  observed	  selective	  killing	  of	  cancer	  cells	  
while	   healthy	   cells	   were	   mostly	   protected.	   For	   DL	   =	   5,	   the	   average	   time-­‐to-­‐death	   and	   cell-­‐to-­‐cell	  
variability	   was	   estimated	   to	   be	   approximately	   two	   to	   three	   fold	   higher	   in	   healthy	   cells	   than	   in	   cancer	  
cells.	  
	  
In	  Figure	  9,	  we	  present	  quantitative	  estimations	  of	  type	  1	  and	  type	  2	  activations	  (based	  on	  average	  
over	  64	  single	  cells).	  Consistent	  with	  the	  data	  shown	  in	  Figure	  9,	  for	  certain	  types	  of	  cancer	  (or	  for	  
some	  cells	  within	  a	  tumor	  population)	  a	  mixed	  type	  1/type	  2	  activation	  phenotype	  will	  be	  the	  mode	  
of	  activation.	  Our	  type	  2	  activation	  data	  (for	  both	  high	  and	  low	  affinity	  ligands)	  should	  be	  relevant	  for	  
apoptosis	   induction	   in	   certain	   neural	   cancers	   as	   recent	   experimental	   data	   indicates	   selective	  
activation	   of	   intrinsic	   apoptosis	   in	   glioblastoma	   cells	   by	   a	   combined	   treatment	   of	   TRAIL	   and	   embelin	  
[41].	   	   Strong	   caspase	   9	   activation	   in	   those	   experiments	   seems	   to	   indicate	   activation	   through	   the	   type	  
2	   pathway.	   From	   our	   simulations	   for	   low	   affinity	   ligands,	   single	   cell	   data	   for	   caspase	   9	   and	   caspase	   3	  
activation	   (Figure	   10)	   provide	   further	   insights	   into	   selective	   killing	   of	   cancer	   cells.	   In	   cancer	   cells	  
cell-­‐to-­‐cell	   variability	   in	   caspase	   3	   activation	   is	   markedly	   reduced	   compared	   with	   that	   in	   healthy	  
cells.	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  
A	   quantitative	   scoring	   approach	   can	   be	   developed	   for	   choosing	   optimal	   death	   ligand	   concentration	  
needed	  for	  selective	  killing	  of	  cancer	  cells.	   In	  this	  scoring	  approach	  quantitative	  assessment	  can	  be	  
done	  for	  various	  key	  factors	  such	  as:	  (i)	  number	  of	  cells	  undergoing	  apoptotic	  activation	  in	  a	  given	  
simulation	  time	  (highest	  score	  of	  10	  for	  100%	  apoptosis)	  (ii)	  average	  time-­‐to-­‐death	  (highest	  score	  of	  
5	  for	  Td	  =	  0	  to	  lowest	  0	  when	  Td	  equals	  the	  maximum	  simulation	  time),	  (iii)	  cell-­‐to-­‐cell	  variability	  in	  
Td	  (the	  case	  with	  cell-­‐to-­‐cell	  variability	  equals	  to	  half-­‐maximal	  simulation	  time	  is	  assigned	  a	  score	  of	  
0	   and	   no	   cell-­‐to-­‐cell	   variability	   is	   assigned	   a	   maximum	   score	   of	   5),	   (iv)	   number	   of	   apoptosis	   in	  
corresponding	   healthy	   cells	   (highest	   score	   of	   10	   for	   0%	   apoptosis).	   When	   we	   applied	   this	  
quantitative	  method	  for	  cancer	  cells	  equipped	  with	  high	  death	  receptor	  (DR	  =	  100),	  DL	  =	  5-­‐10	  turned	  
out	   to	   be	   the	   optimal	   DL	   level.	   The	   following	   death	   ligand	   levels	   DL	   =	   2,	   5	   and	   10	   were	   analyzed	  
based	  on	  data	  shown	  in	  Figure	  7.	  Such	  a	  quantitative	  data	  analysis	  approach	  can	  be	  more	  generally	  
applicable,	   such	   as	   to	   find	   optimal	   ligand	   avidity	   or	   optimal	   combinatorial	   treatment	   options,	   for	  
selective	  apoptotic	  activation	  in	  cancer	  cells.	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

9	  

Table	  2.	  Quantitative	  scoring	  for	  choosing	  optimal	  death	  ligand	  concentration	  
	  
	  
DCR1	  
DCR2	  

DL	  =	  2	  
17.9	  
18.7	  

DL	  =	  5	  
20	  
21.4	  

DL	  =	  10	  
20	  
20.6	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
We	  also	  studied	  death	  ligands	  having	  increased	  affinity	  for	  decoy	  receptors	  than	  death	  receptors	  to	  
probe	   whether	   such	   ligands	   could	   selectively	   induce	   apoptosis	   in	   cancer	   cells.	   When	   expression	   of	  
death	   receptors	   (DR4	   /	   DR5)	   is	   significant	   in	   healthy	   cells	   (cells	   that	   will	   be	   under	   the	   action	   of	  
chemotherapeutic	   drugs),	   but	   still	   the	   DR/	   DCR	   ratio	   is	   larger	   in	   cancer	   cells	   compared	   to	   that	   in	  
healthy	   cells,	   engineered	   ligands	   that	   target	   the	   death	   receptors	   with	   lower	   than	   usual	   affinity	   (~	  
nanomolar)	   might	   allow	   minimal	   cytotoxicity	   in	   normal	   cells.	   The	   affinity	   for	   decoy	   receptors	  
remains	  in	  the	  usual	  nanomolar	  range	  so	  that	  most	  ligands	  bind	  to	  decoy	  receptors	  on	  normal	  cells	  
instead	  of	  death	  receptors.	  Even	  TRAIL	  (the	  natural	  death	  ligand)	  might	  bind	  with	  DCR2	  with	  slightly	  
higher	  effective	  affinity	  (than	  that	  for	  DR4/DR5)	  due	  to	  elongated	  and	  rigid	  extracellular	  structure	  of	  
DCR2	   [28].	   In	   our	   simulations,	   for	   healthy	   cells	   we	   assumed	   DR	   =	   10	   and	   DCR	   =	   20,	   whereas,	   for	  
cancer	  cells	  DCR	  is	  still	  20	  molecules	  but	  DR	  /	  DCR	  ≥	  1.	  	  When	  the	  type	  2	  pathway	  is	  susceptible	  for	  
activation,	  DR	  ~	  20	  (DR	  /	  DCR	  ~	  1)	  and	  DL	  ~	  10	  are	  sufficient	  for	  significant	  apoptotic	  induction	  in	  
cancer	   cells	   (Figure	   11).	   In	   a	   similar	   manner,	   when	   high	   levels	   of	   anti-­‐apoptotic	   proteins	   (such	   as	  
Bcl2)	   makes	   the	   type	   2	   pathway	   particularly	   resistant	   but	   DR4	   /	   DR5	   expression	   is	   high	   (either	  
constitutively	  or	  induced	  by	  genetic	  or	  other	  mechanisms),	  then	  the	  type	  1	  activation	  can	  be	  achieved	  
in	   a	   selective	   manner	   as	   shown	   in	   Figure	   11.	   	   However,	   such	   a	   strategy,	   based	   on	   lower	   affinity	  
ligands	   for	   the	   death	   receptor,	   would	   fail	   if	   the	   decoy	   receptor	   expression	   on	   cancer	   cells	   is	   higher	  
than	  that	  of	  the	  death	  receptor.	  	  	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

10	  

Discussion	  
	  
In	   many	   cancer	   cells,	   over-­‐expression	   of	   pro-­‐	   and	   anti-­‐apoptotic	   molecules	   may	   make	   them	  
particularly	   prone	   to	   either	   type	   1	   or	   type	   2	   activation.	   For	   example,	   high	   over-­‐expression	   level	   of	  
XIAP	   makes	   the	   type	   2	   pathway	   particularly	   resistant.	   In	   contrast,	   low	   expression	   level	   of	   death	  
receptors	   and	   high	   cFLIP	   level	   may	   preferentially	   activate	   the	   type	   2	   pathway	   in	   a	   cancer	   cell.	  
However,	   increased	   concentration	   of	   DL	   increases	   the	   type	   1	   activation	   in	   most	   cases.	   Increase	   in	  
type	   1	   activation	   results	   from	   increased	   caspase	   8	   activation	   that	   compensates	   for	   the	   lower	   binding	  
affinity	  of	  caspase	  8-­‐	  procaspase	  3	  than	  that	  of	  caspase	  8-­‐Bid.	  For	  some	  types	  of	  cancer,	  increased	  DL	  
concentration	   will	   presumably	   allow	   a	   type	   2	   to	   type	   1	   transition	   (as	   also	   observed	   in	   our	   earlier	  
studies	   for	   healthy	   cells	   [15]).	   In	   our	   simulations,	   the	   type	   2	   activation	   in	   cancer	   cells	   exhibits	   its	  
characteristic	  all-­‐or-­‐none	  type	  behavior	  with	  large	  cell-­‐to-­‐cell	  variability	  [17,	  33].	  Therefore,	  type	  2	  
to	   type	   1	   transition	   seems	   to	   allow	   a	   stochastic-­‐to-­‐deterministic	   change	   in	   apoptotic	   activation.	   In	  
certain	  cancers,	  such	  a	  stochastic-­‐to-­‐deterministic	  change	  (through	  type	  2	  to	  type	  1	  transition)	  will	  
be	   possible	   to	   achieve	   by	   combinatorial	   treatments,	   such	   as	   by	   the	   combined	   action	   of	   TRAIL	   and	  
XIAP	   inhibitors	   [3,	   14,	   18].	   Incorporation	   of	   decoy	   receptors	   in	   our	   current	   study	   introduces	  
additional	   complexity	   into	   the	   type	   1/	   type	   2	   choice	   problem	   in	   apoptotic	   activation.	   Significant	  
amount	   of	   decoy	   receptor	   expression	   on	   healthy	   cells,	   as	   observed	   in	   some	   early	   studies	   [22,	   23],	  
largely	   limited	   the	   apoptotic	   activation	   (often	   with	   a	   type	   2	   phenotype)	   under	   low	   level	   of	   death	  
ligand	   induction.	   In	   a	   similar	   manner,	   decoy	   receptors	   on	   cancer	   cells	   significantly	   diminished	  
apoptotic	   activation	   (especially	   when	   the	   death	   ligand	   concentration	   was	   low)	   [31].	   The	   DR	   /	   DCR	  
ratio	   emerged	   as	   key	   parameter	   controlling	   apoptotic	   activation	   and	   cell-­‐to-­‐cell	   variability.	   Our	  
Monte	  Carlo	  simulations	  could	  provide	  a	  clear	  insight	  into	  the	  mechanisms	  of	  two	  different	  types	  of	  
decoy	   receptors.	   For	   the	   case	   of	   DCR1,	   the	   decoy	   receptors	   are	   pre-­‐clustered	   (possibly	   in	   lipid	   raft	  
domains	  [2]),	  and,	  recruits	  death	  ligands	  in	  those	  clusters.	  Thus,	  upon	  death	  ligand	  induction	  death	  
receptors	   cluster	   separately	   but	   the	   death	   receptors	   now	   compete	   (for	   ligands)	   with	   already	  
clustered	  decoy	  receptors.	  For	  DCR2,	  death	  ligand	  induction	  leads	  to	  hetero-­‐clusters	  of	  death	  (only	  
DR5)	  and	  decoy	  receptors	  resulting	  in	  reduced	  clustering	  /	  proximity	  of	  procaspase	  8	  molecules	  (as	  
only	  the	  death	  receptors	  but	  not	  the	  decoy	  receptors	  recruit	  procasapse	  8).	  Under	  conditions	  of	  low	  
level	  of	  available	  death	  adaptor	  proteins	  anti-­‐apoptotic	  effect	  of	  DCR2	  is	  possibly	  stronger	  than	  that	  
of	   DCR1.	   Stronger	   anti-­‐apoptotic	   effect	   of	   DCR1	   might	   also	   be	   observed	   in	   some	   other	   situations.	  
Hence,	  it	  might	  be	  possible	  to	  modulate	  the	  anti-­‐apoptotic	  effect	  of	  decoy	  receptors	  through	  variation	  
in	  the	  DCR1/DCR2	  ratio	  on	  a	  given	  cell	  type.	  
	  
How	  to	  selectively	  target	  the	  apoptotic	  pathways	  in	  cancer	  cells,	  that	  would	  spare	  normal	  cells,	  has	  
been	   a	   key	   question	   in	   cancer	   biology	   and	   cancer	   therapy.	   Here,	   results	   obtained	   from	   our	  
computational	   studies	   elucidate	   mechanisms	   of	   selective	   killing	   of	   cancer	   cells	   under	   TRAIL	   therapy.	  
We	   show	   that	   inherent	   differences	   in	   the	   DR/DCR	   ratio	   (death	   receptor	   to	   decoy	   receptor	   ratio)	  
between	   cancer	   and	   healthy	   cells	   may	   provide	   a	   mechanism	   for	   TRAIL	   induced	   selective	   killing	   of	  
cancer	   cells.	   The	   DR/DCR	   ratio	   modulates	   cell-­‐to-­‐cell	   variability	   in	   apoptotic	   activation	   generating	  
crucial	   differences	   in	   apoptotic	   activation	   between	   cancer	   and	   healthy	   cells.	   It	   might	   also	   be	   possible	  
to	  activate	  other	  death	  ligand	  mediated	  pathways	  for	  certain	  cancer	  types	  (such	  as	  Fas-­‐FasL	  for	  brain	  
tumors	   [40]).	   For	   the	   case	   of	   Fas-­‐FasL,	   the	   relative	   abundance	   of	   death	   receptors	   on	   tumor	   and	  
healthy	   cells	   presumably	   provides	   a	   mechanism	   for	   selectivity	   [40,	   42].	   In	   some	   situations,	   the	   death	  
receptor	  (and/or	  other	  pro-­‐apoptotic	  molecules	  in	  the	  membrane)	  expression	  can	  even	  be	  induced	  in	  
cancer	   cells	   by	   genetic	   or	   other	   techniques	   [40],	   leading	   to	   selective	   apoptotic	   activation	   in	   cancer	  
cells.	   In	   a	   more	   general	   manner,	   inherent	   (or	   induced)	   differences	   in	   expression	   levels	   of	   receptor	  
and/or	   other	   molecules	   in	   the	   membrane	   proximal	   module	   and	   their	   membrane	   organization	   [46],	  
between	  cancer	  and	  healthy	  cells,	  may	  generate	  selectivity	  in	  cancer	  cell	  targeting.	  In	  addition,	  such	  
inherent	   (or	   induced)	   differences	   may	   exist	   in	   downstream	   signaling	   modules	   (such	   as	   high	   Apaf	  
expression	   in	   certain	   neural	   cancer	   cells	   [44])	   contributing	   to	   robust	   selectivity	   in	   death	   ligand	  
induced	   cancer	   cell	   apoptosis.	   In	   the	   cases	   where	   high	   level	   of	   anti-­‐apoptotic	   proteins	   are	   also	  
present	  (such	  as	  cFLIP,	  Bcl2	  and	  XIAP),	  combination	  therapy	  with	  TRAIL	  and	  inhibitor	  molecules	  will	  
help	   achieve	   high	   selectivity	   in	   cancer	   cell	   apoptosis	   [3,	   18].	   One	   may	   also	   consider	   affinity	   variant	  
recombinant	   death	   ligands	   in	   the	   following	   manners:	   (i)	   low	   affinity	   ligands	   for	   specific	   death	   and	  

	  

11	  

decoy	  receptors,	  (ii)	  ligands	  selective	  for	  specific	  decoy	  receptors	  (low	  affinity	  for	  death	  receptors)	  
and	   (iii)	   ligands	   selective	   for	   specific	   death	   receptors	   (low	   affinity	   for	   decoy	   receptors).	   In	   this	   study,	  
we	   considered	   the	   possibility	   of	   using	   low	   affinity	   recombinant	   TRAIL	   as	   a	   strategy	   to	   enhance	  
selectivity	   in	   cancer	   cell	   killing.	   Based	   on	   our	   results,	   it	   is	   expected	   that	   such	   low	   affinity	   ligands	   will	  
allow	   binding	   of	   majority	   of	   death	   ligands	   to	   decoy	   receptors	   on	   healthy	   cells	   leading	   to	   fewer	  
apoptosis	  of	  those	  cells.	  In	  this	  context,	   large	  cell-­‐to-­‐cell	  variability	  (in	  apoptotic	  activation)	  and	  slow	  
activation	   can	   be	   protective	   for	   healthy	   cells.	   	   Therefore,	   cell-­‐to-­‐cell	   variability	   provides	   new	   insights	  
into	  the	  problem	  of	  understanding	  the	  mechanism	  of	  selective	  killing	  of	  cancer	  cells.	  	  
	  
Selective	   targeting	   of	   cancer	   cells	   might	   be	   possible	   in	   various	   possible	   manners.	   	   In	   cancer	   cells	  
equipped	   with	   high	   level	   of	   death	   receptors	   (TRAIL	   receptors	   DR4/DR5)	   and	   low	   level	   decoy	  
receptors	   activating	   the	   type	   1	   apoptotic	   pathway	   might	   be	   suitable	   for	   selective	   killing.	   In	   some	  
other	  cancer	  cells,	  with	  slightly	  defective	  membrane	  proximal	  signaling	  module	  (such	  as	  due	  to	  low	  
level	  of	  death	  adaptor	  proteins)	  selective	  apoptotic	  activation	  through	  the	  type	  2	  pathway	  might	  be	  
possible	   by	   death	   ligand	   induction.	   If	   Bcl2	   is	   also	   overexpressed	   in	   such	   cancer	   cells	   then	   selective	  
activation	   can	   be	   achieved	   under	   combined	   action	   of	   TRAIL	   and	   Bcl2	   inhibitor.	   In	   yet	   another	  
scenario,	  if	  cancer	  cells	  equipped	  with	  high	  concentrations	  of	  anti-­‐apoptotic	  Bcl2	  proteins	  also	  have	  
strongly	   over-­‐expressed	   Bid	   and	   Bax	   (pro-­‐apoptotic)	   molecules,	   then	   removal	   of	   Bcl2	   inhibition	   by	  
inhibitory	   small	   molecules	   could	   be	   sufficient	   for	   selective	   activation	   of	   the	   cancer	   cell	   type	   2	  
pathway.	   In	   silico	   approaches	   may	   help	   develop	   the	   optimal	   strategy	   for	   targeting	   the	   apoptotic	  
pathway	   in	   specific	   cancer	   cells.	   Information	   regarding	   clonal	   heterogeneity	   in	   a	   tumor	   population	  
[35,	  36]	  and	  single	  cell	  genomic/proteomic	  data	   [47]	  can	  be	  utilized	  for	  designing	  Monte	  Carlo	  based	  
in	   silico	  studies	  of	  apoptotic	  activation.	  Single	  cell	  activation	  data,	  as	  obtained	  from	  our	  Monte	  Carlo	  
simulations,	   can	   be	   analyzed	   utilizing	   a	   quantitative	   scoring	   method	   in	   order	   to	   compare	   potential	  
options	   for	   apoptosis	   induction	   in	   cancer	   cells.	   In	   such	   a	   scoring	   approach	   quantitative	   assessment	  
can	  be	  based	  on	  several	  key	  factors	  such	  as:	  maximize	  cancer	  cells	  killing	  while	  keeping	  healthy	  cell	  
killing	  at	  a	  minimal	  level,	  minimize	  cell-­‐to-­‐cell	  variability	  and	  time-­‐to-­‐death	  in	  cancer	  cell	  killing.	  In	  
this	   study,	   we	   have	   applied	   a	   scoring	   method	   for	   low	   affinity	   death	   ligand	   induction	   (for	   apoptosis	  
activation	   data	   in	   Figure	   7)	   to	   find	   the	   optimal	   death	   ligand	   level	   needed	   for	   selectively	   inducing	  
cancer	  cell	  apoptosis.	  Such	  a	  quantitative	  data	  analysis	  method	  can	  also	  be	  useful	  for	  analyzing	  single	  
cell	  activation	  data	  in	  experimental	  and	  clinical	  settings.	  	  
	  
	  

	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

12	  

References

1.	  
2.	  
3.	  
4.	  
5.	  
6.	  
7.	  
8.	  
9.	  
10.	  
11.	  
12.	  
13.	  
14.	  
15.	  
16.	  
17.	  

	  

Falschlehner,	  C.,	  et	  al.,	  TRAIL	  signalling:	  decisions	  between	  life	  and	  death.	  Int	  J	  
Biochem	  Cell	  Biol,	  2007.	  39(7-­‐8):	  p.	  1462-­‐75.	  
Shirley,	  S.,	  A.	  Morizot,	  and	  O.	  Micheau,	  Regulating	  TRAIL	  receptor-­‐induced	  cell	  
death	  at	  the	  membrane	  :	  a	  deadly	  discussion.	  Recent	  Pat	  Anticancer	  Drug	  
Discov,	  2011.	  6(3):	  p.	  311-­‐23.	  
Kurita,	  S.,	  et	  al.,	  Hedgehog	  inhibition	  promotes	  a	  switch	  from	  Type	  II	  to	  Type	  I	  
cell	  death	  receptor	  signaling	  in	  cancer	  cells.	  PLoS	  One,	  2011.	  6(3):	  p.	  e18330.	  
Picarda,	  G.,	  et	  al.,	  TRAIL	  receptor	  signaling	  and	  therapeutic	  option	  in	  bone	  
tumors:	  the	  trap	  of	  the	  bone	  microenvironment.	  Am	  J	  Cancer	  Res,	  2012.	  2(1):	  
p.	  45-­‐64.	  
Merino,	  D.,	  et	  al.,	  Differential	  inhibition	  of	  TRAIL-­‐mediated	  DR5-­‐DISC	  
formation	  by	  decoy	  receptors	  1	  and	  2.	  Mol	  Cell	  Biol,	  2006.	  26(19):	  p.	  7046-­‐55.	  
Rathmell,	  J.C.	  and	  C.B.	  Thompson,	  Pathways	  of	  apoptosis	  in	  lymphocyte	  
development,	  homeostasis,	  and	  disease.	  Cell,	  2002.	  109	  Suppl:	  p.	  S97-­‐107.	  
Elmore,	  S.,	  Apoptosis:	  a	  review	  of	  programmed	  cell	  death.	  Toxicol	  Pathol,	  
2007.	  35(4):	  p.	  495-­‐516.	  
Takeda,	  K.,	  et	  al.,	  Involvement	  of	  tumor	  necrosis	  factor-­‐related	  apoptosis-­‐
inducing	  ligand	  in	  surveillance	  of	  tumor	  metastasis	  by	  liver	  natural	  killer	  cells.	  
Nat	  Med,	  2001.	  7(1):	  p.	  94-­‐100.	  
Quintana,	  E.,	  et	  al.,	  Efficient	  tumour	  formation	  by	  single	  human	  melanoma	  
cells.	  Nature,	  2008.	  456(7222):	  p.	  593-­‐8.	  
Smyth,	  M.J.,	  et	  al.,	  Nature's	  TRAIL-­‐-­‐on	  a	  path	  to	  cancer	  immunotherapy.	  
Immunity,	  2003.	  18(1):	  p.	  1-­‐6.	  
Di	  Carlo,	  M.,	  Beta	  amyloid	  peptide:	  from	  different	  aggregation	  forms	  to	  the	  
activation	  of	  different	  biochemical	  pathways.	  Eur	  Biophys	  J,	  2010.	  39(6):	  p.	  
877-­‐88.	  
Picone,	  P.,	  et	  al.,	  Abeta	  oligomers	  and	  fibrillar	  aggregates	  induce	  different	  
apoptotic	  pathways	  in	  LAN5	  neuroblastoma	  cell	  cultures.	  Biophys	  J,	  2009.	  
96(10):	  p.	  4200-­‐11.	  
Fossati,	  S.,	  J.	  Ghiso,	  and	  A.	  Rostagno,	  TRAIL	  death	  receptors	  DR4	  and	  DR5	  
mediate	  cerebral	  microvascular	  endothelial	  cell	  apoptosis	  induced	  by	  
oligomeric	  Alzheimer's	  Abeta.	  Cell	  Death	  Dis,	  2012.	  3:	  p.	  e321.	  
Raychaudhuri,	  S.	  and	  S.C.	  Raychaudhuri,	  Monte	  Carlo	  Study	  Elucidates	  the	  
Type	  1/Type	  2	  Choice	  in	  Apoptotic	  Death	  Signaling	  in	  Healthy	  and	  Cancer	  Cells.	  
Cells,	  2013.	  2(2):	  p.	  361-­‐392.	  
Raychaudhuri,	  S.	  and	  S.C.	  Raychaudhuri,	  Death	  ligand	  concentration	  and	  the	  
membrane	  proximal	  signaling	  module	  regulate	  the	  type	  1/type	  2	  choice	  in	  
apoptotic	  death	  signaling.	  Syst	  Synth	  Biol,	  2014.	  8(1):	  p.	  83-­‐97.	  
Certo,	  M.,	  et	  al.,	  Mitochondria	  primed	  by	  death	  signals	  determine	  cellular	  
addiction	  to	  antiapoptotic	  BCL-­‐2	  family	  members.	  Cancer	  Cell,	  2006.	  9(5):	  p.	  
351-­‐65.	  
Skommer,	  J.,	  T.	  Brittain,	  and	  S.	  Raychaudhuri,	  Bcl-­‐2	  inhibits	  apoptosis	  by	  
increasing	  the	  time-­‐to-­‐death	  and	  intrinsic	  cell-­‐to-­‐cell	  variations	  in	  the	  
mitochondrial	  pathway	  of	  cell	  death.	  Apoptosis,	  2010.	  15(10):	  p.	  1223-­‐33.	  
13	  

18.	  
19.	  
20.	  
21.	  
22.	  
23.	  
24.	  
25.	  

26.	  
27.	  
28.	  
29.	  
30.	  
31.	  
32.	  
33.	  
34.	  
35.	  
36.	  

	  

Skommer,	  J.,	  et	  al.,	  Nonlinear	  regulation	  of	  commitment	  to	  apoptosis	  by	  
simultaneous	  inhibition	  of	  Bcl-­‐2	  and	  XIAP	  in	  leukemia	  and	  lymphoma	  cells.	  
Apoptosis,	  2011.	  16(6):	  p.	  619-­‐26.	  
Raychaudhuri,	  S.	  and	  S.C.	  Das,	  Low	  probability	  activation	  of	  Bax	  /	  Bak	  can	  
induce	  selective	  killing	  of	  cancer	  cells	  by	  generating	  heterogeneoity	  in	  
apoptosis.	  Journal	  of	  Healthcare	  Engineering,	  2013.	  4:	  p.	  47-­‐66.	  
Breen,	  L.,	  et	  al.,	  Investigation	  of	  the	  role	  of	  p53	  in	  chemotherapy	  resistance	  of	  
lung	  cancer	  cell	  lines.	  Anticancer	  Res,	  2007.	  27(3A):	  p.	  1361-­‐4.	  
Lin,	  T.,	  et	  al.,	  Long-­‐term	  tumor-­‐free	  survival	  from	  treatment	  with	  the	  GFP-­‐
TRAIL	  fusion	  gene	  expressed	  from	  the	  hTERT	  promoter	  in	  breast	  cancer	  cells.	  
Oncogene,	  2002.	  21(52):	  p.	  8020-­‐8.	  
Pan,	  G.,	  et	  al.,	  An	  antagonist	  decoy	  receptor	  and	  a	  death	  domain-­‐containing	  
receptor	  for	  TRAIL.	  Science,	  1997.	  277(5327):	  p.	  815-­‐8.	  
Sheridan,	  J.P.,	  et	  al.,	  Control	  of	  TRAIL-­‐induced	  apoptosis	  by	  a	  family	  of	  signaling	  
and	  decoy	  receptors.	  Science,	  1997.	  277(5327):	  p.	  818-­‐21.	  
Apoptosis	  in	  Health	  and	  Diseases.	  First	  Paperback	  ed.	  2010,	  Cambridge	  UK:	  
Cambridge	  University	  Press.	  
Ngamkitidechakul,	  C.,	  et	  al.,	  Antitumour	  effects	  of	  Phyllanthus	  emblica	  L.:	  
induction	  of	  cancer	  cell	  apoptosis	  and	  inhibition	  of	  in	  vivo	  tumour	  promotion	  
and	  in	  vitro	  invasion	  of	  human	  cancer	  cells.	  Phytother	  Res,	  2010.	  24(9):	  p.	  
1405-­‐13.	  
Guicciardi,	  M.E.	  and	  G.J.	  Gores,	  Life	  and	  death	  by	  death	  receptors.	  FASEB	  J,	  
2009.	  23(6):	  p.	  1625-­‐37.	  
Hua,	  F.,	  et	  al.,	  Effects	  of	  Bcl-­‐2	  levels	  on	  Fas	  signaling-­‐induced	  caspase-­‐3	  
activation:	  molecular	  genetic	  tests	  of	  computational	  model	  predictions.	  J	  
Immunol,	  2005.	  175(2):	  p.	  985-­‐95.	  
Schneider,	  P.,	  et	  al.,	  Characterization	  of	  two	  receptors	  for	  TRAIL.	  FEBS	  Lett,	  
1997.	  416(3):	  p.	  329-­‐34.	  
Meng,	  X.W.,	  et	  al.,	  High	  cell	  surface	  death	  receptor	  expression	  determines	  type	  I	  
versus	  type	  II	  signaling.	  J	  Biol	  Chem,	  2011.	  286(41):	  p.	  35823-­‐33.	  
Gu,	  C.,	  et	  al.,	  A	  trigger	  model	  of	  apoptosis	  induced	  by	  tumor	  necrosis	  factor	  
signaling.	  BMC	  Syst	  Biol,	  2011.	  5	  Suppl	  1:	  p.	  S13.	  
Sanlioglu,	  A.D.,	  et	  al.,	  Surface	  TRAIL	  decoy	  receptor-­‐4	  expression	  is	  correlated	  
with	  TRAIL	  resistance	  in	  MCF7	  breast	  cancer	  cells.	  BMC	  Cancer,	  2005.	  5:	  p.	  54.	  
Fricker,	  N.,	  et	  al.,	  Model-­‐based	  dissection	  of	  CD95	  signaling	  dynamics	  reveals	  
both	  a	  pro-­‐	  and	  antiapoptotic	  role	  of	  c-­‐FLIPL.	  J	  Cell	  Biol,	  2010.	  190(3):	  p.	  377-­‐
89.	  
Raychaudhuri,	  S.,	  et	  al.,	  Monte	  Carlo	  simulation	  of	  cell	  death	  signaling	  predicts	  
large	  cell-­‐to-­‐cell	  stochastic	  fluctuations	  through	  the	  type	  2	  pathway	  of	  
apoptosis.	  Biophys	  J,	  2008.	  95(8):	  p.	  3559-­‐62.	  
Bagci,	  E.Z.,	  et	  al.,	  Bistability	  in	  apoptosis:	  roles	  of	  bax,	  bcl-­‐2,	  and	  mitochondrial	  
permeability	  transition	  pores.	  Biophys	  J,	  2006.	  90(5):	  p.	  1546-­‐59.	  
Notta,	  F.,	  et	  al.,	  Evolution	  of	  human	  BCR-­‐ABL1	  lymphoblastic	  leukaemia-­‐
initiating	  cells.	  Nature,	  2011.	  469(7330):	  p.	  362-­‐7.	  
Anderson,	  K.,	  et	  al.,	  Genetic	  variegation	  of	  clonal	  architecture	  and	  propagating	  
cells	  in	  leukaemia.	  Nature,	  2011.	  469(7330):	  p.	  356-­‐61.	  
14	  

37.	  
38.	  

39.	  
40.	  
41.	  
42.	  
43.	  
44.	  
45.	  
46.	  
47.	  

	  

	  

Hassan,	  M.,	  et	  al.,	  Apoptosis	  and	  molecular	  targeting	  therapy	  in	  cancer.	  
Biomed	  Res	  Int,	  2014.	  2014:	  p.	  150845.	  
Sun,	  X.M.,	  et	  al.,	  Bcl-­‐2	  and	  Bcl-­‐xL	  inhibit	  CD95-­‐mediated	  apoptosis	  by	  
preventing	  mitochondrial	  release	  of	  Smac/DIABLO	  and	  subsequent	  
inactivation	  of	  X-­‐linked	  inhibitor-­‐of-­‐apoptosis	  protein.	  J	  Biol	  Chem,	  2002.	  
277(13):	  p.	  11345-­‐51.	  
Maas,	  C.,	  et	  al.,	  Smac/DIABLO	  release	  from	  mitochondria	  and	  XIAP	  inhibition	  
are	  essential	  to	  limit	  clonogenicity	  of	  Type	  I	  tumor	  cells	  after	  TRAIL	  receptor	  
stimulation.	  Cell	  Death	  Differ,	  2010.	  17(10):	  p.	  1613-­‐23.	  
Ho,	  I.A.,	  W.H.	  Ng,	  and	  P.Y.	  Lam,	  FasL	  and	  FADD	  delivery	  by	  a	  glioma-­‐specific	  
and	  cell	  cycle-­‐dependent	  HSV-­‐1	  amplicon	  virus	  enhanced	  apoptosis	  in	  primary	  
human	  brain	  tumors.	  Mol	  Cancer,	  2010.	  9:	  p.	  270.	  
Siegelin,	  M.D.,	  T.	  Gaiser,	  and	  Y.	  Siegelin,	  The	  XIAP	  inhibitor	  Embelin	  enhances	  
TRAIL-­‐mediated	  apoptosis	  in	  malignant	  glioma	  cells	  by	  down-­‐regulation	  of	  the	  
short	  isoform	  of	  FLIP.	  Neurochem	  Int,	  2009.	  55(6):	  p.	  423-­‐30.	  
Liu,	  X.,	  et	  al.,	  Death	  receptor	  regulation	  and	  celecoxib-­‐induced	  apoptosis	  in	  
human	  lung	  cancer	  cells.	  J	  Natl	  Cancer	  Inst,	  2004.	  96(23):	  p.	  1769-­‐80.	  
Yoshida,	  T.,	  et	  al.,	  Kaempferol	  sensitizes	  colon	  cancer	  cells	  to	  TRAIL-­‐induced	  
apoptosis.	  Biochem	  Biophys	  Res	  Commun,	  2008.	  375(1):	  p.	  129-­‐33.	  
Johnson,	  C.E.,	  et	  al.,	  Differential	  Apaf-­‐1	  levels	  allow	  cytochrome	  c	  to	  induce	  
apoptosis	  in	  brain	  tumors	  but	  not	  in	  normal	  neural	  tissues.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  
U	  S	  A,	  2007.	  104(52):	  p.	  20820-­‐5.	  
Hu,	  R.,	  et	  al.,	  Embelin	  induces	  apoptosis	  through	  down-­‐regulation	  of	  XIAP	  in	  
human	  leukemia	  cells.	  Med	  Oncol,	  2011.	  28(4):	  p.	  1584-­‐8.	  
Marconi,	  M.,	  et	  al.,	  Constitutive	  localization	  of	  DR4	  in	  lipid	  rafts	  is	  mandatory	  
for	  TRAIL-­‐induced	  apoptosis	  in	  B-­‐cell	  hematologic	  malignancies.	  Cell	  Death	  
Dis,	  2013.	  4:	  p.	  e863.	  
Yang,	  Y.,	  et	  al.,	  Parallel	  single	  cancer	  cell	  whole	  genome	  amplification	  using	  
button-­‐valve	  assisted	  mixing	  in	  nanoliter	  chambers.	  PLoS	  One,	  2014.	  9(9):	  p.	  
e107958.	  
	  

15	  

Figures
Figure 1. A schematic for the apoptotic death signaling network showing membrane proximal signaling
module and type 1/type 2 pathways.
Figure 2. Death ligand induced apoptotic activation (a) and type 1/type 2 choice (b) for cancer cells
equipped with over-expressed Bcl2 and XIAP. In our simulations, we used: Bcl2 = 750 nM (10 fold
overexpression), XIAP = 90 nM (3 fold overexpression), Bid = 125 nM (5 fold overexpression), Bax = 415
nM (5 fold overexpression). Overexpression is defined with respect to concentrations used in simulating
apoptosis in healthy cells. Death ligand was varied in the following manner: DL = 2 and 10 (for a 1.2 x 1.2
µm2 cell surface area); DR = 10 and DCR = 20. Data is shown for two different scenarios of decoy
receptor engagement (DCR1 and DCR2). Increased death ligand concentration resulted in increased
apoptotic activation and an increase in type 1 activation fraction.
Figure 3. Death ligand induced apoptotic activation (a) and type 1/type 2 choice (b) for cancer cells
equipped with over-expressed Bcl2 and cFLIP but decreased death adaptor proteins. In our simulations, we
used: Bcl2 = 750 nM (10 fold overexpression), cFLIP = 60 nM (2 fold overexpression), adaptor protein =
10 nM (3 fold lower expression), Bid = 125 nM (5 fold overexpression), Bax = 415 nM (5 fold
overexpression). Death ligand was varied in the following manner: DL = 2, 10 and 100 (for a 1.2 x 1.2 µm2
area); DR = 10 and DCR = 20. Data is shown for two different scenarios of decoy receptor engagement
(DCR1 and DCR2). Increased death ligand concentration resulted in increased apoptotic activation and an
increase in type 1 activation fraction.
Figure 4. Single cell caspase 3 activation (under death ligand induction) in cancer cells equipped with overexpressed Bcl2 and cFLIP but decreased death adaptor proteins. In our simulations, we used: Bcl2 = 750
nM (10 fold overexpression), cFLIP = 60 nM (2 fold overexpression), adaptor protein = 10 nM (3 fold
lower expression), Bid = 125 nM (5 fold overexpression), Bax = 415 nM (5 fold overexpression). Death
ligand was varied in the following manner: DL = 2, 10 and 100 (for a 1.2 x 1.2 µm2 area); DR = 10 and
DCR = 20. Data is shown for two different scenarios of decoy receptor engagement (DCR1 and DCR2).
Each curve corresponds to apoptosis activation for a single cell (Monte Carlo run). Data is shown for 16
representative single cells. Large cell-to-cell variability and all-or-none behavior is observed indicating
type 2 activation.
Figure 5. Death ligand induced apoptotic activation (a) and type 1/type 2 choice (b) for healthy cells.
Healthy cells were assumed to have low level of adaptor proteins (= 10 nM). Death ligand was varied in the
following manner: DL = 2, 10 and 100 (for a 1.2 x 1.2 µm2 area); DR = 20 and DCR = 20. Data is shown
for two different scenarios of decoy receptor engagement. Increased death ligand concentration resulted in
increased apoptotic activation and a type 2 to type 1 transition.
Figure 6. Clustering of death (shown in red) and decoy receptors (shown in green) upon death ligand
engagement. Data is shown for two different scenarios of decoy receptor engagement: DCR1 (a) and DCR2
(b). Clustering on a representative single cell (Monte Carlo run) is shown for 4 different time-points (t =
106, 2 × 106, 5 × 106 107). DL = 100, DR = 100 and DCR = 100 was used in our simulations.
Figure 7. Death ligand induced apoptotic activation (a) and type 1/type 2 choice (b) for cancer cells
equipped with over-expressed Bcl2 family anti- and pro-apoptotic proteins. In our simulations, we used:
Bcl2 = 750 nM (10 fold overexpression), Bid = 125 nM (5 fold overexpression), Bax = 415 nM (5 fold
overexpression). Death ligand was varied in the following manner: DL = 2, 10 and 100 (for a 1.2 x 1.2 µm2
area); DR = 10 and DCR = 20. Data is shown for two different scenarios of decoy receptor engagement.
Increased death ligand concentration resulted in increased apoptotic activation and a type 2 to type 1
transition.
Figure 8. Death ligand induced selective activation of the apoptotic pathway in cancer cells. Cancer cells
were assumed to have higher level of death adaptor proteins (30 molecules compared with 10 in healthy
cells). For cancer cells susceptible to type 2 activation, high expression level of Apaf (100 nM) was used in

	  

16	  

our simulations. Slightly higher expression level of death receptors (20 molecules compared with 10 in
healthy cells) was also used. For cancer cells susceptible to type 1 activation, high expression level of death
receptors (100 molecules) was used, but the expression level of Bcl2 was also assumed to be high (750
nM). In our simulations we also used Bid = 125 nM (5 fold overexpression) and Bax = 415 nM (5 fold
overexpression) for all types of cancer cells. Death ligand induced apoptotic activation is shown to be
significantly higher in cancer cells (DL = 2 molecules). Data is shown for two different scenarios of decoy
receptor engagement: (a) DCR1 and (b) DCR2.
Figure 9. Selective apoptotic activation in healthy and cancer cells under induction of low affinity ligands
for the death and decoy receptors (Ka = 105 M-1). In the membrane module of cancer cells, we assumed
higher level of adaptor proteins (30 molecules in cancer cells and 10 in healthy cells) but lower level of
cFLIP (10 molecules in cancer cells compared 30 in healthy cells). For cancer cells susceptible to type 2
activation, high expression level of Apaf (100 nM) was used in our simulations. Slightly higher expression
level of death receptors (20 molecules compared with 10 in healthy cells) was also used. For cancer cells
susceptible to type 1 activation, high expression level of death receptors (100 molecules) was used, but the
expression level of Bcl2 was also assumed to be high (750 nM). In our simulations we also used Bid = 125
nM (5 fold overexpression) and Bax = 415 nM (5 fold overexpression) for all types of cancer cells. Death
ligand induced apoptotic activation is shown to be significantly higher in cancer cells (DL = 2, 5 and 10
molecules were used in simulations). Data is shown for two different scenarios of decoy receptor
engagement: (a) DCR1 and (b) DCR2.
Figure 10. Single cell caspase 3 (upper panel) and caspase 9 (lower panel) activation in healthy and cancer
cells under induction of low affinity ligands for the death and decoy receptors (Ka = 105 M-1). Data is
shown for DL = 5. Other parameters are same as in Figure 9. Each curve corresponds to apoptosis
activation for a single cell (Monte Carlo run). Data is shown for 8 representative single cells for two
different scenarios of decoy receptor engagement: (a) DCR1 and (b) DCR2.
Figure 11. Selective apoptotic activation in cancer cells under induction of low affinity ligands for the death
receptors (Ka = 107 M-1). In the membrane module of cancer cells, we assumed higher level of adaptor
proteins (30 molecules in cancer cells and 10 in healthy cells) but lower level of cFLIP (10 molecules in
cancer cells compared 30 in healthy cells). For cancer cells susceptible to type 2 activation, high expression
level of Apaf (100 nM) was used in our simulations. Slightly higher expression level of death receptors (20
molecules compared with 10 in healthy cells) was also used. For cancer cells susceptible to type 1
activation, high expression level of death receptors (100 molecules) was used, but the expression level of
Bcl2 was also assumed to be high (750 nM). In our simulations we also used Bid = 125 nM (5 fold
overexpression) and Bax = 415 nM (5 fold overexpression) for all types of cancer cells. Death ligand
induced apoptotic activation is shown to be significantly higher in cancer cells (DL = 10 molecules). Data
is shown for two different scenarios of decoy receptor engagement: (a) DCR1 and (b) DCR2.

	  

	  

	  

17	  

	  
	  
	  
	  

Figure	  1	  

	  

Decoy
Receptor

	  

18	  

Figure	  2	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

Figure	  2a	  

fraction of cells w activated caspase 3

DL=2
DL=10
1

0.5

0
DCR1

DCR2

DL=2
DL=10

Figure	  2b	  

Type 1 activation fraction

1

0.5

0

	  

DCR1

DCR2

19	  

Figure	  3	  

	  

Figure	  3a	  

	  

fraction of cells w activated caspase 3

	  
	  
	  
	  

DL=2
DL=10
DL=100

0.5

0
DCR1

DCR2

DL=2
DL=10
DL=100
Type 1 activation fraction

Figure	  3b	  
0.5

0

	  

DCR1

DCR2

20	  

Figure	  4	  

Figure	  4a	  

Active Caspase 3

1

DL=2

1

0.5

0

DL=10

1

0.5

0

1e+08
Time (MC steps)

	  

0

DL=100

0.5

0

1e+08
Time (MC steps)

0
0

1e+08
Time (MC steps)

	  

Figure	  4b	  

Active Caspase 3

1

DL=2

0.5

0

DL=10

1

0.5

0

1e+08
Time (MC steps)

	  

1

0

DL=100

0.5

0

1e+08
Time (MC steps)

21	  

0
0

1e+08
Time (MC steps)

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Figure	  5a	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

activation fraction of cells w activated caspase 3

Figure	  5	  

DL=2
DL=10
DL=100

1

0.5

0
DCR1

DCR2

	  
	  
DL=2
DL=10
DL=100

Figure	  5b	  

type 1 activation fraction

1

0.5

0

	  

DCR1

DCR2

22	  

Figure	  6	  
	  
Figure	  6a	  
60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

0

60

0

10

T	  =	  106	  MC	  steps	  
	  
	  

	  
	  

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

40

50

0
0

10

20

30

40

T	  =	  107	  MC	  steps	  

T	  =	  5	  ×	  106	  MC	  steps	  

	  

30

60

T	  =	  2	  ×	  106	  MC	  steps	  

60

0

20

23	  

50

60

	  
	  

Figure	  6b	  

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

0

30

40

50

60

50

60

	  

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

10

20

30

40

50

60

0
0

10

20

30

40

T	  =	  107	  MC	  steps	  

T	  =	  5	  ×	  106	  MC	  steps	  

	  

20

T	  =	  2	  ×	  106	  MC	  steps	  

60

0

10

T	  =	  106	  MC	  steps	  

	  
	  
	  

0

0

24	  

	  
	  
	  
Figure	  7	  

fraction of cells w activated caspase 3

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Figure	  7a	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

DL=2
DL=10
DL=100

1

0.5

0

	  

DCR1

DCR2

DL=2
DL=10
DL=100

Figure	  7b	  

Type 1 activation fraction

1

0.5

0

	  

DCR1

DCR2

25	  

Figure	  8	  
	  

	  
Healthy Cells
Cancer high Apaf
Cancer high DR

Figure	  8a	  

activation fraction

1

0.5

0
Caspase 3

Type 1

Healthy Cells
Cancer high Apaf
Cancer high DR

Figure	  8b	  

activation fraction

1

0.5

0
Caspase 3

	  

Type 1

26	  

Figure	  9	  

	  

	  

activation fraction

Figure	  9a	  

DL = 2

Healthy Cells
Cancer high Apaf
Cancer high DR

DL = 5

Healthy Cells
Cancer high Apaf
Cancer high DR

DL = 10

Healthy Cells
Cancer high Apaf
Cancer high DR

1
0.5

activation fraction

0

1
0.5

activation fraction

0

1
0.5
0

	  

Caspase 3

Type 1

27	  

	  

Figure	  9	  

	  

activation fraction

Figure	  9b	  

DL = 2

Healthy Cells
Cancer high Apaf
Cancer high DR

DL = 5

Healthy Cells
Cancer high Apaf
Cancer high DR

DL = 10

Healthy Cells
Cancer high Apaf
Cancer high DR

1
0.5

activation fraction

0

1
0.5

activation fraction

0

1
0.5
0

	  

Caspase 3

Type 1

28	  

	  

	  
Figure	  10a	  

Healthy Cells

Active Caspase 3

1

0.5

Active Caspase 9

0

	  

0.5

0

0
1e+08
2e+08
Time (MC steps)

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

1e+08
Time (MC steps)

1

0

Cancer Cells

1

0
1e+08
2e+08
Time (MC steps)

0

1e+08
Time (MC steps)

29	  

	  

	  
Figure	  10b	  

Healthy Cells

Active Caspase 3

1

0.5

Active Caspase 9

0

	  

0.5

0

1e+08
2e+08
Time (MC steps)

0

1

0.5

0.5

0

1e+08
2e+08
Time (MC steps)

0

1e+08
Time (MC steps)

1

0

Cancer Cells

1

0
0

1e+08
Time (MC steps)

30	  

	  

Figure	  11	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

Healthy Cells
Cancer high Apaf
Cancer high DR

Figure	  11a	  
	  
	  

activation fraction

1

0.5

0
Apoptosis

Type 1

Healthy Cells
Cancer high Apaf
Cancer high DR

Figure	  11b	  

activation fraction

1

0.5

0

	  

Apoptosis

Type 1

31	  

