Gabora, L. (2011). How creative ideas take shape. Psychology Today (online).
http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/mindbloggling/201109/how-creative-ideas-take-shape

How Creative Ideas Take Shape
Liane Gabora
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
Okanagan Campus, Arts Building, 333 University Way, Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, CANADA

Abstract
According to the honing theory of creativity, creative thought works not on individually
considered, discrete, predefined representations but on a contextually-elicited amalgam of
items which exist in a state of potentiality and may not be readily separable. This leads to the
prediction that analogy making proceeds not by mapping correspondences from candidate
sources to target, as predicted by the structure mapping theory of analogy, but by weeding
out non-correspondences, thereby whittling away at potentiality. Participants were given an
analogy problem, interrupted before they had time to solve it, and asked to write down what
they had by way of a solution. Naïve judges categorized responses as significantly more
supportive of the predictions of honing theory than those of structure mapping.

Creative people often work on a task for a long time before they have insight into how to solve
or go about the task, and even if insight occurs it can still take time for the idea can to mature. It
is widely assumed that the creative process involves searching through memory and/or
selecting amongst a set of predefined candidate ideas. For example, computer scientists have
modeled the creative process as heuristic search through a ‘state space', a bunch of predefined possibilities. Most well known psychological theories of creativity (such as the
Geneplore and the Darwinian theory) involve two stages: divergent generation of possibilities,
followed by exploration and ultimately selective retention of the most promising of them. In
psychological theorizing about creativity there is much discussion of the role of divergent
thinking in creativity. Divergent thinking is presumed to involve the generation of multiple, often
unconventional possibilities. Thus construed, it necessarily goes hand-in-hand with selection,
since if you come up with multiple alternatives you eventually weed some of them out.
However, the generation stage of creative thinking may be divergent not in the sense that it
moves in multiple directions or generates multiple possibilities, but in the sense that it produces
a raw idea that is vague or unfocused, that requires further processing to become viable.
Similarly, the exploration stage of creative thinking may be convergent not in the sense that it
entails selecting from amongst alternatives but in the sense that it entails considering a vague
idea from different perspectives until it comes into focus. Thus, the terms divergent and
convergent may be applicable to creative thought not in the sense of going from one to many or
from many to one, but in the sense of going from well-defined to ill-defined, and vice versa.
Although a creative process may involve search or selection amongst multiple possibilities, it
need not, and neither search nor selection need figure prominently in a general theory of
creativity. These are two very different views of creativity; indeed It has been shown

mathematically that selection amongst multiple well-defined entities entails a different formal
structure from actualizing the potential of a single, ill-defined entity.
There are many reasons to think that creativity involves, in the general case, not selection
amongst multiple ideas but the honing of a half-baked idea. A key source of support comes from
work on concept combination. A model of concepts that includes potentiality states as a central
notion accurately predicts the shifts in applicabilities of properties of concepts when they are
placed in different contexts. Studies of concept combination show that the more dissimilar the
contributing concepts, the more original, yet potentially the less practical, the resulting idea. This
suggests that the more ill-defined the unborn idea, the greater the extent to which it exists in a
state of potentiality, and the more processing it requires to become viable. The notion of a state
of potentiality comes from the concept of ‘ground state' in physics, and the notion of
actualization comes from the concept of ‘collapse'. Real-time studies of artists and designers
indicate that creative ideation involves elaborating on a ‘kernel idea', which goes from ill-defined
to well-defined through an interaction between artist and artwork. This too is highly consistent
with the notion of potentiality states. Indeed it is not obvious how one could simultaneously hold
in mind multiple well-defined ideas.
But perhaps the strongest reason is that it is consistent with the structure of associative
memory. Because of the ingenious way items are encoded in memory, knowledge and
memories that are relevant to the situation or task at hand naturally come to mind (for details
see Gabora, 2010). Neural cell assemblies that respond to the particular features of a situation
are activated, and items previously encoded in these cell assemblies (that have similar
constellations of features and activate similar distributed sets of neurons), are evoked. Both the
vagueness of a ‘half-baked' idea and the sense that it holds potential, as well as its capacity to
actualize in different ways depending on how one thinks it through, may be side effects of the
phenomenon of interference. In interference, a recent memory interferes with the capacity to
recall an older memory. (A similar phenomenon, sometimes referred to as crosstalk, occurs in
neural network models of cognition.) Interference is generally thought of as detrimental, but it
may be of help with respect to creativity. A half-baked idea may be what results when two or
more items encoded in overlapping distributions of neural cell assemblies interfere with each
other and get evoked simultaneously.
The phenomenon of interference leading to creative ideation is referred to as creative
interference. When an idea emerges through creative interference, the contributing items are
not searched or selected amongst because together they form a single structure. This structure
can be said to be in a state of potentiality because its ill-defined elements could take on different
values depending on how the analogy unfolds. It is proposed that this unfolding involves
disentangling the relevant features from the irrelevant features by observing how the idea looks
from sequentially considered perspectives. In other words, one observes how it interacts with
various contexts, either internally generated (think it through) or externally generated (try it out).
A Testbed for the ‘Actualization of Potentiality' View of Creativity: Analogy Problem
Solving
To test this new view of creativity as not search or selection but actualization of potential, it was
necessary to find a domain in which creativity occurs, and empirically test how people behave in
tasks in this domain. Since analogy problem solving is central and ubiquitous facet of human
creativity, it seemed like a good choice for a domain.
Analogies are widely believed to involve two elements: a source, which is well understood, and
a target, which is less well understood but which shares elements with the source. One might

2
	  

suppose that because analogy does not (in general) require that one come up with something
new so much as find a source in memory that is structurally similar to the target, it is the creative
process most likely to involve search or selection. Thus if we can show that even analogy
problem solving involves not search or selection amongst predefined alternatives but the
resolution of ill-defined states of potentiality, we have fairly strong evidence for the hypothesis
that potentiality states figure prominently in the creative process.
In tests of analogy solving, the target is presented as a problem that can be solved drawing from
the source (Gick & Holyoak, 1983). It is believed that the source tacitly informs the participant,
prompting a solution. Let's first look at a preeminent theory of how this happens known as
structure mapping. Then we'll look at an alternative that involves the resolution of cognitive
states of potentiality.
Two Views of Analogy
Structure mapping, in its original formulation, posits that analogy generation occurs in two steps
(Gentner, 1983). The first step involves finding an appropriate source in memory and aligning it
with the target. The second step involves mapping the correct one-to-one correspondences
between the source and the target. Thus structure mapping assumes that once the correct
source is found, the analogy making process occurs in isolation from the rest of the contents of
the mind. A key principle of structure mapping is the systematicity principle, according to which
people prefer to connect structures composed of related predicates.
According to more recent formulation of the theory, the process occurs in three stages. The first
stage entails finding all possible source-to-target matches through a quick and dirty process that
emphasizes surface similarity. Structural alignment and mapping occur in the second and third
stages.
While the basic principles of structure mapping are sensible and well-supported, some of its
underlying assumptions have been called into question. First, I propose that the first phase is
not, as Gentner (2010) puts it, a "structurally blind free-for-all" (p. 753) but rather, constrained by
content-addressable structure of associative memory to naturally retrieve items that are in some
way (although not necessarily the right or most relevant way) structurally similar (Gabora, 2000,
2002, 2005, 2010).
A related assumption is that alignment and mapping work with discrete, predefined structures. I
proposed that a ‘half-baked' analogy exists in a state of potentiality due to creative interference.
The source may be an amalgam of multiple items that have previously been encoded to the
neural cell assemblies activated by the target, and that in the present context cannot be readily
separated from one another. The analogy is in a potentiality state because relevant aspects of
these items have not yet been disambiguated from aspects that are irrelevant.
Contrasting the Predictions of Structure Mapping versus Actualizing Potentiality
We have looked at two theories concerning the creative process of analogy making. Structure
mapping is related to search/selection theories of creativity in emphasizing the challenge of
finding a suitable predefined structure. In contrast, according to the ‘actualization of potentiality'
view (because of the ingenious way that information is encoded in memory) suitable pre-defined
structures come to mind for free, not as separate and discrete items but merged together, and
the challenge is dis-entangling the relevant from the irrelevant.

3
	  

The two theories give different predictions as to the state of the mind midway through analogy
formation. This is schematically illustrated in Figure 1. Structure mapping predicts that early on,
multiple distinct and separate sources may be identified. Eventually an appropriate source is
chosen, but the analogy is still unfinished because not all the correspondences between source
and target have been found. There is no reason to expect that the incomplete solution will
contain extra material.
Figure 1. Highly simplified illustration of the
differences between analogy solving by structure
mapping versus honing. According to structure
mapping, midway through the analogy making
process a correct source has been found but not all
the correspondences have been mapped.
According to honing, midway through the analogy
making process potentially relevant sources have
been amalgamated and not all irrelevant
correspondences have been weeded out. Note that
once the analogy is complete it is not possible to
distinguish between the two theories.

According to the ‘actualization of potentiality'
view, however, the incomplete solution is
expected to contain extra material that would
perhaps be correct for similar problems but that
is not appropriate for this one. The unfinished
solution is ill-defined because irrelevant
characteristics of the contributing sources have
not yet been disambiguated from characteristics that are relevant. The first figure provides a
highly simplified illustration of the relevant differences between analogy solving by structure
mapping versus by actualization of potentiality.
Note that for completed analogies it is not possible to distinguish which theory provides a better
explanation of how the analogy was produced. Only for incomplete analogies do the two
theories give different predictions.
Method
Adam Saab (a UBC undergraduate student) and I conducted a study to test of the hypothesis
that midway through analogy problem solving the mind is in a state of potentiality. (If you're not
interested in how the study was conducted, skip ahead to ‘Results'.)
Eighty-five University of British Columbia undergraduates who were taking first year psychology
course participated in the study. The source and target for this analogy solving experiment
were, respectively, The General, and the Radiation Problem, commonly used one-paragraphlong stories in the analogy literature (Gick & Holyoak, 1983). The General involves a fortress
that cannot be captured if all soldiers come from the same direction but that can be successfully
captured by dividing the army into small groups of soldiers that converge on the fortress from
multiple directions. (The complete story is provided in Appendix A). The Radiation Problem
involves finding a way to destroy a tumor without killing surrounding tissue. (The complete story
is provided in Appendix B). The solution to the Radiation Problem is analogous to the solution to
The General; the tumor is destroyed using multiple low-intensity X-rays from different directions.

4
	  

The experimental procedure consisted of the following: In Phase One, the exposure to source
phase, the participants were given five minutes to study The General. They were asked to
summarize the story as a test of their story comprehension.
In Phase Two, the problem solving phase, the participants were presented with the target, the
Radiation Problem. They were given no indication that the story from phase one could help
them solve the problem. Since pilot studies showed that the minimum time required to solve the
Radiation problem is two minutes, the participants were interrupted after 100 seconds and told
they had 20 seconds to write down whatever they were currently thinking in terms of a solution.
In a follow-up questionnaire distributed immediately afterward, the participants were asked
whether they noticed a relation between The General and The Radiation Problem, and if so, at
what point they noticed it.
Judging and Analysis
Results of both phases were assessed by six judges who were naïve as to the theoretical
rationale for the experiment. The story summaries produced in phase one were judged for
comprehension on a three-point scale: poor, fair, or good.
Table 1: Elements of The General (source) that are mapped to the Radiation Problem (target) in a
successful solution.

The General (Source)
Multiple groups of soldiers
Small groups
Groups converge from different
directions

Radiation Problem (Target)
Multiple rays
Low intensity
Rayss converge from different directions

Since we were interested in the nature of cognitive states midway through a creative process,
participants who correctly solved the problem in the allotted time were removed from the
analysis. They were deemed to have correctly solved the problem if they found all three of the
correspondences provided in the first table (Table 1).
The judges were asked to categorize each of the remaining incomplete solutions as either
Structure Mapping (SM) or Actualization of Potentiality (AP) according to the characteristics of
each provided in the second table (Table 2).
Table 2: Characteristics used by naïve judges to categorize artists’ responses to questions about their artmaking process as indicative of Theory S or Theory H.

Characteristic
If multiple ideas are
given, they are
Ideas are

Common core to
ideas?
Emergent properties?

Theory S
Distinct (e.g., complete ideas
separated by ‘or’)
Well-defined; need to be
tweaked and selected
amongst
Never

Theory H
Jumbled together (e.g., idea fragments
spliced together)
Ill-defined; need to be made concrete;
later elements emerge from earlier ones

No

Yes

Yes or sometimes

5
	  

Emergent selfunderstanding?
Emphasis

No

Yes

External product

Internal transformation

A potential concern at this point is that an answer might contain extraneous information because
it was elaborated following retrieval, rather than because of creative interference. There is
evidence that analogy making does in some cases involve adapting or elaborating the source to
improve the match. Structure mapping does not emphasize this kind of adaptation or
elaboration, but it allows for and is not incompatible with it. However, in the analogy used here,
no adapting or elaborating of the source was needed to generate a complete and correct
solution. In other words, if the correct source (The General story) was found, it could be used as
is, without elaboration. Therefore, if extraneous information is present we have good reason to
believe that it was due to creative interference.
An example of an answer that was categorized as structure mapping (SM) is:
"No idea. Don't know much about science. Maybe try to have a low-intensity ray that
would sufficiently kill the tumor but not destroy healthy tissues."
In this answer, one of correspondences has been found (correspondence 2: low intensity ray).
Since the other two correspondences were not found (multiple rays and different directions) the
solution is incomplete. Since the answer provides no evidence that the participant's current
conception of a solution consists of multiple items jumbled together in memory, it was classified
as SM.
Here are some examples of answers that were categorized as AP. The first example is:
"First, what kind of tissue will be destroyed with the ray treatment? Can it be replaced
using skin graft? How much tissue will be destroyed in the surrounding area? Will the cost
outweigh the benefit? This needs to be considered if using the full strength ray."
In this incomplete solution, none of the three correspondences has been found. However, the
phrase "if using the full strength ray" indicates that the participant has considered, or is about to
consider, the possibility of using a ray that is less than full strength, which suggests that
correspondence 2 is within reach. It was classified as AP because it includes irrelevant
information (such as concern about the kind of tissue) activated by the target that is
unnecessary to generation of the correct solution.
A second example of an answer that was categorized as AP is the following:
"The high intensity ray is necessary to kill the tumor so maybe shooting it in short
successive bursts from different angles will kill the tumor without killing too much healthy
tissue."
In this incomplete solution, one of the correspondences has been found: different directions
(correspondence 3). It was classified as AP because it also includes irrelevant information (the
notion of "short successive bursts") activated by the target that is unnecessary to generation of
the correct solution.
Results

6
	  

Each of the 51 incomplete solutions (those that remained after complete solutions were
removed from the analysis) was classified as supportive of structure mapping if 4 or more
judges judged it as structure mapping, and as supportive of actualizing potentiality if 4 or more
judges judged it as actualizing potentiality. In cases where judging was tied, random number
generation was used to assign case values. As shown in Figure 2, 39 were classified as
supportive of actualizing potentiality, and 12 were classified as supportive of structure mapping.
The data supported the hypothesis that analogies are generated by actualizing potentiality.
Figure 2. Results of a
study in which participants
were interrupted midway
through an analogy
problem-solving task and
asked what they were
thinking in terms of a
solution, and their
solutions were classified
as indicative of either
Structure Mapping (SM) or
Honing (HO). (a)
Frequency count of
solution judgments for SM
on the left (N = 12) and
HO on the right (N = 39).
(b) Mean number of
ratings of SM on the left (M
= 1.65, SD =1.66) and HO
on the right (M = 4.35, SD =1.66). Both measures support the prediction of honing theory that midway
through creative processing an idea is in a potentiality state (Gabora & Saab, 2011).

(a)	  

(b)	  

A further analysis compared the mean number of judgments (out of a maximum of 6, the total
number of judges) across all responses that supported each theory, as shown in Figure 2b.
These data corroborate the frequency count findings and provide further support for the AP view
of creativity.
Concluding Remarks
A few days ago I had the good fortune to speak with Deidre Gentner, the originator of the
Structure Mapping theory of analogy, about this project. (By coincidence, we were both at a
seminar on problem solving at a castle in Germany that is now used for computer science
seminars.) Although framed as an alternative to structure mapping, the data presented here are
not incompatible with the key principles of structure mapping, i.e. structural alignment,
systematicity, and mapping. We concluded that it would be possible to incorporate the
actualization of potential into the structure mapping theory.
In my view, doing so would produce a vastly richer and more accurate model of analogy. The
potentiality state is a state in which the entity (in this case the various components of the
‘source') can come together in a flexible, context-specific in response to the specific content of
the ‘target'. The sparse, distributed, content-addressable structure of associative memory
ensures that any item that comes to mind as a potential source bears some structural similarity
(deep or superficial) to the target. Thus the initial stage of analogy solving is viewed as not
"structurally blind", but rather ill-defined due to the multitude of potentially relevant structures

7
	  

that present themselves. Due to the phenomenon of creative interference, what comes to mind
may be quite unlike anything that has ever been experienced. Both the data from frequency
counts and mean number of SM versus AP judgments support the prediction that a half-baked
analogy exists in a state of potentiality, in which the constituent items are merged together, as
opposed to a collection of candidate items each in the separate and distinct form in which they
were originally encoded in memory. The vagueness or ‘half-baked' quality reflects that it is still
uncertain how, in the context of each other, these elements come together as a realizable
whole.
A limitation of the current study is that it only involved one analogy-solving task. My students
and I are investigating the role of potentiality states in other analogy solving tasks, as well as
other kinds of creative processes, and in human cognition more generally.
Acknowledgments
The author is grateful for funding from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
of Canada.
Appendix A: The General
The following story, referred to as The General, was used as the source in this analogy solving
experiment:
A small country was ruled from a strong fortress by a dictator. The fortress was situated in
the middle of the country, surrounded by farms and villages. Many roads led to the
fortress through the countryside. A rebel general vowed to capture the fortress. The
general knew that an attack by his entire army would capture the fortress. He gathered his
army at the head of one of the roads, ready to launch a full-scale direct attack. However,
the general then learned that the dictator had planted mines on each of the roads. The
mines were set so that small bodies of men could pass over them safely, since the dictator
needed to move his troops and workers to and from the fortress. However, any large force
would detonate the mines. Not only would this blow up the road, but it would also destroy
many neighboring villages. It therefore seemed impossible to capture the fortress.
However, the general devised a simple plan. He divided his army into small groups and
dispatched each group to the head of a different road. When all was ready he gave the
signal and each group marched down a different road. Each group continued down its
road to the fortress so that the entire army arrived together at the fortress at the same
time. In this way, the general captured the fortress and overthrew the dictator.
Appendix B: The Radiation Problem
The following story, referred to as The Radiation Problem, was used as the target in this
experiment.
Suppose you are a doctor faced with a patient who has a malignant tumor in his stomach.
It is impossible to operate on the patient, but unless the tumor is destroyed the patient will
die. There is a kind of ray that can be used to destroy the tumor. If the rays reach the
tumor all at once at a sufficiently high intensity, the tumor will be destroyed. Unfortunately,
at this intensity the healthy tissue that the rays pass through on the way to the tumor will
also be destroyed. At lower intensities the rays are harmless to healthy tissue, but they will

8
	  

not affect the tumor either. What type of procedure might be used to destroy the tumor
with the rays, and at the same time avoid destroying the healthy tissue?
References
Gabora, L. (2000). Toward a theory of creative inklings. In (R. Ascott, Ed.) Art, Technology, and
Consciousness (pp. 159-164). Intellect Press, Bristol, UK.
Gabora, L. (2002). The beer can theory of creativity. In (P. Bentley & D. Corne, Eds.) Creative
Evolutionary Systems (pp. 147-161). San Francisco: Morgan Kauffman.
Gabora, L. (2005). Creative thought as a non-Darwinian evolutionary process. Journal of
Creative Behavior, 39(4), 262-283.
Gabora, L. (2010). Revenge of the 'neurds': Characterizing creative thought in terms of the
structure and dynamics of human memory. Creativity Research Journal, 22(1), 113. https://people.ok.ubc.ca/lgabora/papers/eptcs09
Gabora, L. & Saab, A. (2011). Creative interference and states of potentiality in analogy
problem solving. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (35063511). July 20-23, 2011, Boston MA.
https://people.ok.ubc.ca/lgabora/papers/conf_papers/GaboraSaab-CogSci2011.pdf
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy. Cognitive Science,
7(2), 155-170.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical processes and symbol systems.
Cognitive Science, 34, 752-775.
Gick, M. L. & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and analogical transfer. Cognitive
Psychology, 15(1), 1-38.

9
	  

