The NAD(P)H:Flavin Oxidoreductase from Escherichia
coli :
Evidence for a New Mode of Binding for Reduced Pyridine
Nucleotides

‡

§

‡

‡

Vincent Nivière *, Franck Fieschi , Jean-Luc Décout and Marc Fontecave

‡

Laboratoire de Chimie et Biochimie des Centres Rédox Biologiques,

DBMS-CEA/ CNRS/ Université J. Fourier, Batiment K, 17 Avenue des
Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble, Cedex 9, France
§

Institut de Biologie Structurale, CEA/ CNRS/ Université J. Fourier, 41

Avenue des Martyrs, 38027 Grenoble, Cedex 1, France

Running Title : Substrate specificity of the NAD(P)H binding site of Fre

* To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Telephone : 33-(0)4-76-88-91-09. Fax : 33-(0)4-76-88-91-24.
E-mail:niviere@cbcrb.ceng.cea.fr

SUMMARY

The NAD(P)H:flavin oxidoreductase from Escherichia coli, named Fre, is
a monomer of 26.2 kDa that catalyzes the reduction of free flavins using
NADPH or NADH as electron donor. The enzyme does not contain any
prosthetic group but accommodates both the reduced pyridine nucleotide and
the flavin in a ternary complex prior to oxidoreduction. The specificity of the
flavin reductase for the pyridine nucleotide was studied by steady-state kinetics
using a variety of NADP analogs. Both the nicotinamide ring and the adenosine
part of the substrate molecule have been found to be important for binding to the
polypeptide chain. However, in the case of NADPH, the 2’-phosphate group
destabilized almost completely the interaction with the adenosine moiety.
Moreover, NADPH and NMNH are very good substrates for the flavin reductase
and we have shown that both these molecules bind to the enzyme almost
exclusively by the nicotinamide ring. This provides evidence that the flavin
reductase exhibits a unique mode for recognition of the reduced pyridine
nucleotide. In addition, we have shown that the flavin reductase selectively
transfers the pro-R hydrogen from the C-4 position of the nicotinamide ring and
is therefore classified as an A side specific enzyme.

INTRODUCTION

Flavin reductases are enzymes defined by their ability to catalyze the
reduction of free flavins (riboflavin, FMN or FAD) by using reduced pyridine
nucleotides, NADPH or NADH (1). The products of these enzyme activities,
protein-free reduced flavins, were suggested to have important biological
functions as electron transfer mediators, even though the real physiological
significance of these mediators has so far not been fully appreciated. In fact, in
vitro, free reduced flavins can reduce ferric complexes or iron proteins very
efficiently and it has been suggested that flavin reductases could play a key role
in : iron metabolism (1, 2), activation of ribonucleotide reductase (3, 4) and
reduction of methemoglobin (5, 6). There is also indirect evidence for their
function in bioluminescence (7, 8) and oxygen reduction (9). Recently, flavin
reductases have been found to be associated with oxygenases involved in the
desulfurization process of fossil fuels (10) and antibiotic biosynthesis (11-13).
Up to now, two major classes of flavin reductases have been
characterized. Class I enzymes do not contain any flavin prosthetic group and
cannot be defined as flavoproteins (3, 14), whereas class II enzymes are
canonical flavoproteins (15-17). These two classes also exhibit different
enzymatic mechanisms for flavin reduction. Class I enzymes use a sequential
mechanism (14), whereas class II use a Ping-Pong mechanism, as a consequence
of having a redox cofactor bound to the polypeptide chain (17, 18).

The prototype for class I flavin reductases is an enzyme, named Fre 1,
which was initially discovered in Escherichia coli as a component of a
multienzymatic system involved in the activation of ribonucleotide reductase, a
key enzyme in DNA biosynthesis (3, 4). Fre consists of a single polypeptide
chain of 233 amino acids, with a molecular mass of 26,212 Da (19). It uses an
electron donor which can be either NADPH or NADH and riboflavin (Rf) is the
best substrate (3, 14). Steady-state kinetic studies have shown that Fre functions
through an ordered mechanism, with NADPH binding first and riboflavin being
the second substrate (14). Product order release has also been determined, with
reduced flavin being the first product to be released and NADP+ the second (14).
Although Fre is not a flavoprotein, several lines of evidence suggested
that Fre belongs to a large family of flavoenzymes of which spinach ferredoxinNADP+ reductase (FNR) is the structural prototype (20). In spite of very low
global sequence similarity, Fre contains a sequence motif of four amino acids,
R46PFS49, similar to the R93LYS96 region of spinach FNR. In the FNR family,
these conserved residues are involved in the interaction between the protein and
the flavin isoalloxazine ring (20). In spinach FNR, Ser96 has been proposed to
make a hydrogen bond to the N(5) position of the FAD cofactor (20) and was
found to be essential for activity (21). Site-directed mutagenesis experiments
allowed us to demonstrate that Ser49 of Fre (corresponding to Ser96 of spinach
FNR) is indeed involved in flavin binding, and that it is also essential for

activity (22). These results were the first to support the structural relationship
between Fre and the members of the FNR family.
This was further confirmed by characterization of reaction intermediates
which are formed during the catalytic cycle of Fre (23). For the flavoenzymes of
the FNR family, rapid kinetic studies have demonstrated the occurrence of two
distinct intermediates species during the catalytic cycle, identified as charge
transfer complexes between pyridine nucleotide and the flavin cofactor (24-26).
Similarly, in the case of Fre, the same two reaction intermediates of the catalytic
cycle have been characterized (23). Together, these results now extend the
structural similarity between Fre and the proteins of the FNR family to a
functional level.
Substrate specificity studies on Fre using flavin analogs have shown that
the isoalloxazine ring of the flavin is the only part of the molecule which is
recognized by Fre (14). Such a weak interaction of Fre with the flavin provides a
rational explanation why a protein related to a flavoprotein family can use a
flavin as a substrate rather than as a cofactor (14).
In the present paper, using a variety of NAD(P) analogs, substrates or
inhibitors, we have now studied the specificity of Fre for the reduced pyridine
nucleotide, the other substrate. We have shown that Fre exhibits a unique mode
of binding with the reduced pyridine nucleotide, which involves both the
adenosine and the nicotinamide ring moiety of the molecule. However, when
NADPH is used as electron donor, the presence of the 2’-phosphate group of

the molecule destabilized almost completely the interaction with the adenosine
moiety. NADPH, as NMNH, binds to Fre with the nicotinamide ring almost
exclusively. In addition, we have shown that Fre selectively transfers the pro-R
hydrogen from the C-4 position of the nicotinamide group and is therefore
classified as an A-side specific enzyme.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Biochemical and chemical reagents
Riboflavin (Rf), FAD, lumichrome, NAD(P)H analogs, lyophilized yeast
alcohol dehydrogenase, lyophilized

Thermoanaerobium brockii

alcohol

dehydrogenase, 2-propanol-d8 were obtained from Sigma. 2H2O (99.9+ atom %
2

H) was from SDS. Others reagent-grade chemicals were obtained from either

Sigma, Aldrich, or Bio-rad.
Production of recombinant flavin reductase
Purification of the recombinant Escherichia coli Fre was carried out using
a two-step protocol, phenyl-Sepharose and Superdex 75 as previously reported
(14). The protein concentration was determined using the Bio-Rad Protein
Assay reagent (27) and bovine serum albumin as a standard protein.
Enzyme assays
Flavin reductase activity was determined from the decrease of the
absorbance due to the oxidation of the reduced pyridine nucleotide in the
presence of Rf or FAD, using a Varian Cary 1 Bio

spectrophotometer.

Activities were measured at 25 °C in 50 mM Tris-Cl buffer pH 7.6. Assays were
performed in 1 cm path length cuvette (final volume 1 ml). When high
concentrations of NAD(P)H or NMNH were investigated, a 0.1 cm path length
cuvette was used (final volume 0.3 ml). When lumichrome was present in the
enzymatic assays, the cuvette contained in addition 87 mM Me 2SO final

concentration as reported in (14). The reaction was initiated by adding 0.2-15 µg
of enzyme, depending of the reduced pyridine nucleotide used. Activities with
NADPH and NADH were followed at 340 nm (=6.22 mM-1 cm-1), with NMNH
at 338 nm (=5.72 mM-1 cm-1), with thio-NADH at 396 nm (=11.3 mM-1 cm-1),
with 3-acetyl NADH at 364 nm (=5.6 mM-1 cm-1). Enzyme activities were
determined from the linear part of the progress curve, with less than 10% of
reduced pyridine nucleotide utilized over the time course of the reaction.
Kinetic analysis
Reciprocal initial velocities were plotted against reciprocal substrate
concentrations, and all plots were verified to be linear. Kinetic parameters (v m,
Km, Kmapp) were determined from saturation curves, fitted with the equation
vi=(vm[S])/(Km+[S]), using a Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. Inhibition
constants (Ki) were determined using a replot of the Km apparent values (Kmapp)
versus inhibitor concentration [I] and fitted with a straight line, assuming the
equation for a competitive inhibitor : Kmapp=(Km/Ki)[I]+Km. When applicable,
values are shown ± standard deviation.
Substrate- product concentrations
NAD(P)

analogs

and

flavin

concentrations

were

determined

spectroscopically using the following extinction coefficients : adenosine
(260nm=14.9 mM-1 cm-1), AMP, ADP-ribose, ATP-ribose and 2’, 5’ ADP
(259nm=15.4 mM-1 cm-1), ß-NAD(P)+ (259nm=17.8 mM-1 cm-1), ß-NMN+

(266nm=4.6 mM-1 cm-1), nicotinamide (260nm=2.9 mM-1 cm-1), Rf (450nm=12.5
mM-1 cm-1), FAD (450nm= 11.3 mM-1 cm1), lumichrome (nm= 6.0 mM-1 cm-1).
Determination of the stereospecificity of the hydride transfer
[4R-2H] NADH and [4R-2H] NADPH were prepared from enzymatic
reduction of NAD+ and NADP+ by 2-propanol-d8 as previously described (28,
29). As a control NADH and NADPH were prepared by using non deuterated
isopropanol. 1H-NMR spectra were recorded at 25°C on a Varian U+ 500
apparatus. The reaction mixture contained 3 mM [4R-2H] NADH or [4R-2H]
NADPH in 1 ml of 50 mM of potassium phosphate buffer p2H 8, 25 µg of Fre,
15 µM of Rf and was incubated at 25°C under aerobic conditions. The oxidation
of [4R-2H] NAD(P)H was monitored spectrophotometrically at 340 nm. After
total oxidation,

1

H-NMR spectra of the samples were recorded. The

stereospecificity of NAD(P)H was calculated from the ratio [peak area of C4-H
( 8.74 ppm)] / [average peak area of C2-H ( 9.24 ppm) and C6-H ( 9.05
ppm)].

RESULTS

NAD(P)H analogs as substrates
Scheme 1 shows the structures of the various NAD(P)H analogs studied.
Table 1 shows the kinetic and thermodynamic parameters obtained with Fre in
the presence of various NAD(P)H analogs as electron donors and riboflavin (Rf)
as the electron acceptor. Kd values for the different NAD(P)H analogs were
calculated from the Dalziel mathematical treatment of the initial velocities data
(30), which proved to be well-adapted in the case of Fre (14, 22). For a
sequential bireactant mechanism, where A and B are the first and second
substrate of the reaction respectively, the initial reaction velocity, v i, can be
expressed in a reciprocal form in terms of ’s parameters as suggested by
Dalziel (30) :
e/vi = o + A/[A] + B/[B] + AB/[A][B]

(1)

where e is the enzyme concentration. The different  parameters in equation 1
represent a combination of rate constants of each individual step of the
sequential bireactant mechanism (30). A plot of the reciprocal of the
concentration of A versus e/vi, at a constant concentration of B, will have a slope
equal to A + AB/[B] and an Y-axis intercept equal to o + B/[B]. Secondary
replots of the slopes and intercepts versus the reciprocal of the concentration of

B will give the values of the different  parameters, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The 
parameters are related to the Km, kcat and Kd values of the reaction as follows :
Km(A) = A/o; Km(B) = B/o; Kd(A) = AB/B; kcat = 1/o
Km and kcat values for the different reduced pyridine nucleotides obtained
by Dalziel treatment are checked to be identical to Km and kcat values determined
from steady-state kinetic analysis of the reaction during experiments in which
NAD(P)H analogs are varied in the presence of saturating concentration of Rf.
In all cases, the Km value for Rf determined in the presence of different reduced
pyridine nucleotides remained in the 1-10 M range (Table 1).
Unexpectedly, NMNH was found to be a very good substrate for the
enzyme reduction of Rf. In Fig. 1, Fre activity was determined as a function of
NMNH concentration at several levels of Rf. Double reciprocal plots show a
series of intersecting lines to the left of the vertical axis, consistent with a
sequential mechanism as observed in the case of NADPH, with Rf as the
electron acceptor (14). The kcat value was significantly larger than that obtained
with NADPH as the electron donor (Table 1). Km value for NMNH was found to
be 3.5 and 14 times more elevated than the corresponding values for NADPH
and NADH respectively and as a consequence the catalytic efficiency for
NMNH, kcat/Km, was only reduced about 2.5 and 5-fold compared to that
determined for NADPH and NADH respectively (Table 1). The Kd value for
NMNH was 116±17 M, a value slightly larger than the Kd value from NADPH

(54±9 M), determined under the same experimental conditions (Table 1).
These data thus strongly suggested that the adenosine phosphate part of the
reduced pyridine nucleotide does not play a major role in the interaction with the
Fre polypeptide chain and in the formation of the catalytic competent ternary
complex with Rf (14, 23).
We have examined the inhibition pattern of NMN+ when NMNH was
used as the electron donor and Rf as the electron acceptor. When NMNH was
varied in the presence of a fixed non-saturating concentration of Rf, inhibition
by NMN+ was found to be competitive with respect to NMNH (data not shown).
A Ki value for NMN+ of 18 mM has been estimated (Table 2). These results
strongly suggest that the first product to be released is the reduced Rf, followed
by NMN+, as with NADPH as electron donor (14).
Two NADH analogs, 3-acetyl NADH and thio-NADH, with limited
modifications at the carboxamide group of the nicotinamide ring, were tested
and also found to be substrates for the reaction catalyzed by Fre. However, they
exhibited significantly lower kcat values compared to that of NADH (Table 1),
which may reflect their higher redox potential values. Fre activity was
determined as a function of 3-acetyl NADH concentration at several levels of Rf
(data not shown). The double reciprocal plots of the initial velocities show a
series of intersecting lines to the left of the vertical axis (data not shown),
consistent with a sequential mechanism. Kd value determined for 3-acetyl
NADH was found to be about 6 times larger than the corresponding value for

NADPH, whereas its Km value was 13 and 52 times larger than the
corresponding Km values for NADPH and NADH respectively (Table 1).
Km value for thio-NADH was found to be very low, 0.5 M (Table 1),
suggesting an increased affinity of Fre for this compound. Because of the low
Km and kcat values, Kd value for thio-NADH could not be accurately determined.

Enzymatic mechanism with NADH as a substrate
Fig. 2 shows Fre activity determined as a function of NADH
concentration at several levels of Rf. Surprisingly, double reciprocal plots of the
initial velocity versus NADH concentration showed a series of parallel lines.
When Fre activity was determined as a function of Rf at several levels of
NADH, double reciprocal plots showed again a series of parallel lines (data not
shown). When plotting the initial rate data in the form [S]/v i versus [S], where
[S] is the concentration of the varied substrate, we obtained a series of lines that
all intersect on the [S]/vi axis (data not shown). This confirms the parallel line
pattern of the double reciprocal plots (31). Such a pattern would suggest a PingPong mechanism. In any case, data from Fig. 2 cannot be used to determine a Kd
value for NADH with the Dalziel treatment.
That the reduction of Rf by NADH could involve a Ping-Pong mechanism
was intriguing, considering that Fre does not contain a redox cofactor and that
NADPH was clearly shown to function with a sequential mechanism. To further
investigate the possibility of a Ping-Pong mechanism, we carried out a series of

inhibition studies, with NADH as the electron donor. Table 2 shows that AMP
was found to be a competitive inhibitor with respect to NADH (with a Ki value
of 420±70 M) and non-competitive inhibition was observed with respect to Rf.
Lumichrome is a strong competitive inhibitor with respect to Rf, with a Ki value
of 60±9 nM, and an uncompetitive inhibitor with respect to NADH. These data
do not support a Ping-Pong mechanism but are consistent with a sequential
ordered mechanism with NADH binding first (32), as it has been previously
reported for reduction of Rf by NADPH (14).
The parallel line pattern observed in Fig. 2 could then be explained by a
dissociation constant value of NADH (AB/B) much smaller than its Michaelis
constant (A/o), as suggested already by several authors (30, 31, 33). If this is
the case, this makes AB difficult to estimate and equation 1 would become :e/vi
= o + A/[A] + B/[B], assuming a parallel lines pattern for a sequential ordered
mechanism.
The kinetic mechanism of product release for the Fre catalyzed reaction
using NADH and Rf as substrates has been determined by studying product
inhibition. When NADH concentration was varied with a fixed, non saturating
concentration of Rf, inhibition by NAD+ was found to be mixed-type with
respect to NADH (Fig. 3A, Table 2). Furthermore, when Rf concentration was
varied with a fixed, non saturating concentration of NADH, NAD+ was found to

be mixed-type with respect to Rf (Fig. 3B, Table 2). These data strongly suggest
that NAD+ is the first product to be released (33).
In conclusion, the enzyme works with NADH almost as with NADPH
through a sequential ordered mechanism and the parallel line pattern observed in
Fig. 2 can be explained by NADH having a Kd value much smaller than its Km
value (8±1 M, Table 1). However, the reaction with NADH differs from that
with NADPH in that NAD+ is the first reaction product to be released.
NAD(P) analogs as dead-end inhibitors
The data reported in Table 1 suggested that the nicotinamide ribose
phosphate part of the reduced pyridine nucleotide played a major role in binding
to Fre. We have tested a variety of NAD(P) analogs, all lacking the nicotinamide
ring (Scheme 1), as dead-end enzyme inhibitors (Table 3). All NAD(P) analogs
tested in Table 3 were found to be competitive inhibitors with respect to
NADPH. In the case of a sequential ordered mechanism, the inhibition constant
Ki for a competitive inhibitor (I) with respect to the first substrate reflects the
dissociation constant of the enzyme-inhibitor complex (EI) unless the second
substrate can complex with EI to form an inactive ternary complex (34). In such
a case, Ki must be smaller than the true dissociation constant of the enzymeinhibitor complex (34). In our case, an inhibition effect associated with an
increased concentration of the second substrate, Rf, would be observed. This has
been tested using AMP as the dead-end inhibitor. Fre activity was determined as
a function of Rf concentration (varied in a 0.3-100 Km range) at a constant non

saturating concentration of NADPH (100 M) with and without 2 mM AMP.
Double reciprocal plots of the initial velocities versus Rf concentration gave no
evidence of a substrate-inhibition pattern (data not shown). We thus conclude
that, under these conditions, no ternary Fre-Rf-AMP complex was formed and
as a consequence the Ki value reported in Table 3 can be interpreted as a true
dissociation constant for the AMP-enzyme complex. By extension, we consider
that all Ki values reported in Table 3 are also true dissociation constants.
As shown in Table 3, Ki values for 2’, 5’ ADP and ATP-ribose are much
larger than the Kd value for NADPH (3.7±1.0, 3.8±0.8 and 0.054±0.009 mM
respectively). In addition, adenosine is a poor inhibitor with a Ki value of 9 mM.
These data strengthen the hypothesis that binding of the NADPH molecule
occurs mainly through the nicotinamide ring. On the other hand, Ki values for
AMP and ADP-ribose, which are NAD analogs, are about 11 and 9 times
smaller than the Ki values for 2’, 5’ ADP and ATP-ribose respectively. These
observations strongly suggested that the presence of the 2’-phosphate group of
the NADP analogs induces a destabilization of the interaction with the Fre
polypeptide. This is also consistent with a smaller Kd value for NADH, which
has been estimated to be lower than its Km value (8±1 M, see above), compared
to that for NADPH (54±9 M). Furthermore, the finding that the Ki value for
ADP-ribose is identical to that for AMP and that the Ki value for ATP-ribose is
identical to that of 2’, 5’ ADP suggest that the phosphate ribose part of the ADPribose and ATP-ribose molecules does not contribute significantly to the

binding. Adenosine and nicotinamide were also found to be competitive
inhibitors with respect to NADPH. However they are characterized by very high
Ki values (9 and 20 mM respectively, Table 3).

FAD reduction is specific for NADH
Table 4, shows the kinetic parameters for the enzymatic reduction of FAD
by NADPH, NADH or NMNH. The kcat/Km values reported for the three reduced
pyridine nucleotides clearly indicate that with FAD as the electron acceptor, Fre
became highly NADH specific (Table 4). The kinetic parameters for the reaction
(Table 4) can be compared to those for the reduction of Rf (Table 1) : when
NADH was used as the electron donor, while kcat and Km values for the two
flavins, FAD and Rf, were in the same range, the Km value for NADH was much
larger in the case of FAD (301±40 M compared to 8±1 M in the case of Rf).
With NADPH or NMNH as the electron donors this effect was much more
pronounced, with Km values at around 15-20 mM (Table 4), as compared to Km
values of 32±2 and 113±7 M for NADPH and NMNH respectively with Rf as
electron acceptor (Table 1). kcat values, in the case of NADPH and NMNH, were
smaller with FAD than with Rf as the electron acceptor and thus became
comparable to the kcat value obtained with the NADH-FAD system (Table 4). On
the whole, the increased specificity for NADH compared to NADPH and
NMNH, in the case of FAD reduction, resulted mainly from a much larger effect

on the Km values for NADPH and NMNH, whereas kcat values were only slightly
affected.

Stereospecificity of the hydride transfer
Both stereospecifically labeled [4R-2H] NADH and [4R-2H] NADPH
were prepared by transferring deuterium from 2-propanol-d8 to NAD(P)+ with
appropriate NAD(P)+-dependent alcohol dehydrogenases, which are specific for
the transfer of the pro-R hydrogen of NAD(P)H. The isotopic purity of
deuterated NAD(P)H was determined without purification by

1

H-NMR

spectrometry at 500 MHz. As shown in Fig. 4A, the two diastereotopic pro-R
and pro-S hydrogen atoms at C-4 of the non-deuterated dihydronicotinamide
ring of NADH were detected at 2.70 ppm and 2.58 ppm respectively. In the 1HNMR spectrum of the deuterated analog, the signal at 2.70 ppm has disappeared
almost completely indicating that deuterium has been transferred specifically to
the R-position (Fig. 4B). The enzymatic deuteration was less specific in the case
of NADP+ and the isotopic purity of [4R-2H] NADPH was found to be 90%
approximately (data not shown).
The stereoselectivity of the hydrogen transfer from [4R-2H] NADH to Rf
catalyzed by Fre was determined from 1H-NMR analysis of the NAD+ product,
as described in Materials and Methods. The almost complete disappearance of
the peaks in the 2.7-2.9 ppm region, characteristic of NADH, indicated that
oxidation to NAD+ was more than 95% completed (data not shown). Deuterium

free NAD+, which can be obtained in a control experiment with NADH, has a
characteristic C-4 proton doublet at 8.74 ppm, in the aromatic region of the 1H
NMR spectrum (Fig. 5A). The presence of this doublet, also present in the
product of [4R-2H] NADH oxidation, unambiguously shows that Fre preferably
transfers the deuterium from the pro-R position resulting in the formation of
deuterium free NAD+, as the major product (Fig. 5B). Comparison of the
intensities of the aromatic signals however showed that a minor amount (less
than 10%) of deuterated NAD+ was also formed. The latter could be assigned to
the non-enzymatic reduction of free flavin by NADH, which was previously
shown to be effective at the high concentrations of electron donor used in this
study (9). Comparable results have been obtained when the stereoselectivity of
the hydrogen transfer from [4R-2H] NADPH to Rf catalyzed by Fre was
determined under the same experimental conditions (data not shown).
These results show that the hydride transfer is pro-R stereospecific during
reduction of Rf by NAD(P)H catalyzed by Fre.

DISCUSSION

The NAD(P)H:flavin oxidoreductase from E.coli, named Fre, is the
prototype for the class of cofactor-free flavin reductases. The mechanism of the
reaction has been partially elucidated previously with the demonstration that the
flavin reductase provides a site which accommodates both reduced pyridine
nucleotides and flavins, in which the hydride transfer takes place (14, 23).
In a previous paper, we identified the parameters governing the interaction
of the flavin substrate with the enzyme polypeptide chain (14). The interesting
conclusion was that binding of the flavin involved the isoalloxazine ring almost
exclusively, with little contribution from the sugar chain. In the present work,
we have studied the interaction of the pyridine nucleotide with the enzyme and
show that Fre has also some unique properties with regard to that interaction.
Although Fre can operate with both NADH and NADPH when using Rf
as the electron acceptor, we have found that the presence of the 2'-phosphate
group had a destabilizing effect on the binding of the pyridine nucleotide to Fre.
This is clear from the following observations : i) Kd value for NADH has been
estimated to be smaller than its Km value (8±1 M), reflecting a better affinity of
the protein for NADH than for NADPH (Kd value of 54±9 M); ii) Kd values,
for AMP and ADP-ribose were 10 times smaller than the Kd values for 2', 5'
ADP and ATP-ribose.

On the other hand, our results strongly suggested that the adenosine-ribose
moiety of the NAD(P)H molecules is not important for the interaction between
the pyridine nucleotide molecule and the protein. As a matter of fact, the Kd
values for AMP or ADP-ribose moiety of the NADH molecule and for 2’, 5’
ADP or ATP-ribose moiety of the NADPH molecule are much higher than the
Kd values estimated and determined for the corresponding substrate, NADH and
NADPH. That the nicotinamide ring itself could have a marked contribution to
the binding of the pyridine nucleotide to Fre was further supported by the
following data.
First, the affinity of the pyridine nucleotide is strongly affected by
modification of the carboxamide group of the nicotinamide ring, as illustrated
by the larger differences between Km and Kd values determined for 3-acetyl
NADH, thio-NADH and the values estimated for NADH (Table 1). Second,
NMNH, which lacks the adenosine part of the NAD(P)H molecule, was found to
be a very good substrate for Fre and exhibited a Kd value only 2 times higher
than that of NADPH (Table 1). Taking into account that the same Kd values were
obtained for AMP and ADP-ribose on one side and for 2', 5' ADP and ATPribose on the other side, one could conclude that binding of NMNH occurs
mainly by its nicotinamide ring with no marked contribution of its phosphate
ribose moiety.

Taken together, all these results clearly confirmed the presence of a
specific recognition site for the nicotinamide ring on the Fre polypeptide chain
with significant contribution to the binding of the reduced pyridine nucleotide.
As mentioned above, the Kd values for NMNH and NADPH were found
to be comparable. This suggests that the negative effect of the NADPH 2'phosphate group on the protein-substrate interaction cancels almost completely
the binding effect of the adenosine part of the molecule. These observations
suggest a similar mode of binding of NADPH and NMNH, with the main
interaction occurring with the nicotinamide ring. NADH, in contrast, binds to
Fre through interactions involving both the nicotinamide ring and the adenosine
part of the molecule.
The difference between NADPH, NMNH, on one side, and NADH on the
other side, with regard to binding to Fre is also reflected in the kinetic
parameters determined in the presence of FAD as the electron acceptor (Table
4). The data show that FAD induces a dramatic increase of the Km values for
NADPH and NMNH, whereas Km value for NADH is much less affected. Even
though the basis of this difference is difficult to identify, these data further
support the notion of a comparable binding mode of NADPH and NMNH.
In addition, it seems that the order of release of the products from this
enzyme can be different from one pyridine nucleotide to another. With NMNH
and NADPH as electron donors, the enzyme mechanism displays the same order
of product release, with the reduced flavin released first followed by NMN + or

NADP+. This is in contrast with NADH, for which the order of product release
is reversed. However, the present data gives no clear indication which might
explain these differences.
We have determined that the enzymatic hydride transfer is stereospecific
for the C-4 pro-R hydrogen atom of the nicotinamide ring of the NAD(P)H and
then that Fre can be classified as an A-side NAD(P)H dependent oxidoreductase.
This provides further support for our suggestion that Fre is structurally and
mechanistically related to the FNR family (22, 23). As a matter of fact, members
of the FNR family are A-side enzymes, in contrast to members of an other
flavoprotein family, the disulfide reductase family, which are B-side enzymes
(35).
In the case of the flavoproteins of the FNR family, the binding mode of
the pyridine nucleotide with the protein seems to be completely different from
what we have found in the case of Fre. In fact, in the case of spinach FNR (36)
and nitrate reductase (37), binding and inhibition studies using NAD(P) analogs,
suggested that binding of the pyridine nucleotide to the proteins, involved the
adenosine part of the molecule exclusively with no contribution of the
nicotinamide ring. This has been partly confirmed by the structure of the spinach
FNR complexed with NAD(P) analogs, which showed ordered binding of only
the adenosine phosphate moiety of the pyridine nucleotide molecule (20). The
crystal structure of the PDR-NADH complex, where the entire pyridine
nucleotide molecule is seen, has revealed that the nicotinamide ring is not

correctly positioned for hydride transfer with the flavin cofactor (38). A
conformational change was postulated in order to allow direct contact of the
nicotinamide ring and the flavin (38). This is supported by rapid kinetic studies
on PDR which suggested a two-step mechanism for NADH binding (25, 26).
In the case of alcohol dehydrogenase from horse liver, a two-step binding
mode of pyridine nucleotide has also been proposed. The first binding step
would consist of docking of the adenosine part of the pyridine nucleotide and
the second of conformational isomerization for the binding of the nicotinamide
part (39). The fact that the nicotinamide ring is apparently not directly
recognized by the active site of these NAD(P) dependent dehydrogenase is in
keeping with the fact that NMN(H) has never been reported, to our knowledge,
to be an efficient substrate in an enzyme NAD(P)-dependent reaction.
Recognition of the pyridine nucleotide by Fre, by both the adenosine and
nicotinamide moiety (for the case of NADH) or almost exclusively by the
nicotinamide moiety (for the case of NADPH) appears to be unusual. It could
thus represent a new type of pyridine nucleotide binding mechanism, which has
never been described previously. That this NAD(P)H binding mechanism is
different from what it was suggested for the flavoproteins of the FNR family,
may contribute to make Fre a flavin reductase rather than a flavoprotein, in spite
of the structural and functional homologies between these two classes of protein
(22, 23).
Finally, this work and a previous one (14) establishes that Fre exhibits a

very unique mode of binding for both substrates which sets it apart from other
NAD(P)H- and flavin-dependent enzymes. It uses a remarkable symmetrical
strategy for recognition of the NAD(P)H and the flavin. In both cases, it is
mainly the redox part of the substrate molecules, the nicotinamide ring and the
isoalloxazine ring, which are recognized by the polypeptide chain.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to Dr. M. C. Brochier and Dr. C. Fontaine for technical
assistance in 1H-NMR experiments and to Dr. Elspeth Gordon for reading the
manuscript.

REFERENCES

1. Fontecave, M., Covès, J., and Pierre, J. L. (1994) BioMetals 7, 3-8
2. Covès, J., and Fontecave, M. (1993) Eur. J. Biochem. 211, 635-641
3. Fontecave, M., Eliasson, R., and Reichard, P. (1987) J. Biol. Chem. 262,
12325-12331
4. Fontecave, M., Nordlund, P., Eklund, H., and Reichard, P. (1992) Adv.
Enzymol. 65, 145-183
5. Yubisui, T., Matsuki, T., Takeshita, M., and Yoneyama, Y. (1979) J.
Biochem. (Tokyo ) 85, 719-728
6. Hultquist, D. E., Xu, F., Quandt, K. S., Shlafer, M., Mack, C. P., Till, G. O.,
Seekamp, A., Betz, A. L., and Ennis, S. R. (1993) Am. J. Hematol. 42, 13-18
7. Lei, B., Liu, M., Huang, S., and Tu, S. C. (1994) J. Bacteriol. 176, 35523558
8. Zenno, S., Saigo, K., Kanoh, H. and Inouye, S. (1994) J. Bacteriol. 176,
3536-3543
9. Gaudu, P., Touati, D., Nivière, V., and Fontecave, M. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.
269, 8182-8188
10. Gray, K. A., Pogrebinsky, O. S., Mrachko, G. T., Xi, L., Monticello, D. J.,
and Squires, C. H. (1996) Nature Biotechnol. 14, 1705-1709
11. Kendrew, S. G., Harding, S. E., Hopwood, D. A., and Marsh, E. N. G.
(1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 17339-17343

12. Blanc, V., Lagneaux, D., Didier, P., Gil, P., Lacroix, P., and Crouzet, J.
(1995) J. Bacteriol. 177, 5206-5214
13. Parry, R. J., and Li, W. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 23303-23311
14. Fieschi, F., Nivière, V., Frier, C., Décout, J. L., and Fontecave, M. (1995)
J. Biol. Chem. 270, 30392-30400
15. Covès J., Nivière V., Eschenbrenner, M., and Fontecave M. (1993) J. Biol.
Chem. 268, 18604-18609
16. Tanner, J. J., Lei, B., Tu, S. C., and Krause K. T. (1996) Biochemistry, 35,
13531-13539
17. Koike, H., Sasaki, H., Koribo, T., Zenno, S., Saigo, K., Murphy, M. E., P.,
Adman, E. T., and Tanokura, M. (1998) J. Mol. Biol. 280, 259-273
18. Eschenbrenner, M., Covès, J., and Fontecave, M. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.
270, 20550-20555
19. Spyrou, G., Haggard-Ljungquist, E., Krook, M., Jornvall, H., Nilsson E.,
and Reichard, P. (1991) J. Bacteriol. 173, 3673-3679
20. Bruns, C. M., and Karplus, P. A. (1995) J. Mol. Biol. 247, 125-145
21. Aliverti, A., Bruns, C. M., Pandini, V. E., Karplus, P. A., Vanoni, M. A.,
Curti, B., and Zanetti, G. (1995) Biochemistry 34, 8371-8379
22. Nivière, V., Fieschi, F., Décout, J. L., and Fontecave, M. (1996) J. Biol.
Chem. 271, 16656-1661
23. Nivière, V., Vanoni, M. A., Zanetti, G., and Fontecave, M. (1998)
Biochemistry 37, 11879-11887

24. Batie, C. J., and Kamin, H. (1986) J. Biol. Chem. 261, 11214-11223
25. Gassner, G., Wang, L., Batie, C., and Ballou, D. P. (1994) Biochemistry 33,
12184-12193
26. Gassner, G. T., and Ballou, D. P. (1995) Biochemistry 34, 13460-13471
27. Bradford, M. M. (1976) Anal. Biochem. 72, 248-254
28. Mostad, S. B., and Glasfeld, A. (1993) J. Chem. Educ. 70, 504-506
29. Inouye, S., and Nakamura, H. (1994) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
205, 275-281
30. Dalziel, K. (1973) The Enzymes, 3nd Ed., Boyer, P. D., Ed., Vol. XI pp. 259, Academic Press, New York
31. Rudolph, F. B., and Fromm, H. J. (1979) Methods Enzymol. 63, 139-159
32. Fromm, H. J. (1979) Methods Enzymol. 63, 467-486
33. Segel, I. H. (1975) Enzyme Kinetics, John Wiley & Sons, New York
34. Spector, T., and Cleland, W. W. (1981) Biochem. Pharmacol. 30, 1-7
35. Sem, D. S., and Kasper, C. B. (1992) Biochemistry 31, 3391-3398
36. Batie, C. J., and Kamin, H. (1984) J. Biol. Chem. 259, 11976-11985
37. Trimboli, A., J., and Barber, M., J. (1994) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 315,
48-53
38. Correll, C. C., Batie, C. J., Ballou, D. P., and Ludwig, M. L. (1992) Science
258, 1604-1610
39. Adolph, H. W., Kiefer, M., and Cedergren-Zeppezauer, E. (1997)
Biochemistry, 36, 8743-8754

FOOTNOTES

1

The abbreviations used are : Fre, NAD(P)H : flavin oxidoreductase; FNR,

ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase; PDR, phthalate dioxygenase reductase; Rf,
riboflavin;

AMP,

adenosine

phosphoadenosine

5’-monophosphate;

5’-phosphate;

2’,

ADP-Ribose,

5’

ADP,

adenosine

2’5’-

diphosphoribose; ATP-ribose, 2’-phosphoadenosine 5’-diphosphoribose;
NMNH, -nicotinamide mononucleotide reduced form; 3-acetyl NADH, 3acetylpyridine

adenine

dinucleotide

reduced

form;

thio-NADH,

thionicotinamide adenine dinucleotide reduced form; v i , initial velocity; vm ,
maximal velocity; Kmapp , apparent Michaelis constant; e, enzyme
concentration; o, A, B, AB, kinetic parameters defined by Dalziel (30); nd,
not determined.

FIGURE LEGENDS

Scheme 1. Structure of the different pyridine nucleotide analogs.

Figure 1. A, flavin reductase initial velocity as a function of NMNH
concentration in the presence of 1.00 (

), 1.25 ( ), 2.00 ( ) or 3.00 M (

)

Rf. The flavin reductase concentration, e, used in the assay was 0.0192 M. The
results are presented as double reciprocal plots with straight line determined by a
linear regression program. B, secondary plot of the slopes from A against 1/[Rf]
and fitted with a straight line, corresponding to the equation : y = AB x + A. C,
secondary plot of the intercepts from A against 1/[Rf] and fitted with a straight
line, corresponding to the equation : y = B x + 0.

Figure 2. Double reciprocal plots of the flavin reductase initial velocity as a
function of NADH concentration in the presence of 0.25 (

), 0.50 ( ), 1.00

( ) or 20.00 M ( ) Rf.

Figure 3. A, NAD+ as a mixed-type inhibitor for NADH. The enzyme initial
velocity was assayed as a function of NADH concentrations using 1 M Rf, in
the absence ( ) or in the presence of 0.47 (

), 0.95 ( ) or 1.43 ( ) mM

NAD+. B, NAD+ as a mixed-type inhibitor for Rf. The enzyme initial velocity

was assayed as a function of Rf concentrations using 10 M NADH, in the
absence ( ) or in the presence of 3 ( ), 4 ( ) or 5 ( ) mM NAD+.

Figure 4. 1H-NMR spectra (500 MHz) of NADH (A) and [4R-2H] NADH (B)
obtained by enzymatic reduction.

Figure 5. Aromatic region of the 1H-NMR spectra (500 MHz) of NAD+ obtained
from the Fre-catalyzed reduced pyridine nucleotide oxidation in the presence of
Rf. A : NAD+ obtained from NADH enzymatic oxidation. B : NAD+ obtained
from [4R-2H] NADH enzymatic oxidation.

TABLES

