How to get moving: lessons in eukaryotic motility from a prototypic
model of cell polarization

arXiv:1501.06640v1 [q-bio.SC] 27 Jan 2015

Jasmine A. Nirody a and Padmini Rangamani,∗b
Mathematical models, with some simplifying assumptions, can provide clarity into the workings of complex biological systems.
Despite their seeming simplicity, even so-called ‘minimal’ models can exhibit a diverse range of behavior in various regions of
the parameter space. These models can be studied using simulations and analytical methods. Simulations are often parameter
dependent and fall short of providing a complete understanding of the full range of system responses. Analytical approaches
on the other hand provide a framework to study the entire phase space. Here, we outline a largely analytical method for studying reaction-diffusion models. Using a prototypic model of cell polarization, we characterize protein activation in response
to an external stimulus and highlight the importance of phase-space analysis. We demonstrate how comprehensive treatment
of the phase space can guide experimental design and supplement simulation studies. In order to make such analyses more
accessible, we provide an easy-to-use graphical user interface to test the stability behavior of biological systems (available at
http://www.ocf.berkley.edu/∼jnirody)† .

1

Introduction

downstream processes, usually resulting in the polarization of
cytoskeletal elements. Several experimental studies illustrate
the dependence of cytoskeleton-mediated cell locomotion on
members of this family: Rho has been shown to regulate the
assembly of contractile actin-myosin filaments, and Rac and
Cdc42 regulate actin polymerization to form protrusions for
amoeboidal movement, as well as in the formation of lamellipodium and filopodium 18 . For more information on the role
of this family of proteins in regulating downstream processes,
we refer the interested reader to the comprehensive review by
Raftopolou and Hall 21 .
Given their importance, it is unsurprising that the dynamics
of these proteins has been of great interest, and have been studied both theoretically and experimentally 1,6,7,27 . Analysis of
more extensive biochemical models of polarization than examined here can be found in several places in the literature 2,22,32 .
Indeed, the Rho GTPase switch does not exist in isolation,
and its interactions with downstream elements (including Factin 9,12 ) have been studied extensively. In the following, however, we focus on a comprehensive analysis the elegant and
minimal model proposed by Mori et al. 16 .
This model exhibits a polarity-generating mechanism distinct from that of classical diffusion-driven (Turing) instabilities 29 , termed by the authors as ‘wave-pinning’. Polarization
models relying primarily on Turing-type mechanisms are also
plentiful in the literature 13,19,27 .
This model consists of the bidirectional conversion between
active (A) and inactive (U) forms of a single protein. Through
simulations, Mori et al. showed that their model exhibits
many of the characteristic hallmarks of cell polarization 16 .
First, when an initially unpolarized cell is given a directional
stimulus, it responds by dividing its length into ‘front’ and
‘rear’ regions, defined by high and low concentration of active molecule, respectively. Second, a polarized cell is able

Motility, and in particular directional cell movement, is fundamental for cellular function and survival. Cell migration is
directed by external cues that serve as either attractants or repellants. Exposure to these cues sets into motion a series of intracellular responses, including the rearrangement of the actin
cytoskeleton. This process ultimately culminates in an extension from the ‘leading’ edge of the cell. The formation of new
focal adhesions at this protrusion lead to the contraction of the
cell body and the detachment of the adhesive sites in the cell’s
‘rear’ 3,4,15,32 . In order to lead to any coordinated movement,
this process must be enacted by a polar cell—that is, a cell with
a clearly designated ‘front’ and ‘back’.
The process of cell polarization is usually initiated first by
the redistribution of signaling proteins, and then of the cytoskeletal elements within the cytoplasm 3,4 . A large variety
of signaling proteins have been implicated in cell polarization
and motility; these include Rho GTPases, MAP kinases, P13K,
PTEN, and PAR proteins 5,10,22,23,32 . In this review, we focus
on the involvement of the Rho family of GTPases, which are
widely accepted as one of the key contributors to cell motility
and the onset of polarity 21 .
Nearly 50 different members of the Rho family have been
identified across the range of eukaryotes 25 . Rho GTPases exist in inactive, GDP-bound and active, GTP-bound states. The
activation of these molecules serves as a molecular switch for
† Interactive Mathematica notebook for stability analysis of RD equations at
http://www.ocf.berkeley.edu/∼jnirody.
a Biophysics Graduate Group, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
94720
b Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University
of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA 92093.
Email: padmini.rangamani@eng.ucsd.edu

1

to reverse its polarity if subjected to a sufficiently strong opposing stimulus. Finally, polarity is maintained as an equilibrium state after removal of the transient stimulus. In a series of
follow-up studies, the authors analyzed several further aspects
of their model, including a comparison with models that display a primarily Turing-type mechanism of polarization 10 , extension of the model to consider downstream interactions with
actin 12 , and the effects of stochasticity on the wave-pinning
mechanism 30 .
In the following, we outline a largely analytic treatment of
this model, which is made possible by the simplicity of its formulation. Despite this simplicity, however, the model displays
rich dynamics. Using techniques from dynamical systems and
bifurcation theory, we explore the parameter space and divide
it into regions based on the characteristics of model equilibria
within them. The ability to fully explore and properly characterize these regimes is a benefit of this analysis in comparison to simulation-based studies. We note that the analysis
presented in this paper is largely generalizable, and can be applied to various biochemical models. To this end, we provide
a user-friendly graphical user interface (GUI) to test the stability behavior of other biological systems of interest (available at
http://www.ocf.berkeley.edu/∼jnirody)† .
In particular, we use our analysis to review and explain the
following aspects of cell polarization:

The WPP model was first proposed in 2008 by Mori et al. as
fulfilling a ‘minimal’ set of requirements for cell polarization
and the onset of motility 11,16 . Figure 1A shows an overview of
the model: an inactive form of a protein (U) is converted to the
active form (A) with some rate kon , with the reverse reaction
occurring with some rate koff . Additionally, the active form
provides positive feedback, facilitating its own formation. The
nonlinearity provided by this feedback is necessary for many of
the important properties of the model.
As shown in Figure 1A, the base reactions are modeled
around the bidirectional conversion between two forms of a single protein. For ease of notation, we call the concentrations of
the active and inactive forms a and u. The kinetics of this system are
da
= f (a, u)
dt
= kon u − koff a ,
|{z}
|{z}
activation

(1)

inactivation

The choice of function f (a, u) is relatively arbitrary, as long as
it fulfills the criteria described previously; namely, that there
exists cooperative feedback from A onto its own production.
We choose the rate of activation kon to be a basal rate k0 (units
of 1/time, s−1 ) combined with a Hill function with saturation
parameter K (units of concentration, mM) and dimensionless
1. How does localization of the active form to the membrane maximal rate γ:
(modeled in the WPP model as a 100-fold difference in
γa2
kon = k0 + 2
.
(2)
diffusion rates between U and A) facilitate cell polariza|{z}
K + a2
{z
}
|
tion?
basal
activation
rate

2. How does the size of a cell affect its ability to polarize?

cooperative
feedback

The Hill coefficient nH = 2 is chosen to ensure the existence of
3. Is spontaneous polarization observed in the absence of an a bistable parameter range. Then:
external directional stimulus?


γa2
f
(a,
u)
=
u
k
+
− koff a .
(3)
4. Can polarization occur through more than one intrinsic
0
|{z}
K 2 + a2
mechanism ?
|
{z
} inactivation
activation

2

Assuming there is no flux in or out of the system, mass conservation requires that:

Model overview

Biological systems are often overwhelmingly complex, but the
emergence of conserved, key motifs can point to a set of ‘minimal’ properties required for a dynamic behavior. One such
motif has been the central role of Rho GTPases in regulating
cell polarization and motility. Prototypic models which capture
the fundamental properties of the system they intend to emulate are powerful for studying such complex systems. In particular, their simplicity makes them mathematically tractable
and amenable to comprehensive analysis. In the following, we
give an overview of a particularly simple and elegant model of
cell polarization, which we term the ‘wave-pinning polarization’ (WPP) model.

du
da
=−
dt
dt
= − f (a, u).

(4)

To find steady state solutions (a∗ , u∗ ) of this system, we must
solve for f (a, u) = 0. Additionally, to enforce mass conservation, we impose the constraint p = u0 + a0 = u(t) + a(t), where
p is a constant denoting the total amount of protein. This means
that an equilibrium point (a∗ , u∗ ) = (a∗ , p − a∗ ) must satisfy


γa∗2
∗
(p − a )
= koff a∗ .
(5)
K 2 + a∗2
2

(A)

U

(B)
kon
koff

(C)

A

Fig. 1 Schematic of the WPP model. (A) Purely nonspatial model corresponds to a well-mixed system. The model consists of an
interconversion between inactive (U) and active (A) forms of a single protein. The active form effects a positive feedback on its own
production; in the WPP model, this feedback takes the form of a cooperative Hill function. An extended one-dimensional spatial model can be
representative of (B) two cytoplasmic species or (C) one cytoplasmic and one membrane-bound species, depending on the relative diffusion
coefficients of the forms.

The solutions to the above equation can be visualized as intersections between a sigmoidal curve (the left hand side) and a
straight line (the right hand side). There are at most three such
intersections. In the following, we generally restrict ourselves
to a parameter space where these three solutions exist and are
real-valued; we label them in increasing order as a∗1 < a∗2 < a∗3 .
The above model only considers only homogenous solutions,
which exhibit no spatial structure. However, spatial heterogeneity is nearly ubiquitous in real biological systems. Luckily,
it is relatively straightforward to remove the assumption of a
well-mixed system by considering a reaction-diffusion system
with the kinetics of the well-mixed WPP model.
We consider a one-dimensional segment (0 ≤ x ≤ L), which
can serve as an approximation of a transection of the cell. Depending on the relative values of the diffusion coefficient, this
extension can serve to model two cytoplasmic species (Figure
1B) or one cytoplasmic and one membrane-bound species (Figure 1C). As before, u and a are the concentrations of U and A,
both in units of molecules/length:
da
∂ 2a
= Da 2 + f (a, u)
dt
∂x
∂ 2u
du
= Du 2 − f (a, u).
dt
∂x

equation (ODE) counterparts. This daunting complexity often
leads to these models being studied primarily through simulations, which provide instant but ultimately transient gratification: while we gain insight into the behavior of these systems,
the variety of their behaviors across parameter space nearly assures that we cannot grasp their full capabilities through simulation alone. In the following section, we outline an analytic
protocol for the study of reaction-diffusion systems, particularly those corresponding to cell polarization. Using the WPP
model as an example, we divide the parameter space into regions and characterize the typical behavior of the system within
them. We emphasize that the steps discussed in this article are
highly generalizable, and we hope to highlight how such comprehensive treatments of mathematical models in biology are
powerful and insightful.

3

(6)

Phase-space analysis

After their initial proposal of the WPP model 16 , the authors
considered several important extensions 10,17,30 . However, a
full characterization of the equilibrium behavior of the system
as a function of the basal rate of activation k0 and the average
amount of total protein p has not yet been adequately discussed.
In this section, we outline such a characterization. The mathematical basis of such analyses can be found in the fundamental
book by Strogatz 26 . Computations were done in Mathematica
and MATLAB; all associated scripts will be made available as
a user-friendly GUI at www.ocf.berkeley.edu/∼jnirody† .

(7)

Reaction-diffusion models are ubiquitous in biology, particularly in systems which give rise to spatial patterning 13 . Indeed, many such models have been suggested for the generation of cell polarity 13,19,27 . Despite their seeming simplicity,
the difficulty in analyzing (and comparing) these partial differential equation (PDE) models comes from the richness of their
behavior as parameters are varied, especially when compared
to the phase-space of their reaction-only ordinary differential
3

k0

0.06

0

a*3
a*2
a1*

0

0

0

0.03

a*1

a

a

a

2

a1*
0

a*2

0.4

0.3

a*

a*3

0.6

a*3

p = 0.31
1.2

p = 0.28
0.8

0.6

p = 0.25

0.03

k0

0.06

0

0.03

k0

0.06

Fig. 2 Equilibrium curves for each of the three steady states in the WPP model. For all of the following plots, we choose: γ = 1, koff = 1,
K = 1 and vary the average amount of total protein p. The two stable steady states a∗1 and a∗3 are shown as solid blue and green lines,
respectively; the unstable steady state a∗2 is shown as a dashed line. For a range of k0 , all three steady states exist and are real-valued; this
region is shaded in red; this range increases with p, eventually resulting in an irreversible system response when it reaches k0 = 0.

3.1

Well-mixed model

In this way, positive feedback loops may allow for a sustained
cellular response to a transient external stimulus 31 , a central
feature in cell polarization. To illustrate this, consider the basal
rate parameter k0 as a function of an external stimulus S (i.e.,
k0 = k0∗ S). Now, we can look to the plots in Figure 2 as doseresponse curves — the cell responds to external stimulus S by
producing the activated protein A.
As S (and consequently k0 ) is slowly increased, the concentration of A follows along the curve corresponding to a∗1
(blue) until it crosses the bistable region, after which the equilibrium value is the larger a∗3 (green). If the stimulus is removed, and the level of S decreases, the higher-valued equilibrium is maintained within the bistable region; this behavior,
where the dose-response relationship is in the form of a loop
rather than a curve, is called hysteresis. If the bistable regime is
large enough, in particular if it extends to k = 0, an essentially
irreversible response to transient stimuli may be elicited (as is
seen for p = 0.31 in Figure 2).
Figure 3 shows the bistability region for the WPP model as
the total average protein concentration p and the basal activation rate k0 are varied. From the sloping shape of the bistable
region, we can see that for sufficiently high values of total protein (for the set of parameters in Figure 3, p ≥ 3), an ‘irreversible’ response may be generated: both steady states are stable even when the stimulus is removed, at k0 = 0. The simulation parameters chosen by Mori et al. are shown as a purple
dot.

We first begin with the (relatively) easier task of analyzing the
reaction-only ODE model before considering the full reactiondiffusion system. Recall that the WPP model has three steady
states, which we denote (a∗1 , u∗1 ), (a∗2 , u∗2 ), and (a∗3 , u∗3 ). To assess the stability of each of these steady states, we look at the
Jacobian matrix of the system:


f (a, u)a
f (a, u)u
J=
− f (a, u)a − f (a, u)u


2auK 2 γ
γa2
−
k
k
+
0
off
2 +K 2 )2
K 2 +a2 
=  (a 2auK
.
2
2
− (a2 +K 2γ)2 + koff −k0 − K 2γa+a2
Here, fa and fu denote the partial derivatives of f (a, u) with
respect to a and u, respectively. The linearization of the reaction terms around an equilibrium point (a∗ , u∗ ) is simply
J|(a∗ ,u∗ ) [da du]T , where J|(a∗ ,u∗ ) represents the Jacobian matrix evaluated at (a∗ , u∗ ). An equilibrium point is said to be
stable if the eigenvalues of the J|(a∗ ,u∗ ) all have real parts less
than or equal to zero and unstable if any one eigenvalue has a
real part greater than zero.
Example equilibrium curves for γ = 1, koff = 1, K = 1 are
shown for various values of average total protein p in Figure 2.
For the WPP model, a∗1 and a∗3 are stable (shown as blue and
green solid lines, respectively), while a∗2 is unstable (shown as
a black dashed line).
For certain choices of parameters, both stable steady states
exist; this is called the bistable regime. Within this region, either of the two steady states may be reached for the same set
of kinetic parameters, depending on the initial conditions of the
system (i.e., the ‘starting’ concentrations).
Bistability is a common feature in biochemical reaction networks, particularly those containing positive feedback loops 31 .

3.2

1-D spatial model

Having characterized the bistable regime of the well-mixed
model, we now turn our attention to the full reaction-diffusion
system. The homogenous equilibria also serve as steady states
for the spatially extended system and as before, we are inter4

5

σ − = fa − fu and σ + = 0; therefore any spatially homogenous perturbation will relax back to the spatially uniform steady
state. We are instead interested in the emergence of heterogenous patterns that occur via perturbations within a finite range
of critical wavenumbers 0 ≤ kc ≤ kmax . The value of these crit-

bis

5

2.5

p

le

tab

(a*3 ,u*)
3

well
mixed
bistable

0.07

k0

0.14

2.5

0

p

0

*
(a*,
1 u1)

fro
nt

so
lu

linea

tio
ns

r ins

front solutions

0

Fig. 3 The extent of the bistable region in (k0 , p) space for the
well-mixed model. In unshaded regions, only a single stable steady
state (either (a∗3 , u∗3 ) or (a∗1 , u∗1 )) exists. Within the shaded region,
both steady states exist and are stable. The system may tend to either
state, dependent on initial conditions. The parameter set used in the
simulations by Mori et al. 16 is shown as a purple point.

0

0.07

k0

tabili
t

y

0.14

Fig. 4 Parameter space topology for the full PDE model when
DU = 10µM2 s−1 and DA = 0.1µM2 s−1 . The region of linear
instability is shown shaded in orange for wavenumber k = 0.2. This
corresponds to a perturbation of length L = 2π
k ≈ 30µM. Smaller
values of k result in an expansion of the linear instability region;
larger values of k result in the region shrinking. An additional domain
is shown shaded in blue, in which front-like solutions are supported
when given a sufficiently strong (or spatially graded) perturbation.
The parameter choice made by Mori et al. (purple point) lies in this
region.

ested in their stability throughout the parameter space.
Recall that for the spatially homogenous system, we turned
to the Jacobian to analyze the linear stability of these states
under small perturbations from equilibrium. The linearized
spatially-extended equation now has the form
  

 
 
∂ ∂a
D
0 ∂2 ∂a
∂a
= A
+
J
,
(8)
0 DU ∂ x2 ∂ u
∂u
∂t ∂ u
where J is the Jacobian for the reaction equations, as before.
In order to analyze the stability of this system with respect to
perturbations, we must first note that now these perturbations
depend both on time and space. A convenient form for such
perturbations is [∂ a ∂ u] = [∂ a∗ ∂ u∗ ]eλt eikx , where the term
eikx is a common way to represent a spatial wave, with k as the
wavenumber. Substituting this into the linearized equation (8)
leads to the Jacobian of the spatially extended system


f (a, u)a − DA k2
f (a, u)u
J∗ =
,
− f (a, u)a
− f (a, u)u − DU k2

ical wavenumbers becomes important when we are faced with
a finite domain size. Since cells are of finite size, we want
to investigate how the length of the domain affects the system
response. This is because the spatial pattern that emerges from
an instability corresponding to a wavenumber k has wavelength
ω = 2π
k ; accordingly, for finite systems, only values of k above
a certain threshold will generate any meaningful spatial patterns.
The region of ‘linear instability’ is highlighted in orange
in Figure 4 for k = 0.2. This corresponds to a pattern of
wavelength ω = 2π
k ≈ 30µM. This length scale is intermediwith eigenvalues
ate among the motile eukaryotic cells that use Rho GTPases
to generate polarity. In this region, one or both of the steady

1
(9) states, (a∗ , u∗ ) and (a∗ , u∗ ), lose stability with respect to a nonσ± =
fa − fu − (DA + DU )k2 ±
1 1
3 3
2
 homogenous
q
perturbation as shown above (see Figure 5).
2
( fa − fu − (DA + DU )k2 ) − 4 (DA DU k4 + (DA fu − Du fa )k2 ) . We note that the region computed is for diffusion coefficients
DU = 10 µM2 s−1 and DA = 0.1 µM2 s−1 . A similar parameter
As the expressions for the eigenvalues now contain the addi- topology (with slightly larger regions of instability) was found
tional unknown k, we are now interested in a family of so- in a reduced one-species model where infinite cytoplasmic diflutions, one for each wavenumber. The eigenvalues for the fusion was assumed 28 . The disparity in diffusion coefficients
nonspatial system are achieved when k = 0, and are given by assumed in Figure 4 presupposes the compartmentalization of
5

the two species: a protein diffuses far more slowly on the membrane than in the cytosol (here, we assume the ratio of diffusion
coefficients to be ≈ 0.01 20 ). In the following sections, we will
assess the importance of this presumption. In addition to the region of linear instability, the parameter space for the full model
can admit a surrounding region where front-like solutions are
observed. In this region, a stalled wave can appear when the
system is subjected to a directed stimulus (e.g., a gradient) or
if the domain exhibits some intrinsic polarity at t = 0. The parameters chosen by Mori et al. fall within this region; their
simulations demonstrate that this ‘intrinsic polarity’ may arise
via sufficiently noisy initial conditions 16 .
The boundaries to this regime are calculated by solving the
Maxwell condition and finding the ranges of u that admit a
stalled wave 16 :

Qualitatively, the dependence of polarization on compartmentalization is relatively intuitive. As A and U constitute
GTP- and GDP-bound versions of a single protein, their
cytoplasmic diffusion rates are likely very similar. Given
this, one would not expect the formation of any sort of
regular pattern with no initial spatial structure.
We show this quantitatively by defining the ratio of the diffusion rates RD = DA /DU , and considering the effect of
this quantity on the regimes allowing spatially heterogenous solutions. For one membrane-bound and one cytoplasmic species, we take this ratio to be ≈ 0.01 20 .
When RD = 1, no spatially heterogenous patterns can be
generated, and this region disappears altogether. However,
as RD decreases, spatial patterns are supported for a finite
range of wavenumbers (Figure 5) 17 . As the rate of diffusion of U increases, the maxima of σ (k) move towards
k = 0, eventually displacing the uniform steady state in
the limit DU → ∞ 28 . This trend is not symmetric — as
RD increases from 1, there is no consequent extension of
the multistable regime. This is similar to the formation of
Turing patterns in local excitation, global inhibition models; for an overview of this brand of models with respect
to cell polarization, we refer the reader to several excellent
reviews 5,10,16 .

Z a+

I(b) =

f (a, u)da = 0.

(10)

a−

We then use the mass conservation condition to compute this
region in (k0 , p) space. While this is not analytically feasible
for the WPP model, numerically solving the integral provides
an accurate characterization of this region.
The method outlined here is not specific to the WPP model,
or even to models of cell polarity. To make such a phase-space
analysis more accessible to the biological community, we provide an easy-to use GUI to allow readers to analyze the stability
properties of other systems of interest.

4

2. Benefit of being big: In addition to the importance of different diffusion rates between active and inactive forms,
we can use the fact that the range of critical wave numbers is bounded above to consider the existence of a corresponding lower bound on the length of the cell L.

Key take-away points

The analysis above provides us significant insight into the behavior of the WPP model throughout the parameter space (Figure 4). Using this, we can point out several notable properties
of the model as they pertain to cell polarization.
We note that the below properties are predicted using analyses performed on a 1D spatial model. Extension of the model
to three, or even two, dimensions may (and likely do) result in
different behaviors 5 . However, an analytic treatment of higherdimensional spatial models is rarely possible, and thus the comprehensive analysis of a reduced model in one spatial dimension lays the foundation for simulation studies in higher dimensions.

The value of the maximum critical wavenumber kmax for
a feasible value of RD is quite low (Figure 5). This suggests that smaller cells are less sensitive to polarization,
while larger cells are able to respond more robustly. Interestingly, this result has been observed experimentally:
cells were found to become significantly more sensitized
as they were flattened in a confined channel 8,14 .
3. Spontaneous polarization: Recall that k0 can be written as a function of the concentration of some stimulus S:
k0 (S) = k0∗ S. This formulation allows us to characterize
parameter values which allow for spontaneous polarization in the absence of a directed external stimulus.

1. Importance of compartmentalization: The Rho GTPase
family is large and varied, and is present in eukaryotes
spanning from C. elegans to humans. However, one common feature of these proteins is compartmentalization: the
active form is bound to the membrane, while the inactive
form diffuses in the cytoplasm 21 . This feature has been
shown to be important for cell polarization 10,16,17 . We illustrate the necessity of membrane localization by considering how the phase space of the WPP model in Figure 4
changes if both species are contained in the cytoplasm.

Certain, but not all, cells are able to spontaneously selfpolarize. In the WPP model, we can by considering the
regimes crossed in Figure 4 by the line k0 = 0. We see
that polarization in the absence of a stimulus is possible if
the value of p is sufficiently high. This is consistent with
experimental observations that the constitutive expression
of Rho GTPases result in extension of randomly oriented
lamellopodia and membrane ruffling 24 .
6

(A)

(B)
1

5

1

3
4

2

0

p

2.5

2

0.14

0

0.07

k0

σ(a* ,u*)

0.14

1 1

σ(a*3 ,u* )
3

RD = 10-2
RD = 100

k

1

k

3

k

4

k

Fig. 5 Examination of the rise of Turing patterns by loss of stability given critical wave numbers k. (A) A small segment of the parameter
space is highlighted for the full spatial WPP model, showing regions where neuter (region 1), one (regions 2 and 3), or both (region 4) of the
equilibrium points become unstable. (B) An illustration of the loss of the linearly instability regime as RD approaches 1. Plots show the
magnitude of the real part of the rightmost eigenvalue for both equilibria within each of the regions highlighted in A. Plots are shown for
k ∈ [−1, 1]. When RD = 10−2 , corresponding to the localization of the active form to the membrane, a finite range of critical wavenumbers is
observed; this range disappears when RD = 1.

4. Polarization strategies: The parameter space topology
for the WPP model contains two distinct regions that allow for non-homogenous equilibrium solutions. Because
of the choice of parameters in Mori et al. 16 , the system
behavior in only one of these regions, corresponding to
stalled-wave solutions (shaded in blue in Figure 4) was
explored. The fact that these solutions were not initially
found by a purely simulation-based study further emphasizes the need for comprehensive analytic treatment of biological models.

Prototypic ‘minimal’ models are commonly used to study
biological phenomenon. For systems involving spatial patterning, such models are often of the reaction-diffusion type. As
the behavior of these systems can vary widely with parameter
choice, simulation studies are often unsatisfying in that they
only provide a small peek into the full capabilities of these
models. In the above, we outline the steps for a comprehensive analytic treatment of an example minimal model for cell
polarization. Additionally, a user-friendly interface for implementing such a treatment for generic reaction-diffusion systems
In general, Turing patterns form more easily (i.e., in re- is provided online as a supplement. We show the usefulness of
sponse to far smaller perturbations) than patterns formed such a protocol, in that it illuminates several features of the
by a wave-pinning mechanism. However, they occur on model which are difficult to observe via simulation alone.
a far slower timescale 5,10,16 . The existence of a Turinglike instability regime in addition to a region which admits References
stalled-wave solutions presents cells with multiple strate- 1 A Bishop and Alan Hall. Rho gtpases and their effector proteins. Biochem.
gies for polarization.
j, 348:241–255, 2000.

5

2 Adriana T Dawesa and Leah Edelstein-Kesheta. Phosphoinositides and
rho proteins spatially regulate actin polymerization to initiate and maintain
directed movement in a 1d model of a motile cell. 2006.

Conclusions

The WPP model captures many of the inherent properties observed in cell polarization, including response to a spatial gradient, sustained polarization after removal of a transient stimulus, and spontaneous polarization in the absence of any external
cues. In the above, we give an overview of the full range of the
system responses through a comprehensive phase-space analysis.

3 Hans-Günther Döbereiner, Benjamin Dubin-Thaler, Grégory Giannone,
Harry S Xenias, and Michael P Sheetz. Dynamic phase transitions in cell
spreading. Physical review letters, 93(10):108105, 2004.
4 Hans-Günther Döbereiner, Benjamin J Dubin-Thaler, Gregory Giannone,
and Michael P Sheetz. Force sensing and generation in cell phases: analyses of complex functions. Journal of Applied Physiology, 98(4):1542–
1546, 2005.

7

5 Leah Edelstein-Keshet, William R Holmes, Mark Zajac, and Meghan
Dutot. From simple to detailed models for cell polarization. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
368(1629):20130003, 2013.

20 Marten Postma, Leonard Bosgraaf, Harriët M Loovers, and Peter JM
Van Haastert. Chemotaxis: signalling modules join hands at front and tail.
EMBO reports, 5(1):35–40, 2004.
21 Myrto Raftopoulou and Alan Hall. Cell migration: Rho gtpases lead the
way. Developmental biology, 265(1):23–32, 2004.

6 Ting Gong, Yuan Liao, Fei He, Yang Yang, Dan-Dan Yang, Xiang-Dong
Chen, and Xiang-Dong Gao. Control of polarized growth by the rho family
gtpase rho4 in budding yeast: Requirement of the n-terminal extension of
rho4 and regulation by the rho gtpase-activating protein bem2. Eukaryotic
cell, 12(2):368–377, 2013.
Science,

22 Padmini Rangamani, Marc-Antoine Fardin, Yuguang Xiong, Azi Lipshtat,
Olivier Rossier, Michael P Sheetz, and Ravi Iyengar. Signaling network
triggers and membrane physical properties control the actin cytoskeletondriven isotropic phase of cell spreading. Biophysical journal, 100(4):845–
857, 2011.

8 William R Holmes, Benjamin Lin, Andre Levchenko, and Leah EdelsteinKeshet. Modelling cell polarization driven by synthetic spatially graded
rac activation. PLoS computational biology, 8(6):e1002366, 2012.

23 Padmini Rangamani, Azi Lipshtat, Evren U Azeloglu, Rhodora Cristina
Calizo, Mufeng Hu, Saba Ghassemi, James Hone, Suzanne Scarlata, Susana R Neves, and Ravi Iyengar. Decoding information in cell shape. Cell,
154(6):1356–1369, 2013.

7 Alan Hall.
Rho gtpases and the actin cytoskeleton.
279(5350):509–514, 1998.

9 WR Holmes, AE Carlsson, and L Edelstein-Keshet. Regimes of wave type
patterning driven by refractory actin feedback: transition from static polarization to dynamic wave behaviour. Physical biology, 9(4):046005, 2012.

24 Karin Rei, Catherine D Nobes, George Thomas, Alan Hall, and Doreen A
Cantrell. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signals activate a selective subset of
rac/rho-dependent effector pathways. Current Biology, 6(11):1445–1455,
1996.

10 Alexandra Jilkine and Leah Edelstein-Keshet. A comparison of mathematical models for polarization of single eukaryotic cells in response to guided
cues. PLoS computational biology, 7(4):e1001121, 2011.

25 Jörg Schultz, Frank Milpetz, Peer Bork, and Chris P Ponting. Smart, a
simple modular architecture research tool: identification of signaling domains. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 95(11):5857–
5864, 1998.

11 Athanasius FM Marée, Alexandra Jilkine, Adriana Dawes, Verônica A
Grieneisen, and Leah Edelstein-Keshet. Polarization and movement of
keratocytes: a multiscale modelling approach. Bulletin of mathematical
biology, 68(5):1169–1211, 2006.

26 Steven H Strogatz. Nonlinear dynamics and chaos: with applications to
physics, biology and chemistry. Perseus publishing, 2001.

12 May Anne Mata, Meghan Dutot, Leah Edelstein-Keshet, and William R
Holmes. A model for intracellular actin waves explored by nonlinear local
perturbation analysis. Journal of theoretical biology, 334:149–161, 2013.

27 KK Subramanian and Atul Narang. A mechanistic model for eukaryotic
gradient sensing: spontaneous and induced phosphoinositide polarization.
Journal of theoretical biology, 231(1):49–67, 2004.

13 Hans Meinhardt. Orientation of chemotactic cells and growth cones: models and mechanisms. Journal of Cell Science, 112(17):2867–2874, 1999.

28 Philipp Khuc Trong, Ernesto M Nicola, Nathan W Goehring, K Vijay Kumar, and Stephan W Grill. Parameter-space topology of models for cell
polarity. New Journal of Physics, 16(6):065009, 2014.

14 Jason Meyers, Jennifer Craig, and David J Odde. Potential for control of
signaling pathways via cell size and shape. Current biology, 16(17):1685–
1693, 2006.

29 Alan Mathison Turing. The chemical basis of morphogenesis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 237(641):37–72, 1952.

15 TJ Mitchison and LP Cramer. Actin-based cell motility and cell locomotion. Cell, 84(3):371–379, 1996.
16 Yoichiro Mori, Alexandra Jilkine, and Leah Edelstein-Keshet. Wavepinning and cell polarity from a bistable reaction-diffusion system. Biophysical journal, 94(9):3684–3697, 2008.

30 Georg R Walther, Athanasius FM Marée, Leah Edelstein-Keshet, and
Verônica A Grieneisen. Deterministic versus stochastic cell polarisation
through wave-pinning. Bulletin of mathematical biology, 74(11):2570–
2599, 2012.

17 Yoichiro Mori, Alexandra Jilkine, and Leah Edelstein-Keshet. Asymptotic
and bifurcation analysis of wave-pinning in a reaction-diffusion model for
cell polarization. SIAM journal on applied mathematics, 71(4):1401–1427,
2011.

31 Wen Xiong and James E Ferrell. A positive-feedback-based bistable memory modulethat governs a cell fate decision. Nature, 426(6965):460–465,
2003.

18 Catherine D Nobes and Alan Hall. Rho, rac, and cdc42 gtpases regulate the
assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress
fibers, lamellipodia, and filopodia. Cell, 81(1):53–62, 1995.

32 Yuguang Xiong, Padmini Rangamani, Marc-Antoine Fardin, Azi Lipshtat, Benjamin Dubin-Thaler, Olivier Rossier, Michael P Sheetz, and Ravi
Iyengar. Mechanisms controlling cell size and shape during isotropic cell
spreading. Biophysical journal, 98(10):2136–2146, 2010.

19 Mikiya Otsuji, Shuji Ishihara, Kozo Kaibuchi, Atsushi Mochizuki, Shinya
Kuroda, et al. A mass conserved reaction–diffusion system captures properties of cell polarity. PLoS computational biology, 3(6):e108, 2007.

8

