The flavin reductase ActVB from Streptomyces
coelicolor. Characterization of the electron transferase
activity of the flavoprotein form.

Laurent Filisetti, Julien Valton, Marc Fontecave, and Vincent Nivière*

Laboratoire de Chimie et Biochimie des Centres Redox Biologiques, DRDCCEA/CNRS/Université Joseph Fourier, 17 Avenue des Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble, Cedex 9,
France.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Vincent Nivière; Tel.: 33-4-38-78-91-09;
Fax: 33-4-38-78-91-24; E-mail: vniviere@cea.fr.

ABSTRACT
The flavin reductase ActVB is involved in the last step of actinorhodin biosynthesis in
Streptomyces coelicolor. Although ActVB can be isolated with some FMN bound, this form
was not involved in the flavin reductase activity. By studying the ferric reductase activity of
ActVB, we show that its FMN-bound form exhibits a proper enzymatic activity of reduction
of iron complexes by NADH. This shows that ActVB active site exhibits a dual property with
regard to the FMN. It can use it as a substrate that goes in and off the active site or as a
cofactor to provide an electron transferase activity to the polypeptide.

Keywords: ActVB from Streptomyces coelicolor, flavin reductase, FMN substrate, FMN
cofactor, ferric reductase, two-substrates enzyme mechanism.

1

INTRODUCTION

Flavin reductases represent a broad class of enzymes defined by their ability to
catalyze the reduction of free flavins, riboflavin, FMN or FAD, by NAD(P)H [1-4]. A clear
distinction between a flavin reductase and a flavoprotein resides in the fact that the former
uses flavin as a substrate whereas the latter uses it as a prosthetic group. In general, flavin
reductase physiological functions have been directly associated with the chemical properties
of their released product, the free reduced flavin [1]. Free reduced flavins are known to
reduce natural iron complexes like ferrisiderophores very efficiently and thus flavin
reductases have been proposed to play an important role in iron uptake in bacteria, as ferric
reductase enzymes [1]. Flavin reductases have been also found to be essential for a recently
emerging class of flavin dependent monooxygenases such as luciferase for light emission or
enzymes involved in antibiotics synthesis, aromatic and sulfur oxidations and other reactions
[2-4]. In those systems, the reduced free flavin generated by the flavin reductase binds to the
active site of the monooxygenase and, in the presence of oxygen, is then converted into a
flavinhydroperoxide species as the key intermediate for oxidation reactions [5]. Such a twocomponent system has been recently studied in the case of the last step of actinorhodin
biosynthesis, a natural antibiotic produced by Streptomyces coelicolor [2-3, 5]. It involves
ActVB, as the flavin reductase [2,3], and ActVA-ORF5, as the monooxygenase component
[5]. Although ActVB can be isolated with various amount of FMN bound, depending on the
preparation, we unambiguously demonstrated that flavin reductase activity of ActVB did not
involve the protein-bound FMN. The presence of protein-bound FMN was rather interpreted
as a reflect of the strong affinity of ActVB for the oxidized FMN [3].
In this work, by studying the ferric reductase activity of ActVB, we show that its
FMN-bound form exhibits a proper enzymatic activity namely the reduction of iron

2

complexes by NADH, in the absence of additional free flavins. These data highlight a dual
property of ActVB active site with regard to the FMN. In the presence of high concentrations
of FMN, it can use it as a substrate that goes in and off the active site. In the absence of free
flavin, the ActVB-bound FMN provides the polypeptide a flavoprotein character with an
electron transferase activity.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

NADH, FMN, Fe3+-EDTA, ferricyanide and bathophenanthroline were from Sigma.
Pyoverdin, azotobactin and desferal were gifts from Dr. Isabelle Schalk (University of
Strasbourg, France). The recombinant ActVB protein from Streptomyces coelicolor was
purified as reported in [3]. ActVB FMN content was determined spectrophotometrically
using a ε455nm = 13.6 mM-1 cm-1 [3]. Enzymatic activities were measured at 18 °C, under
anaerobiosis conditions. Flavin and Fe3+-EDTA reductase activities were determined from
the decrease of the absorbance at 340 nm (ε340nm= 6.22 mM-1 cm-1), as reported in [3]. For the
low redox potential iron complexes, azotobactin, pyoverdin and desferal, the reduction
reaction was carried out in the presence of the ferrous iron acceptor bathophenanthroline and
followed from the increase of the absorbance at 535 nm (ε535nm= 25.0 mM-1 cm-1),
characteristic of the Fe2+-bathophenanthroline complex [6]. Ferricyanide reduction was
followed from the decrease of the absorbance at 420 nm (ε420nm= 1.01 mM-1 cm-1). Anaerobic
experiments were carried out in a Jacomex glove box equipped with an Uvikon XL
spectrophotometer coupled to the measurement cell by optical fibers (Photonetics system).

3

RESULTS

Fe-EDTA reductase activity of ActVB in the presence of free flavins
The ability of ActVB to reduce Fe3+-EDTA complex in the presence of NADH and
FMN was tested in anaerobiosis. The reaction was followed spectrophotometrically from the
decay of the absorbance at 340 nm, due to the oxidation of NADH. As shown in Figure 1, the
extent of NADH oxidation was found directly proportional to the amount of Fe3+-EDTA
present in the reaction mixture, giving a proportion of one NADH molecule reducing two
molecules of Fe3+-EDTA (Figure 1). In the absence of Fe3+-EDTA, only a slight amount of
NADH was oxidized, corresponding to the amount of free FMN present in the assay mix, (5
µM, data not shown). When the initial velocity of the reaction was studied in the presence of
a fixed concentration of Fe3+-EDTA (300 µM) as a function of NADH or FMN
concentrations, typical Michaelis-Menten curves were obtained (data not shown). Vm and Km
values for NADH and FMN under those conditions were found to be identical to those
reported using the standard flavin reductase activity assay in which the electron acceptor is
oxygen (Table I and [3]). These data suggest that in the presence of free FMN, reduction of
Fe3+-EDTA occurs through a chemical reaction with the reduced FMN, provided by the
flavin reductase activity of ActVB.

Fe-EDTA reductase activity of ActVB in the absence of free flavins
The ActVB polypeptide contains various amounts of bound FMN, depending on the
enzyme preparation [3]. Reduction of Fe3+-EDTA by NADH catalyzed by different ActVB
preparations containing 0.1 or 0.5 mol of bound–FMN per mol of polypeptide chain was
tested in the absence of free FMN. In anaerobiosis, in the presence of 300 µM Fe3+-EDTA,
the velocity of NADH oxidation was found to be directly proportional to the total

4

concentration of FMN bound to ActVB (Figure 2). It should be noted that under these
conditions, the concentration of FMN bound to ActVB is several orders of magnitude smaller
than the concentration of free flavins used in the flavin reductase activity assay described
above (Figure 1). These data show that the ActVB-FMN complex catalyzes the reduction of
Fe3+-EDTA by NADH in the absence of free flavin. From these data, a kcat value of 17 s-1 for
the ActVB protein containing one mol of bound-FMN per mol of polypeptide chain can be
calculated.
The mechanism for the enzyme reaction was investigated by studying the initial
velocity of NADH oxidation as a function of NADH and Fe3+-EDTA concentrations, under
anaerobiosis conditions. As shown in Figure 3A, the double reciprocal plot of the initial
velocity of NADH oxidation as a function of NADH concentration at several levels of Fe3+EDTA shows a series of parallel lines. In Figure 3B, the initial velocity of the reaction as a
function of Fe3+-EDTA concentration at several levels of NADH also shows a series of
parallel lines. These data are consistent with a ping-pong enzyme mechanism. The kinetic
parameters, Km and Vm values determined from Figure 3 are shown in Table I. The kcat value
of 9 s-1 corresponding to an ActVB protein containing 0.5 mol of bound-FMN per mol of
polypeptide chain is in full agreement with the value previously determined for the ActVB
protein containing one mol of FMN per mol of polypeptide chain.
That the reduced FMN bound to ActVB can indeed transfer electrons to the Fe3+EDTA, according to the ping-pong mechanism, was verified with the following experiments.
The FMN bound to ActVB was reduced anaerobically with one molar equivalent of NADH,
with respect to FMN (Figure 4). Complete reduction was obtained as shown by the
disappearance of the 457 nm band characteristic for the oxidized FMN bound to ActVB [3],
together with the appearance of a NAD+-FMNred charge transfer band in the 550 to 800 nm
region, with an isosbestic point at 507 nm [3]. Additions of Fe3+-EDTA resulted in an

5

immediate oxidation of the FMN, as shown by the increase of the absorption at 457 nm,
together with the decrease of the charge transfer band, again with an isobestic point at 507
nm (Figure 4). Complete oxidation was achieved when 2 molar equivalents of Fe3+-EDTA
per mol of reduced FMN in the active site of ActVB was added (Inset of Figure 4). No
evidence for the appearance of half-reduced flavin forms could be observed during the
oxidation process. The resulting fully oxidized FMN exhibits a maximal absorption at 457
nm, which indicates that at the end of the oxidation process the flavin remains in the active
site of ActVB [3].

Ferric reductase activity using various ferric complexes
Different ferric complexes, including ferrisiderophores, were tested for their ability to
be substrates for the ferric reductase activity of the ActVB-FMN complex. As shown in
Table I, the ActVB-FMN complex did not catalyze reduction of ferrioxamine. On the
contrary, ferricyanide, ferripyoverdin and ferriazotobactin were found to be substrates for the
enzyme, with Km values comparable to that reported for the Fe3+-EDTA complex (Table I).
On the other hand, Vm (kcat) values varied, with ferricyanide as the best substrate and
ferripyoverdin as the less efficient (Table I).

DISCUSSION

Although the as-isolated ActVB is a mixture of FMN-free and FMN-containing
forms, our previous work demonstrated that the bound FMN was not involved in the flavin
reductase activity of ActVB [3]. ActVB was shown to contain only one FMN binding site,

6

which was then defined as the substrate-binding site for the flavin reductase activity. So that
ActVB was not initially described as a flavoprotein [3].
In the present work, by exploring the capability of ActVB to catalyze the reduction of
several iron complexes by NADH, we demonstrate that it can also behave as a functional
flavoprotein, with a bound FMN cofactor that transfers electrons from NADH to the iron
complex. These data highlight a new functionality of ActVB, which thus can use FMN not
only as a substrate but also as a cofactor.
When a ferric complex was tested for reduction in the presence of free flavin, ActVB
exhibited a classical ferric reductase activity through its flavin reductase activity [1]. This is
due to its capacity to bind and reduce free flavins at the expense of NADH and release the
reduced flavins that transfer electrons to Fe3+, non-enzymatically. [1].
On the other hand, ActVB can also catalyze the reduction of various iron complexes
in the absence of free flavin and this ferric reductase activity has been shown to directly
depend on the amount of FMN bound to the ActVB polypeptide. Under these conditions, the
concentration of FMN in the activity test is several orders of magnitude smaller than the Km
value for FMN related to the flavin reductase activity. Therefore, it can be excluded that this
specific ferric reductase activity results from the flavin reductase activity of ActVB.
The presence of a redox cofactor in ActVB is expected to induce a specific enzyme
mechanism, with a transfer of the reducing equivalents from NADH to the iron complexes
through the FMN cofactor. Indeed we show that when reduced by NADH, the FMN cofactor
can directly reduce the ferric complex. Also, the double reciprocal plots of the initial velocity
of the ferric reductase activity shows a series of parallel lines when one of the two substrates,
NADH or the iron complex, varied. This suggests a two-step transfer ping-pong enzyme
mechanism, as it has been proposed for the flavoprotein spinach ferredoxin-NADP(H)
reductase for the reduction of ferredoxin in the presence of NADPH [7]. For the ferric

7

reductase activity of ActVB, such a mechanism is consistent with NADH reducing first the
FMN cofactor, which in turn reduces two molecules of iron complexes:
ActVB-FMN + NADH ↔ ActVB-FMN-NADH
ActVB-FMN-NADH ↔ ActVB-FMNH2 + NAD+
ActVB-FMNH2 + Fe3+(EDTA) ↔ ActVB-FMNH• + Fe2+(EDTA)
ActVB-FMNH• +Fe3+(EDTA) ↔ ActVB-FMN + Fe2+(EDTA)
Based on a three-dimensional crystal structure, a similar enzyme mechanism was
proposed for FeR, a ferric reductase from Archaeoglobus fulgidus that exhibits some
sequence homologies with ActVB [8]. FeR was believed to contain an FMN cofactor so far
[8]. However, in the case of FeR, no kinetic data were reported to support such a mechanism
[8].
It should be noted that in the case of ActVB, the formation of an intense charge
transfer band between NAD+ and FMNH2 within the active site [3] might not be totally in
agreement with such a ping-pong mechanism where NAD+ has to dissociate from the charge
transfer complex before the iron complex get reduced. An ordered mechanism with the
formation of ternary complex between the FMN cofactor, NADH and the iron complexes
previous to the electron transfer through the FMN cofactor might be also considered [7]. In
the case of the flavoprotein ferredoxin reductase, such a mechanism was proposed to be also
consistent with a series of parallel lines [7], as observed in this work. Further studies are
needed to clarify this point.
In addition to Fe3+-EDTA, FMN-containing ActVB can efficiently catalyze the
reduction of several iron complexes and ferrisiderophores, which display comparable Km
values. Because these molecules exhibit different structures, this clearly indicates that Km
values do not just reflect the affinity for the ferric complexes substrates, but rather a complex
combination of rate constants of individual steps of the two-substrate enzyme mechanism [9].

8

Thus using ferric complexes as substrates, we demonstrate here that, in the absence of
free flavins, ActVB displays an efficient electron-transferase activity. This might have
physiological consequences with regard to iron metabolism in S. coelicolor, but also to other
metabolic pathways, where ActVB would used to reduce other electron-accepting substrates.
In conclusion, these studies on the ferric reductase activity of ActVB reveal that
ActVB exhibits a dual property with regard to the FMN molecule. It can use it as a substrate
that goes in and off the active site or as a cofactor that confers to the polypeptide an electron
transferase activity. To our knowledge, this is the first time that such a property has been
described for a polypeptide chain.
These data imply that the same polypeptide chain has different affinities for the flavin
molecule. This is difficult to explain if one consider a single flavin binding site on the ActVB
polypeptide, as illustrated by the crystal structure of proteins from the same family, FeR [8]
and PheA2 [10], in complex with a flavin. Whether the ActVB homodimer would enjoy
cooperativity properties as far as FMN binding is concerned, with strong binding of the first
flavin (cofactor) and weaker binding of the second flavin (substrate), remains to be
investigated. Interestingly, in FeR, which is a homodimer like ActVB, only one subunit has
been observed to bind a FMN cofactor [8]. Characterization of two binding sites on the
ActVB homodimer, one per monomer with different affinities for FMN, is currently under
investigation.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work has been supported by an Emergence Région Rhône-Alpes Fellowship. We
thank Dr. Isabelle Schalk (Strasbourg, France) for the generous gift of ferrisiderophore
molecules.

9

REFERENCES

1. Fontecave, M., Covès, J., and Pierre, J. L. (1994) Ferric reductases or flavin reductases ?
BioMetals 7, 3-8.
2. Kendrew, S. G., Harding, S. E., Hopwood, D. A., and Marsh, E. N. G. (1995) Identification
of a flavin:NADH oxidoreductase involved in the biosynthesis of actinorhodin. J. Biol. Chem.
270, 17339-17343.
3. Filisetti, L., Fontecave, M, and Nivière, V. (2003) Mechanism and substrate specificity of
the flavin reductase ActVB from Streptomyces coelicolor. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 296-303.
4. Galan, B., Diaz, E., Prieto, M. A., and Garcia, J. L. (2000) Functional analysis of the small
component of the 4-hydroxyphenylacetate 3-monooxygenase of Escherichia coli W : a
prototype of a new flavin :NAD(P)H reductase subfamily. J. Bacteriol. 182, 627-636.
5. Valton, J., Filisetti, L., Fontecave, M, and Nivière, V. (2004) A two-component flavindependent monooxygenase involved in actinorhodin biosynthesis in Streptomyces coelicolor.
J. Biol. Chem. 279, 44362-44369.
6. Pierre, J. L., Fontecave, M., and Crichton, R. R. (2002) Chemistry for an essential
biological process: the reduction of ferric iron. BioMetals 15, 341-346.
7. Carrillo, N., and Ceccarelli, E. A. (2003) Open questions in ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase
catalytic mechanism. Eur. J. Biochem. 270, 1900-1915.
8. Chiu, H. J., Johnson, E., Schröder, I., and Rees, D. C. (2001) Crystal structures of a novel
ferric reductase from the hyperthermophilic archaeon Archaeoglobus fulgidus and its complex
with NADP+. Structure. 9, 311-319.
9. Dalziel, K. (1973) in: The Enzymes (Boyer, P. D., Eds), 3rd Ed., Vol. XI pp. 2-59,
Academic Press, New York.

10

10. Van den Heuvel, R. H. H., Westphal, A. H., Heck, A. J. R., Walsh, M. A., Rovida, S., van
Berkel, W. J. H., and Mattevi, A. (2004) Structural studies on flavin reductase PheA2 reveal
binding of NAD in an unusual folded conformation and support novel mechanism of action. J.
Biol. Chem. 279, 12860-12867.

11

FIGURE LEGENDS

Figure 1. Time course of NADH (200 µM) oxidation followed at 340 nm in anaerobiosis in
the presence of 3 µM FMN, 0.054 µM ActVB and different concentrations of Fe3+-EDTA: 15,
30, 60, 100 and 350 µM, in 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6.

Figure 2. Ferric reductase activity in the absence of free FMN, followed at 340 nm in
anaerobiosis. The solution contains 200 µM NADH, 300 µM Fe3+-EDTA in 50 mM Tris/HCl
pH 7.6. The reaction was started by addition of various preparations of ActVB-bound FMN
protein. () ActVB 0.054 µM, FMN-bound 0.005 µM, () ActVB 0.490 µM, FMN-bound
0.05 µM, () ActVB 0.110 µM, FMN-bound 0.055 µM, () ActVB 0.327 µM, FMN-bound
0.16 µM. In the inset is shown the initial velocity of NADH oxidation as a function of the
concentration of the ActVB-bound FMN.

Figure 3. Ferric reductase initial velocity for the ActVB FMN bound enzyme. The reaction
was followed at 340 nm in anaerobiosis, in 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6. The ActVB
concentration used was 0.054 µM and the protein-bound FMN was 0.027 µM. A, as a
function of NADH concentration, in the presence of () 16, ( 20, () 33, () 65 and (Δ)
110 µM Fe3+-EDTA. B, as a function of Fe3+-EDTA concentration, in the presence of () 1.3,
() 2.3, () 3.9, () 8.6 and (Δ) 16 µM NADH.

Figure 4. Oxidation of reduced ActVB by Fe3+-EDTA. ActVB (150 µM) containing 80 µM
protein-bound FMN was reduced in anaerobiosis with 80 µM NADH (). Then, 30 (), 60
(), 90 (), 120 () and 150 (Δ) µM Fe-EDTA, final concentrations, were added. The inset
shows the variation of the absorbance at 457 nm as a function of the [Fe-EDTA]/[FMN] ratio.
12

Table I. Kinetic parameters for the ferric reductase activity of ActVBa
In the presence
of free FMNb
NADH FMN

Varied
NADH
c
substrate
kcat
9.2±0.4 9.2±0.4 8.9±0.5
-1
(s )
Km
6.6±0.5 1.0±0.1 8.4±0.5
(µM)
a
Measured in anaerobiosis in 50 mM

In the absence of free FMN
FeFerricyanided Pyoverdin
c
d,e
EDTA
9.8±0.4
42±2
0.23±0.03
105±14

130±20

128±38

Azotobactin

Desferal

3.7±0.4

No
activity
/

d,e

165±40

d,e

Tris/HCl pH 7.6. The ActVB preparation contains 0.5

mol of FMN bound per mol of polypeptide chain. bWith a fixed concentration of Fe3+-EDTA
(300 µM). cData from Figures 3A and 3B. d With a fixed concentration of NADH (200 µM).
e

In the presence of 2 mM bathophenanthroline

13

Fig. 1

14

Fig. 2

15

Fig. 3A

16

Fig. 3B

17

Fig. 4

18

