Whether relative respiration in trees can be constant: a discussion of a scaling
hypothesis
V.L. Gavrikov
Abstract
Respiration measurements of whole tree plants have been reported that give evidence that
the relative per volume/mass unit respiration decreases with increase of tree body size. In this
study, based on the available data published a question was explored if the relative per area unit
respiration in trees can be a constant, independent of the surface area size. There is a definite gap
in the published data when the allometric studies of tree body structure do not intercept with
studies on trees respiration. Thus the question was studied with the help of indirect comparison
between various data. The comparison showed that the scaling exponents, volume vs. surface
area and respiration vs. stem volume, are slightly larger than they should be for the hypothesis of
the relative respiration constancy to hold. The data studied give evidence that the relative per
area unit respiration slightly increases with the increase in tree surface area. Possible
explanations of the relationship include a different distribution of metabolically active parts of
stem and higher nitrogen content in larger trees. Also, the published datasets might include large
fast growing trees, which imply that larger trees grow faster and hence have higher per unit
surface area growth respiration. A crucial experiment is required in which the respiration
measurements were performed for the same data as the measurements of scaling between stem
volume and surface area.

Introduction
Respiration is known to be one of the most fundamental processes in living bodies. The
interest in respiration in trees originates both from the wish to understand the basics of life and
the need to estimate the global role of forests in climate change.

Direct measurements of trees respiration on a whole plant level are rather scarce because
of obvious technical difficulties. Nevertheless some recent reports provided important data on
the matter of whole plant respiration and the scaling of it across species and plant sizes. Reich et
al. (2006) reported of measurements of about individual 500 plants belonging to 43 species that
were both laboratory and field-grown specimens. In these data, the trees were represented by
saplings and seedlings. As a result, Reich et al. (2006) argued that the whole-plant respiration
rate scales approximately isometrically with total plant mass, which means that the power
exponent is varying about unity.
Cheng et al. (2010) gave the evidence of respiration rates in larger trees. They showed
that the aboveground respiration rates scaled as 0,82-power of the aboveground biomass. Mori et
al. (2010) conducted an extensive research of direct measuring of respiration in 271 whole
plants, from seedlings to large trees. The authors established that the scaling allometric exponent
varied continuously from unity for smallest plants to 3/4 in larger saplings and trees.
Obviously, the total respiration of a plant body grows as the body’s total size increases.
But the relative respiration per unit of body size may show at least two distinct behaviors with
the body growth. Let R stand for the total respiration, γ for the scaling exponent and V for the
plant body volume. (For the sake of consistence, I will use the plant volume V as a measure of
the total body size assuming a good relationship between body volume and body mass). So, the
scaling relationship is given by

R V  .

(1)

If the scaling exponent γ is equal to unity then per volume unit respiration should be
constant, i.e. independent of V, since R / V  V 0 . If however the scaling exponent γ is less than
unity then per volume unit respiration cannot be a constant but should be a decreasing function
of V:

R
 V  1 .
V

It is widely understood that for larger trees the relative, per volume unit, respiration
decreases with the growth of the relevant body size, the volume. The biological grounds for this
have been also clearly discussed. While the bodies of smaller plants are metabolically active in
the whole volume, low-active stem wood constitutes most of the biomass of larger trees (Pruyn
et al., 2005; Mori et al., 2010).
On the other hand, the same logic can be applied in respect to another measure of tree
size, the stem surface area. The respiration of the tree stem is largely located in the thin sheath of
inner bark (Pruyn et al., 2002, 2005). Unlike stem volume, an increase in the bole surface area is
always the relevant increase in living metabolically active tissues. It is therefore natural to
hypothesize that the relative per area unit respiration can be a constant independent of the
amount of the surface area.
Mathematically, the hypothesis is expressed as follows. Because the relationship between
stem volume V and stem surface area S may be expressed through a scaling exponent β as

V  S

(2)

then substituting (2) in (1) one gets the expression for the total respiration as
R  S  .

Respectively, the relative per area unit respiration can be given as
R
 S  1 .
S

(3)

It is obvious that the scaling exponent γβ–1 in (3) may be equal to zero, and for this the
relation between the scaling exponents β and γ should be as follows



1



.

(4)

The aim the study was to test the hypothesis if the relative per unit area respiration in
larger trees can be a constant, i.e. independent of the amount of bole surface area, on the basis of
available public data. Formally, the hypothesis is presented in the relationship (4).

Materials and methods
There is a definite gap in the published data. Studies focused on tree respiration do not
provide values of the scaling exponents between stem volume and stem surface area. Studies
aimed at estimating of the morphological scaling exponents do not deal with measuring of tree
respiration.
The values for γ were taken from the sources cited above (Reich et al., 2006; Cheng et al.,
2010; Mori et al., 2010). Additionally, the dataset published by Cheng et al. (2010) was partly
recalculated. The dataset contains DBHs, heights, log-transformed respiration and logtransformed mass parameters for a number of species; among them are two conifers, Pinus
tabulaeformis Carr. and Pinus massoniana Lamb. For these two conifers, a two-way volume
equation (Inoue, Kurokawa, 2001) was applied to get bole volumes. The bole surface areas were
estimated through a cone surface formula. Using of the two measures, the scaling exponent β
was calculated by fitting of the combined pine data by a power function. Independently, the logtransformed respiration and mass measures were fitted by a linear function to get the exponent γ
for the same combined pine data.
The values for β were taken from a study by Inoue and Nishizono (personal
communication) on relationship between stem volume and stem surface area in Japanese cedar
and Japanese cypress forest stands. The values for β were also estimated from the datasets of
levels-of-growing-stock studies in Douglas-fir (Marshall, Curtis, 2001; Curtis et al., 2009). For
control plots in the datasets, bole volumes were calculated by dividing of stand volume by the
number of living trees for every age available. From the same tables, the data of mean quadratic
diameter and mean stand heights were taken to estimate the mean bole surface areas through the
cone formula. Then the mean volume was fitted against mean bole surface area by a power
function to get estimations of the β power exponent.
All the fittings were performed by means of STATISTICA 6 software using an ordinary
least squares approach.

Results and discussion
The found in the literature and estimated values of γ and β scaling exponents are
summarized in the table. In most of the cases if one of the two exponents is available the other is
not. That is why the unknown exponent was calculated in accordance with the hypothesis (4) and
given in the table in parentheses.

Table. Reported and estimated values of scaling exponents γ and β.
Reported and estimated values of
scaling exponents
β

References
γ

(1 to 1,33)*

from 1 to 0,75

Mori et al., 2010

(1,22)

0,82

Cheng et al., 2010

1,568±0,032**

0,7429±0,032**

Cheng et al., 2010 (recalculated)

(1)

1

Reich et al., 2006

from 1,35 to 1,79

(0,74 to 0,56)

Inoue, Nishizono, Japanese cedar

from 1,35 to 1,63

(0,74 to 0,61)

Inoue, Nishizono, Japanese cypress

1,569±0,006**

(0,64)

Hoskins experiment, Douglas-fir

1,487±0,007**

(0,67)

Iron Creek experiment, Douglas-fir

* in parentheses, estimated through (4) values are given
** fitted values ± std. error

According to the hypothesis (4) if the relative per area unit respiration is independent of
the surface area then the scaling exponents γ and β should exactly compensate each other so that
their product is equal to unity. An examination of the data in the table shows that the measured
values of the scaling exponent β tend to be slightly bigger that those expected through (4). For
example, the multi-species study by Mori et al. (2010) gives the minimal value of γ as 0,75
which through (4) corresponds to the maximal value of β of ≈1,33. The study by Cheng et al.

(2010) suggest the value 0,82 for γ which gives ≈1,22 for β. The measurements by Inoue and
Nishizono (personal communication) give the values of β from 1,35 and larger.
On the other hand, the values for γ tend to be some larger than those expected through
(4). For example, the maximum γ values estimated through (4) for Inoue and Nishizono and
Hoskins and Iron Creek data amount 0,74. The minimal γ value measured in Reich et al. (2006),
Cheng et al. (2010) and Mori et al. (2010) is 0,75. All the comparisons mean that the product of γ
and β should be slightly bigger than unity.
In the only case, data by Cheng et al. (2010), it was possible to estimate the scaling
exponents γ and β for the same dataset (see in table ‘recalculated’). Multiplication of γ and β for
the data subset gives 1,5680,7429 ≈ 1,16. Thus the relation (3) for the case should be as

R S  S 0,16 which means that the relative per area unit respiration should slightly grow with the
increase in the total surface area.
The inference may look to some extent counterintuitive. In fact, if the very properties of
stem surface in the process of growth would remain the same then there were not sufficient
causes for the relative per area unit respiration to alter. The data shown in the table give evidence
that in some, rather peculiar, cases the scaling exponents γ and β may satisfy (4) and therefore
provide certain stability of the per unit area respiration. Nevertheless it looks more likely that in
general the scaling exponents γ and β do not satisfy (4) and they are expected to produce the
increase of relative per unit area respiration.
A couple of hypothesis can be suggested to explain the increase of the per unit area
respiration. The allometric scaling concept provide useful generalizations of tree body structure
but does not take account of the complexity of tree stem in terms of physiological variation of its
different parts. It is known that respiration vary in stems and branches of different diameters and
branching orders (Bosc et al., 2003). It has been also shown that respiration in tree tissues
strongly linked to the content of nitrogen in them (Reich et al., 2008). It is not unlikely that the
distribution of variously active surfaces within stems of larger trees is different from that in

smaller trees. Pruyn et al. (2002) found that sapwood of older trees had higher respiratory
potential than sapwood of younger trees if the outer-bark surface area of stems was used as a
basis for comparing respiratory potential.
Another consideration deals with the overall non-linearity of tree growth. It is widely
known that a typical tree has an S-shaped growth curve, both in linear and volumetric terms. If
one considers a dataset with no mature and over-matured trees then for this particular dataset
larger trees will on the average grow faster. Because growth respiration is a sufficient part of the
overall respiration the growth curve non-linearity means that larger trees would show higher
respiration on both absolute and relative per area unit basis.
As a conclusion it should be admitted that these explanations remain theoretical
speculations until a crucial experiment is performed. The crucial experiment should include
measurements of both scaling exponents, volume vs. surface area and respiration vs.
volume/mass, on the same dataset.

References

Bosc, A., De Grandcourt, A., & Loustau, D. (2003). Variability of stem and branch maintenance
respiration in a Pinus pinaster tree. Tree Physiology, 23(4), 227-236.
Cheng, D. L., Li, T., Zhong, Q. L., & Wang, G. X. (2010). Scaling relationship between tree
respiration

rates

and

biomass.

Biology

letters,

6

(5),

715–717,

doi:10.1098/rsbl.2010.0070.
Inoue A., Kurokawa Y. (2001). Theoretical Derivation of a Two-way Volume Equation in
Coniferous Species. The journal of the Japanese forestry society, 83(2), 130-134.
Curtis, R. O. Levels-of-growing-stock Cooperative Study in Douglas-fir: Report No. 19–the Iron
Creek Study, 1966-2006 / R. O. Curtis, D. D. Marshall et al.– United States Department
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station, 2009.– 78 pp.

Marshall, D. D. Levels-of-growing-stock cooperative study in Douglas-fir: report no. 15Hoskins: 1963-1998 / D. D. Marshall, R. O. Curtis.– United States Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, 2001.–80 pp.
Mori, S., Yamaji, K., Ishida, A., Prokushkin, S. G., Masyagina, O. V., Hagihara, A., ... & Umari,
M. (2010). Mixed-power scaling of whole-plant respiration from seedlings to giant trees.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(4), 1447–1451.
Pruyn, M. L., Gartner, B. L., & Harmon, M. E. (2002). Respiratory potential in sapwood of old
versus young ponderosa pine trees in the Pacific Northwest. Tree Physiology, 22(2-3),
105–116.
Pruyn, M. L., Gartner, B. L., & Harmon, M. E. (2005). Storage versus substrate limitation to
bole respiratory potential in two coniferous tree species of contrasting sapwood width.
Journal of experimental botany, 56(420), 2637-2649.
Reich, P. B., Tjoelker, M. G., Machado, J. L., & Oleksyn, J. (2006). Universal scaling of
respiratory metabolism, size and nitrogen in plants. Nature, 439(7075), 457-461.
Reich, P. B., Tjoelker, M. G., Pregitzer, K. S., Wright, I. J., Oleksyn, J., & Machado, J. L.
(2008). Scaling of respiration to nitrogen in leaves, stems and roots of higher land plants.
Ecology letters, 11(8), 793–801.

