Title
Phen-Gen: Combining Phenotype and Genotype to Analyze Rare Disorders

Affiliations
Asif Javed1, Saloni Agrawal1, Pauline C. Ng1
1

Computational & Systems Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
Corresponding authors: Asif Javed (javeda@gis.a-star.edu.sg) and Pauline C. Ng
(ngpc4@gis.a-star.edu.sg)

Abstract
We introduce Phen-Gen, a method which combines patient’s disease symptoms and sequencing
data with prior domain knowledge to identify the causative gene(s) for rare disorders.
Simulations reveal that the causal variant is ranked first in 88% cases when it is coding; which is
52% advantage over a genotype-only approach and outperforms existing methods by 13-58%. If
disease etiology is unknown, the causal variant is assigned top-rank in 71% of simulations.

1

Introduction
Rare disorder analysis has been facilitated by next generation sequencing. The diagnostic yield
in large clinical studies remains moderate, varying between 16-50%1,2. The cause of two-thirds
of new cases remains unknown3 and nearly half of OMIM-reported disorders have an unknown
molecular basis4. Issues that may be limiting the success of a study include focus on coding
exome with exclusion of potential regulatory variants5, and lack of systematic integration of
prior knowledge of disease and gene(s) involved. More recently there has been a shift in
paradigm to incorporate patient symptoms in the causative gene prediction; eXtasy6, PHIVE7
and PHEVOR8 are recent examples. However each has its limitations and none of the existing
symptom-driven methods extend across the entire genome.
We introduce Phen-Gen, a method which combines the patient's sequencing data and
symptoms with prior knowledge of human diseases and functional interplay of different genes,
all within a systematic Bayesian framework (Supplementary Fig. 1). The method offers two
alternate paths to disease-gene implication. Phen-Gen’s exome-centric approach predicts the
damaging impact of coding mutations using nonsynonymous, splice site, and indel predictors
within a unifying framework (Supplementary Figs. 2 and 3). This allows for a direct quantitative
comparison between coding variants. Phen-Gen’s genome-wide approach utilizes evolutionary
conservation, ENCODE predicted functionality, and proximity to coding sequence to estimate
disease functionality of a locus (Supplementary Figs. 4 and 5). Both approaches take into
account that healthy humans harbor hundreds of supposedly damaging mutations and certain
genes are more prone to these so-called deleterious variants (Supplementary Fig. 6).
To safeguard against overfitting, each component of our loosely coupled pipeline has been
individually evaluated in cross-validation; before analyzing the complete method in totality.
Phen-Gen assigns the causal gene first rank in 88% of simulations. It shows a 19-58%
improvement in direct simulation comparison to previously published methods: eXtasy6,
VAAST9, and PHEVOR8; and 13-16% improvement over results reported by PHIVE7 in a
comparable simulation framework. For novel genes, unknown to our internal database, PhenGen assigns first rank in 71% of simulations. The efficacy of Phen-Gen is further established in
real patient data from a recently published study2. The causal gene is ranked first in 8/11
patients (and within top 5 in all). For ease of use and to address data privacy issues, Phen-Gen is
available both as a web server and an open-source downloadable package (http://phengen.com).

2

Results
Prediction framework
Phen-Gen combines disease symptoms and sequencing data to estimate the role of genes in
rare disorders (Supplementary Fig. 1). The patient symptoms are semantically matched against a
database of known human disorders using an in-house implementation of Phenomizer10. The
potential role of novel but functionally similar genes is estimated using random walk with
restart over a gene interaction network. This network was constructed by integrating seven data
sources. The sequencing data is analyzed using an exome-centric approach and a genomic
approach. The performances of Phen-Gen’s predictors for exome and genome have been
quantified using enrichment of disease causal mutations, in conjunction with depletion of
common polymorphisms. The phenotypic and genotypic predictions are combined and genes
ranked based on the two corroboratory pieces of evidence.
The performance of method is first evaluated at the variant level using Human Gene Mutation
Database11 (HGMD 2011.4) reported disease variants across different subclasses
(Supplementary Fig. 7). In all three coding categories, 84% (or higher) mutations were predicted
damaging with high probability (≥0.9). The genomic predictor was evaluated using HGMD
reported disease causal regulatory variants; 80% were scored and 38% were assigned a
damaging probability of 0.5 or higher.

Simulated datasets
We evaluated Phen-Gen with in silico patients. For a given disorder, a patient’s genetic data was
created by adding a HGMD disease causal mutation into a healthy individual’s genome or
exome. The patient’s phenotypic data was generated based on reported disease symptoms.
Combining all dominant and recessive simulations, Phen-Gen assigns the disease causal variant
first rank in 88% of the cases across different classes of coding variants (Table 1 and
Supplementary Table 1).
To ascertain the performance in implicating novel causal genes, we split the HGMD reported
variants based on whether the disease-gene link is ‘known’ or ‘unknown’ to our local
Phenomizer database. When the gene is known, Phen-Gen assigns it the first rank in 92% cases
for dominant and 96% cases for recessive diseases (Table 1). However even for unknown
disorders, adding the disease symptoms improved the prediction and Phen-Gen is able to
correctly identify the true gene in 43% of dominant and 92% of recessive disorders. To further
3

evaluate Phen-Gen’s role in novel disease-gene discovery, we masked the gene’s association
with the disorder in the respective simulation. The results are comparable to the true unknown
cases. Combining results from all unknown and masked simulations, Phen-Gen is able to assign
first rank to disease causal variants in 71% cases (Supplementary Table 2).
To evaluate any potential biases of using 1000 Genomes for both allele frequency estimation
and generating in silico patients, the simulations were repeated using only Exome Sequencing
Project (ESP)12 data in the common variant filtration step (Supplementary Table 3). We also
evaluated the performance of our method in identifying the disease causal gene with a
compound heterozygous disease inheritance pattern (Supplementary Table 4 and
Supplementary Fig. 8). Moreover, to account for phenotypic heterogeneity, Phen-Gen was
assessed by randomly sampled symptoms from 44 disorders for which the symptom list and
their frequency of occurrence has been compiled10 (Supplementary Table 5 and
Supplementary Fig. 9).
It is more challenging to narrow down the role of a particular noncoding variant in a rare
disorder. Phen-Gen correctly identifies the genetic cause in 49% of cases with noncoding
disease variants, with phenotypic information contributing substantially to the prediction
(Supplementary Table 6). Moreover, the decoupled nature of the phenotypic and genotypic
predictors within the unifying analysis framework bodes well to improving predictions as the
regulatory role of different genomic sites is unraveled.

Real datasets
We also applied Phen-Gen to a study comprising of a hundred father-mother-child trio families
with the child in each family suffering from intellectual disability symptoms1. Eleven families
with variants implicated in recessive or X-mode inheritance were used in this evaluation. 81%
(13/16) of the reported genes were ranked in the top 10 in our prediction (Table 3). In the
original study all mutations reported in dbSNP or observed in the in-house dataset were
removed from further evaluation. Phen-Gen, on the other hand, allows rare (below 1% MAF)
variants from dbSNP. When the original study criterions were adopted, the predictions
improved further. 8/11 patients were assigned an implicated gene as the top gene and all
reported genes now ranked in the top 5 in the respective families (Supplementary Table 7).

Comparison
We evaluated Phen-Gen against VAAST9 and eXtasy6, both of which rank genes or variants
based only on nonsynonymous mutations (Fig. 1). eXtasy under default setting ranks all
4

common and rare variants. In its manuscript it was also evaluated with rare variants (MAF<1%)
separately. We show results under both scenarios. VAAST assigns top rank to an average of 14
genes per simulation; whereas Phen-Gen and eXtasy assign a continuum of ranks with a lone
gene assigned the top rank in each simulation. Phen-Gen assigns the causal gene top rank in
82% cases for dominant disorders compared to 62% for VAAST and 24% for eXtasy. For recessive
disorders, Phen-Gen assigns top rank in 97% cases compared to 78% for VAAST, and 30% for
eXtasy.
While Phen-Gen was in submission, PHEVOR8 was published by the authors of VAAST. PHEVOR
combines multiple disease and functional ontologies to improve the performance of genomic
predictors like VAAST. To evaluate its performance, 50 dominant and 50 recessive VAAST
simulations were randomly chosen and the genes reprioritized using PHEVOR. Phen-Gen
identifies the causal gene in 90% of dominant and 88% of recessive simulations, while
VAAST+PHEVOR assign the top rank in 66% and 68%, respectively (Fig. 1). In conclusion, PhenGen outperforms VAAST, eXtasy, and VAAST+PHEVOR by 19-58%.
PHIVE7 is another recently published method that integrates phenotypic information. It scores
all exonic variants and matches human disease symptoms against a knockout mouse phenotype
database using semantic similarity. In its publication, it was evaluated in a similar simulation
framework albeit with a different disease set of HGMD variants. The authors report its ability to
assign the disease causal gene first rank in 66% of cases for dominant and 83% of cases in
recessive disorders. In comparison to PHIVE, Phen-Gen shows 16 and 13 percentage points’
advantage in identifying the true causal gene for dominant and recessive disorders respectively.
The impact of regulatory variants in congenital disorders is well established13. FunSeq14 was
recently published to predict the regulatory role of noncoding mutations. FunSeq’s results using
HGMD regulatory variants indicate a strong enrichment of damaging mutations, but only 18% of
the damaging regulatory variants fall within its first filtration criteria. In contrast, Phen-Gen
assigns damaging probabilities to 80% of these variants (Supplementary Fig. 7).
Phen-Gen highlights the advantage of integrating patient symptom information in
understanding disease mechanism and works on both coding and noncoding variation.

5

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre for sharing the
100 intellectual disability patient data in particular J. de Ligt for his help with this data. We
would also like to thank S. Köhler for his help with Phenomizer, N. Jinawath for her help
interpreting patient symptoms, and S. Prabhakar and N. Clarke for their comments on the
genomic predictor. The authors would also like to thank S. Prabhakar, S. Davila, A. Wilm and R.
del Rosario for their comments on the manuscript.

Author Contributions
AJ conceived and designed the project, designed and implemented the analysis framework,
implemented methods, conducted experiments, interpreted results, wrote the initial
manuscript, revised and proofread the paper. SA implemented methods, conducted
experiments, set up the web-server, revised and proofread the paper. PCN conceived and
designed the project, revised and proofread the paper, and supervised the project.

6

References
1.

De Ligt, J. et al. N. Engl. J. Med. 367, 1921–9 (2012).

2.

Yang, Y. et al. N. Engl. J. Med. 369, 1502–1511 (2013).

3.

Cordero, J.F. Book Review. N. Engl. J. Med. 352, 2032 (2005).

4.

Amberger, J., Bocchini, C.A., Scott, A.F. & Hamosh, A. Nucleic Acids Res. 37, D793–D796
(2009).

5.

Chakravarti, A. Genome Res. 21, 643–644 (2011).

6.

Sifrim, A. et al. Nat Methods 10, 1083–1084 (2013).

7.

Robinson, P.N. et al. Genome Res. 24, 340–8 (2014).

8.

Singleton, M.V et al. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 94, 599–610 (2014).

9.

Yandell, M. et al. Genome Res. 21, 1529–1542 (2011).

10.

Köhler, S. et al. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 85, 457–464 (2009).

11.

Stenson, P.D. et al. Hum. Genet. 133, 1–9 (2014).

12.

Fu, W. et al. Nature 493, 216–20 (2013).

13.

Visel, A. et al. Nature 464, 409–412 (2010).

14.

Khurana, E. et al. Science 342, 1235587 (2013).

7

Figure legend
Figure 1
Comparison with VAAST, eXtasy, and VAAST+PHEVOR
The comparison of Phen-Gen, VAAST, eXtasy and VAAST+PHEVOR in simulations using OMIM
disease symptoms and HGMD nonsynonymous mutations is shown. In each panel, the ability of
the methods to narrow down the true gene search within 1, 5 and 10 genes is depicted. (a) The
two panels reflect comparison with VAAST and eXtasy. For Phen-Gen the bar is split into the
predictive power based on genotypic prediction and the added advantage gained from disease
symptoms. VAAST only uses the genotype data and assign multiple genes the same rank at the
top of the order. For a fair comparison, the true gene was assigned the worst, average and best
VAAST rank among similarly ranked peers. For example, if VAAST assigns the true gene along
with 4 other genes the same top rank, then the causal gene will be ranked as 1, 3 and 5 for best,
average and worst respectively. The three components of the VAAST bar reflect the
performance across the three scenarios. eXtasy ranks all rare and common variants. The two
components of eXtasy bar reflect its performance under the default settings and the added
advantage of discarding common variants (MAF>1%) from its input. (b) 50 dominant and 50
recessive simulations were randomly chosen for comparison with PHEVOR. For VAAST only the
best rank (among similarly ranked genes) is depicted. PHEVOR+VAAST bars highlight the added
advantage of analyzing VAAST output in light of the phenotypic information by PHEVOR.

8

9

Table 1 Performance in simulated patients for coding predictor
Phen-Gen’s performance is evaluated with OMIM-listed disease symptoms and HGMD- reported
variants for coding predictor. Across all simulations Phen-Gen assigns the causal variant top rank
in 88% of cases. The results are categorized based on the class of the true causal variant and the
table entries reflect the percentage of simulations in each category with the indicated result.
The top three rows in each sub-table represent the performance of the complete method
(genotype and phenotype), the genotype-only approach, and the phenotype-only approach
respectively. The performance of Phen-Gen when the causal gene is previously known and
unknown is depicted as well.
Dominant
Top
gene (%)

Recessive

Top 5 genes
(%)

Top 10 genes
(%)

Top gene
(%)

Top 5 genes
(%)

Top 10 genes
(%)

Missense and Nonsense
Phen-Gen

82

89

91

97

98

98

Genotype only
Phenotype only

0
30

3
66

17
72

75
23

98
49

98
67

Known

93

97

98

97

98

98

Unknown

51

67

72

92

97

97

Phen-Gen

80

85

85

87

87

87

Genotype only

0

4

29

72

87

87

Phenotype only
Known

33
87

75
89

77
89

26
87

50
87

65
87

Unknown

49

67

70

81

82

82

Phen-Gen
Genotype only

80
0

88
1

94
2

97
64

98
98

98
98

Phenotype only
Known

31
94

72
98

74
98

24
97

56
98

72
98

Unknown

25

47

75

96

97

97

Splice site

Indels

Combined (Missense, Nonsense, Splice site and Indels)
Phen-Gen

81

88

91

96

97

97

Genotype only

0

3

13

72

97

97

Phenotype only

31

69

74

24

51

68

Known

92

97

97

96

97

97

Unknown

43

61

73

92

96

96

10

Online Methods
Gene list
We aimed to capture four popular gene lists (Consensus CDS, RefSeq, Ensembl and UCSC
known). Incomplete transcripts were discarded in each database and only protein coding genes
were considered. Alternatively spliced transcripts reported in the same data source were
assigned to the same gene. The mapping from the first three databases to UCSC known gene list
was downloaded and utilized to merge gene names across data sources. Additionally, two genes
were merged if any of their isoforms exhibited greater than 95% identity in the exon sequence
in the same orientation15 . Finally, an in-house mapping used for identifying alternate isoforms
in the SIFT database was employed16 . The final gene list comprised of 26,803 protein coding
genes with 11.4 gene or transcript identifiers reported per gene on average. This gene set was
employed in all the experiments in the manuscript and any downloaded gene identifier was
translated to this set.

Variant prediction
For the coding predictor, each called variant in the patient's genome (or exome) is evaluated if it
lies within the coding regions in a reported transcript of the fore mentioned gene list, or if it
falls within the splice site definition of the intron-exon boundary. The coding variants are further
sub-categorized as start-loss, stop-gain, stop-loss, splice site, nonsynonymous, synonymous or
indel. Each variant is assigned a probability of deleteriousness based on its highest estimated
damaging impact. For the genomic predictor, all coding and noncoding variants are analyzed for
their putative functional role.

Nonsynonymous variants
Nonsynonymous mutations are probably the best studied class of damaging mutations and a
plethora of literature has been written and algorithms developed to evaluate their damaging
impact. For our prediction we combined two commonly used algorithms SIFT 16 and PolyPhen217 . The aim here is to estimate the probability of a non-synonymous mutation given its’ SIFT
and PolyPhen-2 scores. We employed a positive and neutral dataset to estimate the empirical
distribution of these scores both individually and in conjunction. The positive set comprised of
disease causal nonsynonymous mutations from the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) 11.
The neutral set contained nonsynonymous substitutions in the human reference genome with
respect to the ancestral sequence as inferred from the human-chimp-gorilla exome alignment.
Only the loci where both chimp and gorilla sequence aligned and agreed on the allele were
11

considered. The two distributions were combined using Bayes’ rule with prior probability of a
nonsynonymous variant being damaging 0.6718. The two algorithms exhibit general agreement
(Supplementary Fig. 2). Hence the two ends of the spectrum where the predictions disagree are
quite sparse. The posterior probability in these bins was interpolated using the geometric mean
of their nearest neighbors. PolyPhen-2 predictions tend to average out within each bin; adding
SIFT scores helps differentiate and improve the probability estimates within each bin. The
continuum of predicted probabilities can be thresholded to achieve 91% accuracy with less than
2.1% false positives; which compares favorably with MutationTaster19 at 87% accuracy and 4%
false positive rate using the same data. It needs to be emphasized though that the downstream
analysis uses the probability estimates and not the binary predictions.

Splice site variants
Exon-intron boundary information was extracted for all the transcripts in the gene list from their
respective databases. Mutations in the 8 base pair locus surrounding the donor site or the 3
base pair locus surrounding the acceptor site (Supplementary Fig. 3) were considered splice
disrupting. In particular the 2 base pair at the start and end of an intron tend to be more
conserved and hence were treated separately20. To estimate the probability of deleteriousness
of a mutation affecting splicing boundaries, we employed splice site disease causal mutations
from HGMD as a positive set. The neutral set contained common mutations in dbSNP with
minor allele frequency greater than 30% within the defined sites. The prior probability of a
splice site mutation being damaging was estimated by the reduction in the number of common
mutations at these sites in comparison to the whole genome. The rationale being that the
mutation rate is assumed to be constant in a random subset of the genome; and this reduction
in common mutations is attributed to prior mutations being pruned out by negative selection.
The splice site definition fails to capture 8% of mutations reported in HGMD (with another 1%
lying outside our gene list). A closer examination of these false negatives reveals that most of
these sites are more than 10 bp away from our defined exon-intron boundaries. Some of these
could reflect variability in transcript annotation; however others could potentially be
introducing alternate splice sites which would not be represented in the prediction.

Start-loss, Stop-gain and Stop-loss variants
Start and stop codon altering mutations and nonsense mutations are highly deleterious and in
most analysis are assumed to be damaging21 . We confirmed this hypothesis by computing the
relative decrease in common mutations at these sites with respect to the complete genome.
Once again, common mutations (MAF>30%) in dbSNP were used and these sites were defined
using our gene set. Our analysis reveals that these mutations are highly likely to be damaging
with probability 0.999.
12

Small insertions and deletions
To estimate the potential damaging impact of a genic indel, we first classify them as either
frameshift or non-frameshift. A different predictor is used for each class. In both cases, the
respective disease causal indels from HGMD constitute the positive set. The neutral set
comprises of common mutations from dbSNP (MAF>30%). The prior probability of a coding
indel being damaging is estimated using 54 unrelated whole genome sequencing samples made
publicly available by Complete Genomics Inc. The dataset revealed a strong exonic bias in indel
calls, with 20% of indels located within 4% of the genome annotated as coding genes. To rectify
for this bias, we compared the enrichment of rare indels (MAF<5%) and common indels
(MAF>30%) within and outside the genes. The assumption being that both rare and common
indels are impacted equally by the coding bias. Based on this computation, the prior probability
of a genic indel being damaging was estimated to be 0.0787. This is a weak prior and the true
value is likely to be higher. However because of higher false positive rate in calling indels (in
comparison to SNPs) it would be prudent to err on the conservative side. Further the weak prior
is rescued by strong observation in both indel categories. All frameshift indels are assigned the
probability of deleteriousness based on the empirical distribution of its positive and neutral set
combined using Bayes’ rule. Non-frameshift indel predictions are further refined by
incorporating the importance of the impacted locus (based on its tolerance to single nucleotide
mutations).

Genomic variants
Next, we aimed to estimate the putative functional role of all genomic variants. To this end,
conservation, putative regulatory interactions and proximity to genes were used to annotate the
variants (Supplementary Fig. 4). Both GERP++22 and PhyloP23 (threshold 1.445) were used to
define evolutionary conserved sites. ENCODE computational predictions for transcription factor
binding sites and experimental annotations for DNASE hypersensitive sites were included.
Proximity to gene annotations (including coding sequence, UTRs and 70 bp at the start and end
of each intron) was incorporated.
A key statistical challenge in estimating the functional role of noncoding mutations is the dearth
of disease causal regulatory mutations in public datasets. Further, most studies focus on coding
variants and hence dbSNP has accumulated a higher number of these variants over time. To
correct for both these shortcomings, we employed two positive and two neutral datasets.
Disease causal regulatory mutations in HGMD and reported GWAS hits (downloaded from NCBI)
constituted the positive sets. The neutral sets contained common SNPs in dbSNP and common
SNPs in publicly available unrelated sample data from Complete Genomics Inc (MAF > 0.30)
respectively. Ten thousand permutations were performed and each positive and neutral dataset
13

was randomly selected with equal probability. Each selected dataset was subsampled, in each
permutation, to estimate confidence intervals (Supplementary Fig. 5). The positive and neutral
empirical distributions thus estimated were combined within Bayes’ rule. The prior probability
of a random mutation in our annotated regions being damaging was estimated to be 0.0688. In
addition to the fore mentioned annotations, we also considered further annotations including
GUMBY24, noncoding RNA from GENCODE25, microRNA26 and GC content27. The technical
difficulty in embracing more annotations stems from the small size of the positive sets. Adding
more annotations increases the number of bins exponentially. This dilutes the signal within each
bin, making it more susceptible to stochastic noise. GUMBY is stringent in its conservation
threshold and thus quite accurate but not all-encompassing to all functional regions.
Furthermore, 99.65% of GUMBY conserved sites overlapped with GERP++. MicroRNA predicted
loci28 and GENCODE annotations29, despite their well established epigenetic role were not well
represented in our positive sets. GC content was suggestive of the regulatory role when only
HGMD was used as positive set; the predictive power disappeared when both positive sets were
employed. This could potentially reflect the enrichment of de novo mutations in the HGMD
dataset, as mutation rate across the genome tends to correlate with GC content27. These
predictors can be further interrogated and perhaps rescued with increasing size of regulatory
variant datasets.

Pooling
The estimated loss of function at the genic level is predicted by pooling damaging variants
within each gene considering the most damaging predicted variants for maternally and
paternally inherited chromosomes. If the haplotype phase information is not available, the first
and second highest variants are considered under the assumption that they lie on opposite
chromosomes. Noncoding mutations are assigned to the nearest gene within 50 kb. This
criterion is similar to conservative settings in GREAT30 and assumes potential cis regulatory
impact of these variants on the respective genes. The inheritance pattern of the variants is
compared against the disease inheritance pattern. For small pedigrees (such as trios or
quartets) only variants consistent with this pattern are evaluated. For larger pedigrees, the
flexibility to allow for nominal inconsistencies is permissible. This leeway is to account for
potentially undiagnosed patients, incomplete penetrance, low coverage, and possible error in
variant calls. Common variants are omitted from this pooling. For the prediction, any variant
with reported minor allele frequency above 1% in either 1000 genomes31, National Heart, Lung,
and Blood Institute Exome Sequencing Project (NHLBI ESP) or dbSNP32 version 135 is deemed
common and excluded from consideration as the etiological variant. The analysis allows for the
user to discard or incorporate variants inconsistent with the pedigree. Unless de novo mutation
is the likely cause of the condition, the former is recommended.
14

Healthy individuals have been reported to harbor up to 100 damaging mutations33 . The
distribution of these so-called deleterious variants is not uniform across all genes and certain
genes (such as olfactory genes) are more likely to carry these loss-of-function variants. To
account and rectify for these incidental red herrings, we compute a null distribution of our
predictor for each gene using the samples from 1000 Genomes. These individuals have not been
reported to suffer from any disorders and represent a generic snapshot of human genetic
variability across the globe. The pooled probability distribution of each gene is estimated under
both the dominant and recessive inheritance pattern (Supplementary Fig. 6). For a patient, only
genes harboring variants which exceed the ninety ninth percentile of the corresponding null
distribution are considered for downstream analysis. For example, more than 1% of 1000
Genomes samples carry rare variants in CYP2C19 on both chromosomes with estimated
damaging probability 0.88 or higher. Hence for a recessive disorder patient, CYP2C19 will only
be considered as a candidate gene if there are two variants within the gene that both have a
damaging probability higher than 0.88. A key advantage of our approach, in the context of the
method, is that we establish a continuum of predicted loss of functionality of each gene within
healthy individuals.

Phenotypic prediction
The patient’s disease symptoms are mapped to Human Phenotype Ontology database using an
in-house replica of Phenomizer10. The aim here is to match the patient’s symptomatology to the
list of known disorders and estimate the significance of each disease match. The BenjaminiHochberg multiple testing corrected p-values are translated to probabilities assuming disease
set has a uniform prior.

Each disease probability is assigned to all genes implicated in literature for that disorder. If no
genes are currently known, the probability is distributed uniformly across all genes. Certain
genes are known to impact multiple disorders. Pleiotropy is accounted for by combining all the
15

assigned probabilities for a gene across the spectrum of disorders it has been reportedly
involved in.

Thus far we have estimated the role of each gene leveraging on direct knowledge of their
involvement in diseases with similar symptoms. Next we incorporate ‘guilt by association’ based
on evidence of their interaction with a known perpetrator. To gather this circumstantial
evidence, a random walk with restart is conducted on gene-gene interaction network. Each
gene is selected as a starting point of the walk with probability Pgene. Restart probability of 90% is
used for the walk. This translates to 90% of the phenotypically matched probability aka ‘guilt’
retained by the initial gene and 10% of it permeated across its known associates; with stronger
evidence of interaction leading to a higher probabilities.

Gene-gene interaction network construction
In the context of the method, the gene-gene interactions are not just limited to physical
interaction of genes. Rather they reflect the ability of two genes to impact the same underlying
biology and thus lead to the same (or similar) disorders and symptoms. This information is
agglomerated across different sources including known involvement in the same pathway or
ontology domains, data-mined reports of co-occurrence across publications, and/or correlated
co-expression among tissue types. The gene-gene interaction network is constructed by
combining these sources in a framework inspired by ref. 34. A key difference is that the original
study made binary predictions, thus representing an un-weighted graph; whereas we construct
a randomized graph with edge weights proportional to confidence in interaction. The network
construction is as follows. All pairs of genes reportedly involved in the same pathway
(REACTOME35, KEGG36, NCI-Nature37) are considered true interactions. This confidence stems
from the manual curation process of these sources by domain experts. To improve recall of the
network, we supplement the pathway information with additional data sources. The pathway
based interaction are used to evaluate the predictive power of data mining approaches
(BioGRID38 , STRING39), Gene Ontology domains annotations40 (cellular component, molecular
function, and biological process) and gene co-expression (COXPRESdb41 ). These predictions are
combined within a unifying framework in a manner similar to ref. 34 with prior probability of
two random genes interacting estimated from pathway databases. A high confidence (coinvolvement probability >=0.1) gene-gene interaction network was thus defined. In total, the
network comprised of 920,898 interactions.
16

To test the efficacy of this network in representing genetic heterogeneity, gene pairs implicated
for the same disorder were extracted from HGMD and OMIM (10,852 and 5,083 respectively).
31% and 39% of these pairs are represented by a direct edge in the network (P<<10-16 based on
distribution of random gene pairs) indicating that the probability of their involvement in similar
diseases is well represented in the network; and that the network is significantly enriched in
true interactions; which bodes well in its efficacy to elucidate novel gene involvements in known
disorders.
Disease causal genes tend to play a more central role in interactome. This is reflected in the
gene-gene interaction network where HGMD and OMIM implicated genes tend to have a higher
number of edges (P ≤10-166 and P ≤1.8×10-192 respectively).

Combined
Assuming phenotypic and genotypic probability estimates are independent observations of the
same underlying probability of involvement of a gene we combine the two predictions for each
gene within a Bayesian framework.

Computational efficiency
Exome sequencing routinely yields 20,000 variants per sample; the number increases to 4
million for whole genome sequencing. We employ a simultaneous linear scan of the variant and
annotation files. To speed up the process ‘regions of interest’ were defined using interval
forests; with one tree per chromosome. Overlapping intervals were merged to define a sieve
which represents 19% of the genome. This allows the implementation to quickly sift out the
variants of interest discarding the rest. To expedite the actual run-time execution, whenever
possible, the burden of computation was moved to pre-processing and information stored in a
binary format for faster reading, e.g. for noncoding variants the database overlap information is
encoded in 1 byte per interval.

17

The source code, preprocessed databases and executables are provided as single downloadable
package. This includes an in-house implementation of Phenomizer with limited functionality
necessary for Phen-Gen. The source code is released under the GNU General Public License, so
a computationally savvy user can make changes to incorporate further metrics of
deleteriousness and improve on the model. We plan to periodically update the online and
downloadable versions of Phen-Gen with each major release of the source databases. The
software is also available as an online server for ease of use.

Simulating in silico patients
To evaluate Phen-Gen we generated in silico patients. For a given disorder, a patient’s genetic
data was created by adding a known disease causal mutation from HGMD into a healthy
individual with zygosity consistent with the reported disease inheritance pattern. These
genomes on average harbor four million genomic variants, of which twenty four thousand are
coding42. The patient’s phenotypic data was generated based on reported disease symptoms.
Phen-Gen allows pedigree data, which considerably narrows down the search pool but in the
simulations we aimed for the extreme case where only the lone patient information is available.
In the first set of simulations, 765 diseases for which at least one causal variant was reported in
HGMD and the disease symptoms were defined in OMIM4 were extracted. These symptoms
were used to define the patient’s condition. Each causal variant was systematically spiked in
each of the 1092 individuals from 1000 Genomes dataset in turn and the remaining individuals
were used to define the null distribution (Tables 1 and Supplementary Tables 1 and 6).
To evaluate Phen-Gen’s performance in identifying the disease causal gene with a compound
heterozygous disease inheritance pattern a second set of simulations was conducted. In these,
the general framework remained the same as before. But this time instead of a single variant,
two variants were added to the patient genome in a heterozygous state on opposite
chromosomes. For these simulations only recessive inheritance pattern disorders with at least
two variants reported in (or near) the same gene were used with a simulated patient generated
for every pair of reported variants (Supplementary Table 4). In the case where one or both of
the members of a spiked variant pair was noncoding, the genomic variant predictor was used
(Supplementary Fig. 8).
To evaluate Phen-Gen’s robustness to phenotypic heterogeneity, 44 disorders for which the
symptom list and their frequency of occurrence has been compiled11 were used. For each
disorder, five medical histories were constructed by randomly sampling each symptom based on
its frequency. The simulations were conducted in a similar manner as before, with the added
18

caveat that every individual patient genome was evaluated five times, once with each medical
history (Supplementary Table 5).

19

Methods-only references
15.

Pruitt, K.D. et al. Genome Res. 19, 1316–1323 (2009).

16.

Sim, N.-L. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 40, W452–7 (2012).

17.

Adzhubei, I.A. et al. Nat. Methods 7, 248–249 (2010).

18.

Kryukov, G.V, Shpunt, A., Stamatoyannopoulos, J.A. & Sunyaev, S.R. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 106, 3871–3876 (2009).

19.

Schwarz, J.M., Rodelsperger, C., Schuelke, M. & Seelow, D. Nat Meth 7, 575–576 (2010).

20.

Lewin, B. Genes VIII. 1–1027 (Pearson Prentice Hall, 2004).

21.

Price, A.L. et al. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 86, 832–838 (2010).

22.

Davydov, E.V et al. PLoS Comput. Biol. 6, e1001025 (2010).

23.

Cooper, G.M. et al. Genome Res. 15, 901–913 (2005).

24.

Prabhakar, S. et al. Genome Res. 16, 855–863 (2006).

25.

Lassmann, T. et al. Genome Res. 22, 1775–1789 (2012).

26.

Kozomara, A. & Griffiths-Jones, S. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, D152–D157 (2011).

27.

Smith, N.G.C., Webster, M.T. & Ellegren, H. Genome Res. 12, 1350–1356 (2002).

28.

He, L. & Hannon, G.J. Nat. Rev. Genet. 5, 522–531 (2004).

29.

Esteller, M. Nat. Rev. Genet. 12, 861–874 (2011).

30.

McLean, C.Y. et al. Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 495–501 (2010).

31.

Altshuler, D., Lander, E. & Ambrogio, L. Nature 476, 1061–1073 (2010).

32.

Sherry, S.T. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 29, 308–311 (2001).

33.

MacArthur, D.G. et al. Sci. 335 , 823–828 (2012).

34.

Wu, G., Feng, X. & Stein, L. Genome Biol. 11, R53 (2010).
20

35.

Matthews, L. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 37, D619–D622 (2009).

36.

Kanehisa, M., Goto, S., Sato, Y., Furumichi, M. & Tanabe, M. Nucleic Acids Res. 40, D109–
14 (2012).

37.

Schaefer, C.F. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 37, D674–D679 (2009).

38.

Stark, C. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 34, D535–D539 (2006).

39.

Franceschini, A. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D808–15 (2013).

40.

Ashburner, M. et al. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat. Genet. 25, 25–29 (2000).

41.

Obayashi, T. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D1014–20 (2013).

42.

Altshuler, D.M. et al. Nature 491, 56–65 (2012).

21

Competing Financial Interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

22

Phen-Gen: Combining Phenotype and
Genotype to Analyze Rare Disorders
Asif Javed1, Saloni Agrawal1, Pauline C. Ng1
1

Computational & Systems Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, Singapore

Supplementary material
VAAST, PHEVOR and eXtasy simulations
The performance of Phen-Gen was compared against VAAST1, PHEVOR2, and eXtasy3. PHEVOR
is a phenotype-based add-on tool which relies on genomic predictions from methods like
VAAST. Both VAAST and eXtasy predict only on the damaging impact of amino acid changing
SNVs and do not score indels, splice or noncoding variants. Hence for this comparison only
nonsynonymous mutations in Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) were used. VAAST uses
a unique file format (Genome Variant Format, or GVF) and their analysis package comes with
conversion software to convert from VCFs to this format. Unfortunately, we faced compatibility
issues with VCFs extracted for majority of the samples from African American population
(ASW), within the 1000 Genomes data. To keep things simple, all ASW samples were removed
from these. For computational efficiency, a random set of 1000 individuals were set aside as
controls and 26 individuals were used to generate the simulated patients. For each causal
variant, one individual was randomly selected and eXtasy, VAAST and Phen-Gen were run
independently. The comparison was conducted using HGMD reported disease causal variants
for which the disease symptoms are defined in OMIM.
For VAAST the 1000 individuals served as controls to estimate the composite likelihood under
the healthy model to be compared against the disease model. Phen-Gen and eXtasy provide a
continuum of rankings whereas VAAST (on average) identifies 14 genes at the top of the list. For
a fair comparison, the true causal gene for VAAST ranking was assigned best, average, and
worst rank among similarly ranked genes. For example, if VAAST assigns the true gene along
with 4 other genes the same top rank. The causal gene will be ranked as 1, 3 and 5 for best,
average and worst respectively. This is reflected in the three components of the bar in VAAST
results (Fig. 1). VAAST was able correctly narrow down the true causal gene to within 14 genes
1

(on average) in 62% of dominant and 78% of recessive cases. In comparison, Phen-Gen was able
to identify the correct etiological gene in 82% cases for dominant and in 97% cases for recessive
OMIM reported disorders.
PHEVOR was recently published by the authors of VAAST. It combines information from
multiple disease and functional ontology databases to re-prioritize genomic predictions in light
of patient-specific symptoms. PHEVOR is only available as an online tool; making a
comprehensive simulation comparison not possible. In its publication, PHEVOR was evaluated
in 100 simulations. We chose the same number for our comparison. 50 dominant and 50
recessive cases were randomly chosen from the VAAST simulations. As a sanity check, VAAST
predictions of this subset were compared against VAAST results for all simulations to ensure
that the subsample reflects the general trend. PHEVOR web server only allows up to 5 disease
symptoms. If the phenotype description exceeds this number, 5 symptoms were randomly
chosen. The combination of VAAST and PHEVOR was able to assign the causal gene top rank in
66% of dominant and 68% of recessive simulations. In comparison for the same cases, PhenGen was able to correctly identify the causal gene in 90% of dominant and 88% of recessive
simulations (Fig. 1).
The better performance of Phen-Gen can be attributed to methodological differences as well as
difference in data sources integrated in the prediction. PHEVOR’s 'ontology propagation’ does
not take in account the information content of its various data sources. Phen-Gen estimates
this in the gene interaction network construction by relying on pathway databases. Pathway
databases are often the best curated gene functional information available 4. PHEVOR currently
does not use this resource, although its authors concede integrating pathway information to be
an active area of PHEVOR's development.
eXtasy relies on locus and gene specific information and does not use a control population.
Hence the control set was not used in its prediction. Under default settings it evaluates all
variants both common and rare. In its manuscript it was evaluated with rare variants (MAF<1%)
as well. eXtasy’s performance is thus evaluated under both scenarios. In the first, all variants in
the individual exome were provided as an input. In the second, only rare variants were used
and variants with MAF>1% in 1000 Genomes, dbSNP or National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute’s Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) were discarded. eXtasy is able to narrow down the
causal variant within top 10 variants in 69% of the cases for dominant and 76% of the cases for
recessive disorders. In comparison Phen-Gen is able to narrow down the causal variant within
10 variants in 91% of the cases for dominant and 98% of the cases for recessive disorders. The
relative advantage of Phen-Gen can potentially stem from multiple factors. eXtasy does not
incorporate the disease inheritance pattern in its prediction. It also ranks variants based on
2

individual phenotypes. Although the information is combined in rank aggregation, the interplay
of different combination of phenotypes may not be well represented.
For the comparison Phen-Gen used the identical control set of 1000 individuals from VAAST to
define the null distribution of genes. Phen-Gen outperforms eXtasy, VAAST and VAAST+PHEVOR
by 19-58% (Fig. 1). eXtasy currently only allows a subset of disease symptoms defined in Human
Phenotype Ontology. To investigate Phen-Gen’s relative advantage due to a more
comprehensive symptom list, Phen-Gen simulations were repeated restricting it to the
symptoms accepted by eXtasy; Phen-Gen’s ability to identify the true disease causal gene
dropped by 1% in these simulations (results not shown).
For further comparison with VAAST, 44 phenotypic heterogeneous dataset was employed. The
results show the relative performance and highlights Phen-Gen’s advantage even when disease
symptoms are not completely specific (Supplementary Fig. 8).

Performance using real dataset
Phen-Gen was evaluated using a recently published real dataset comprising of one hundred
parents-child trio families with the children exhibiting intellectual disability symptoms5. This
data contains variant calls for each family, as well as a rich resource of medical history detailing
each patient’s unique symptoms. The information was initially electronically parsed, and then
manually evaluated by two of the authors independently to absolve the translation to Human
Phenotype Ontology terms from any ambiguities. Further advice from a clinician was sought to
remove any errors of interpretation.
On the genotypic side, a key challenge in handling the real dataset was the noise level in the
variant calls. In the original study itself, the focus was on de novo mutations and the provided
‘high quality calls’ cast an initial wide net to encompass large number of candidate mutations.
In the original publication, these calls were pruned by further bioinformatic processing and
finally bench validation. Replicating this effort required access to the patient samples
themselves, which was not possible. The validation rate of de novo mutations reported even
after further bioinformatic processing was 11.4%3. To sidestep validation issues due to noise
level in the data and focus on the downstream analysis that Phen-Gen aims to provide, we
initially focused on eighteen families with variants implicated in recessive or X-mode
inheritance. Seven families were further removed from consideration as the variants reported
in the publication were not observed in the correct inheritance pattern in the provided data
3

and had likely been corrected in the bench validation3. Hence eleven families were used in this
current study.
The performance of Phen-Gen is evaluated for variants reported in the original publication
(Supplementary Table 7). Phen-Gen allows for variants with MAF below 1% in public databases.
The first column of Phen-Gen results depicts the performance in this scenario. The original
study however discarded all known variants (already existing in dbSNP, or observed in their inhouse database). After adopting the same filtering criteria as the original study, 16/21 genes
agreed with the original study, and only five are potentially false positives. Of these five
variants, two were homozygous in the patient and observed in heterozygous state in two
different families and the remaining three are only observed in the respective family. Of the
three novel variants two are indels which were not evaluated in the original study. These five
variants cannot be ruled out as disease causal candidates based purely on the bioinformatics
analysis of the variant calls and further bench validation and functional analysis would be
needed to implicate or exonerate them.
Intellectual disability is a genetically diverse disorder and it has been estimated that more than
a thousand different genes may be playing a role6. Thus despite the rich and detailed patient
history, it is challenging to list it down to a few genes based purely on symptomatic knowledge.
We analyzed the symptoms of 58 patients with reported recessively inherited deleterious
mutations, de novo mutations, or X-linked mutations in males (Supplementary Tables 3 and 9 in
the original publication5). The analysis relied only on just the phenotypic information to rank
the genes for each patient. To quantify the performance of our approach, we computed the
sum of the ranks of all reported genes in the respective patient’s phenotypic match. The aim of
this analysis is to highlight that the genes reported in the original study based on genetic
evidence tend to have a significantly lower rank in our lists than observed just by chance. Each
individual patient’s rank should have a uniform distribution under the null hypothesis and
hence their sum - an Irwin-Hall distribution- is approximated by a Normal distribution. The
results indicate that the rank sum of reported genes is significantly lower than expected by
chance (P ≤ 0.0036).
The authors split the gene set into known, unknown and candidate genes. The ‘known genes’
had been implicated for intellectual disability in prior literature. ‘Candidate genes’ had not been
directly reported for intellectual disability, but are linked to brain and embryonic development
and there is further evidence of their involvement. The remaining genes are deemed
‘unknown’. Even when we focused on individual gene subclasses, the rank sums in all three
categories were significantly lower: known genes (P ≤ 2.44×10-8), candidate genes (P ≤ 0.0051),
and unknown genes (P ≤ 0.0192). In the original study, only known genes carrying deleterious
4

variants were considered confirmed as diagnosed; or if the same candidate gene harboring
damaging mutations was observed in two different patients with similar symptoms. Known
genes implicated in these patients are expected to be ranked lower. Our results indicate that
although the unknown genes set could harbor a lot of incidental genes, they are likely to
contain some true positives as well; and the diagnostic yield of this dataset can potentially be
improved by further corroboration.

Comparison with PHIVE
PHIVE7 was evaluated in a simulation framework similar to the one presented in this paper. The
authors used a somewhat different HGMD version (869 diseases versus 765 for Phen-Gen) and
this could potentially contribute to the difference in results. Since PHIVE is only available as an
online server and not a downloadable package, it is not possible to do a comprehensive
evaluation using the same dataset. The authors report 66% power to identify the causal gene in
dominant and 83% in recessive disorders. Comparison of these reported results reveals PhenGen has 13-16% higher efficacy in identifying the true causal mutation in both dominant and
recessive disorders (Table 1). This advantage may be attributed to different factors including
the underlying prediction framework and better representation of the disease symptoms in
human databases.
PHIVE uses phenotypes from mouse gene knockout experiments to establish phenotype to
gene links. Using the mouse model to represent human phenotypes has a few limitations.
Mouse knockout experiments have only been conducted for approximately a third of the
human genes. There has been increasing focus in the recent past to generate a more
comprehensive resource8, and this would improve PHIVE predictions over time. In comparison
human disease-gene association span only about 10% of the genes. Both these numbers
support the usage of gene (or protein) interaction networks to extrapolate predictions to the
remaining set of genes. PHIVE assigns a uniform phenotypic score to the 2/3 rd gene set and the
authors concede that integrating protein interaction information is a potential future direction
to improve results. A second issue which would be more difficult to address is that human and
mice do not share disease morphology for all disorders9. In particular it would not be
representative of any primate specific, or even more constrained human-specific, traits. Ward
and Kellis recently showed that a large number of human regulatory regions do not show
evolutionary conservation in primate evolution10, so the mouse model may not recapitulate
recently acquired regulatory evolving traits. Despite these limitations, animal models provide
an invaluable resource and integrating this information along with human disease matches is
one avenue to improve Phen-Gen’s predictions.
5

On the genotypic side, PHIVE assigns arbitrary pathogenicity scores for the different classes of
coding mutations (all except missense). These scores were chosen to give optimal predictions
within their simulation framework. Their performance declined by almost half in simulations
spiking the causal variant in in-house exomes (Fig. 4a of the publication7). The authors
attributed this decline to their reliance on allele frequency information which would be
unavailable for novel variants observed in the in-house data. This issue will be faced during the
analysis of any new dataset. Another factor potentially playing a role is that the 1000 Genomes
data is highly curated and fine-tuning the predictions based on this dataset may have led to
overfitting. For example, the indel calls in the public data have been improved in extensive
bench validations11, whereas in a practical scenario these calls tend to be more error prone.

Comparison with FunSeq
FunSeq12 evaluates the regulatory role of a noncoding mutation using a combination of
functionality categories similar to Phen-Gen. It identifies the top 0.4% of the genome as
‘sensitive’ to regulatory disrupting mutations. The selective constraint in each combination of
annotations is estimated using enrichment of rare variants. FunSeq annotations are highly
predictive of functionality but may not necessarily be all-encompassing. The method follows
multiple screening steps to reduce the number of candidate mutations. Analysis of HGMD
reported disease causal regulatory variants reveals that their initial filter (representing coding
and sensitive regions) only captures 18% of these damaging variants and would annotate the
rest as benign. Phen-Gen on the other hand assigns a continuum of probabilities to 80% of the
variants. These variants are assigned a lower probability based on genotypic information
(Supplementary Fig. 7). These variants would likely be poorly predicted by any genotype only
approach and would require phenotypic support for improved predictions. Simulation results
support this hypothesis; Phen-Gen is able to specify the true causal variant regulatory mutation
in 49% of the cases with phenotype information (Supplementary Table 6). This predictive power
stems from phenotypic corroboration with a 30 percentage points advantage in predicting the
true causal gene compared to a purely genotype only approach; thus highlighting Phen-Gen’s
advantage of integrating this viable resource. In 69% of the cases, the disease gene appeared in
Phen-Gen’s top 10 list of candidate.

Prior probability for genomic predictor
It is estimated that about 10-15% of the genome is functionally active13. Assuming the average
of these estimates and that all functional loci reside within our regions of interest span 19% of
6

the genome, we can compute the probability of a random annotated locus being functional to
be 12.5/19 = 0.66. Next to compute the probability of a mutation at a functional region being
deleterious, we used the PhyloP conserved bases as surrogates of the functional genome and
computed the reduction in common mutations in dbSNPs (MAF>30%) at these sites in
comparison to the rest of the genome. These numbers were combined to yield the probability
of an annotated variant being damaging 0.0688 which is used as prior in the genomic predictor.

Incorporating pedigree information
For a dominant disease inheritance pattern genes harboring one or more damaging mutations
are evaluated. Predicted damaging variants with one or more copies of the alternate allele in all
cases and no copies of alternate allele in controls are considered. Only genes with a predicted
probability higher (or equal) in cases than controls are incorporated in the downstream
analysis.
For a recessive or compound heterozygous disease inheritance pattern, genes harboring two or
more damaging mutations are evaluated. Predicted damaging variants with one or more copies
of the alternate allele in all cases and one or zero copies of the alternate allele in controls are
considered. Only genes with a predicted probability higher in cases than controls are
incorporated in the downstream analysis. This allows for compound heterozygosity while
reducing the false positives. If both parents are included in the analysis, there is a further filter
to require at least one variant from each parent.
Phen-Gen allows the user to restrict the analysis to variants consistent with the pedigree
structure of the family. This is the recommended settings as pedigree inconsistent variants
harboring potential de novo mutations also tend to be enriched in sequencing errors. The
software allows the user with leniency in this criterion by allowing pedigree-inconsistent
variants if de novo mutations are the likely cause of the condition. In practice for real datasets
however it is highly recommended to use a pedigree based variant caller (such as GATK 2
PhaseByTransmission walker) to prune out false de novo calls.

Evaluating null distribution of genes
To evaluate Phen-Gen’s null distribution of genes we compared our predicted deleterious
variant harboring genes with loss of function genes reported in ref. 11 and Residual Variation
Intolerance Score (RVIS) reported in ref 14. Ref. 11 used a subset of 1000 Genomes individuals
for their analysis and the predicted damaging variants were subsequently curated after further
bench validations. Ref. 14 used NHLBI ESP allele frequencies and corrected for gene size as
7

larger genes are more likely to harbor incidental so-called damaging variants due to size. A
cutoff of ninety fifth percentile was employed to their set of damaging variant harboring genes.
Phen-Gen employs a one percentile cutoff for the null distribution. Despite methodological and
dataset differences, genes which exceed this cutoff showed high enrichment in the respective
datasets (P ≤ 8×10-3 for McArthur et al and 10-2 for Petrovski et al using Fisher’s exact test).

8

Supplementary Table 1
Additional statistics for results reported in Table 1
Performance in simulated patients with OMIM-listed disease symptoms and HGMD reported
variants for coding predictor. The table is an extension of Table 1 with performance for
genotype and phenotype-only predictors added for both known and unknown diseases in each
category (see highlighted rows). The number of variants in each category is also included at the
top of each table. The performance of both genotypic and phenotypic predictors in each
category is presented. The percentage of known (gene disease association in the local
Phenomizer database) and unknown variants in each category is also reported.
Dominant
Top
gene
(%)
Missense & Nonsense
Phen-Gen

Top 5
genes
(%)

Recessive
Top 10
genes
(%)

Top gene
(%)

9,194 variants, 1092 individuals
82

89

91

0

3

17

Phenotype
only

30

66

Phen-Gen

93

Top 5
genes
(%)

Top 10
genes
(%)

11,028 variants, 1092 individuals
97

98

98

75

98

98

72

23

49

67

97

98

97

98

98

0

3

19

75

98

98

Phenotype
only

37

80

84

25

51

68

Phen-Gen

51

67

72

92

97

97

0

3

13

72

96

97

12

26

40

13

29

54

Genotype
only

Genotype
only

Genotype
only

All

Known
(74%)

Unknown
(26%)

Phenotype
only

Splice site

Phenotype
only

Known
(91%)

Unknown
(9%)

1,581 variants, 1092 individuals

Phen-Gen
Genotype
only

All

All

80

85

85

0

4

29

33

75

77

1,899 variants, 1092 individuals

All

87

87

87

72

87

87

26

50

65

9

Dominant

Recessive

Top
gene
(%)

Top 5
genes
(%)

Top 10
genes
(%)

Top gene
(%)

Top 5
genes
(%)

Top 10
genes
(%)

87

89

89

87

87

87

0

4

30

72

87

87

Phenotype
only

39

87

89

28

52

67

Phen-Gen

49

67

70

81

82

82

0

4

25

72

82

82

5

20

26

3

16

43

Phen-Gen
Genotype
only

Genotype
only

Known
(81%)

Unknown
(19%)

Phenotype
only

Indel

Known
(94%)

Unknown
(6%)

5,972 variants, 1092 individuals
80

88

94

0

1

2

Phenotype
only

31

72

Phen-Gen

94

4,220 variants, 1092 individuals
97

98

98

64

98

98

74

24

56

72

98

98

97

98

98

0

1

1

64

98

98

Phenotype
only

38

87

89

26

59

73

Phen-Gen

43

61

73

92

96

96

0

2

11

70

95

96

8

21

32

11

27

56

Phen-Gen
Genotype
only

Genotype
only

Genotype
only

All

Known
(80%)

Unknown
(20%)

Phenotype
only

Combined

Known
(91%)

Unkown
(9%)

16747 variants, 1092 individuals

Phen-Gen
Genotype
only

All

81

88

91

0

3

13

All

17147 variants, 1092 indviduals
96

97

97

72

97

97

All

10

Dominant

Recessive

Top
gene
(%)

Top 5
genes
(%)

Top 10
genes
(%)

Top gene
(%)

Top 5
genes
(%)

Top 10
genes
(%)

Phenotype
only

31

69

74

24

51

68

Phen-Gen

92

97

97

96

97

97

0

3

14

72

97

97

Phenotype
only

38

83

86

26

53

69

Phen-Gen

43

61

73

92

96

96

0

2

11

70

95

96

8

21

32

11

27

56

Genotype
only

Genotype
only
Phenotype
only

Known
(77%)

Unknown
(23%)

Known
(91%)

Unknown
(9%)

11

Supplementary Table 2
Performance in novel disease gene discovery
The simulations are conducted with OMIM-listed disease symptoms and HGMD reported
variants. In each category, Phen-Gen is evaluated with the knowledge of the respective known
disease gene association masked from the simulation. The results are highlighted. Across all
masked and unknown simulations Phen-Gen assigns the causal variant top rank in 71% of cases.
For a comparison, Phen-Gen’s performance in the known and unknown categories is also
included from Supplementary Table 1. The results indicate a drop in performance for novel
gene discovery in comparison to known associations, and highlight comparable performance to
the true unknown cases. Since prior disease knowledge impacts only the phenotypic part of the
prediction, Phen-Gen’s prediction performance based solely on the phenotype is also included.
Dominant

Recessive

Top
gene
(%)

Top 5
genes
(%)

Top 10
genes
(%)

Top gene
(%)

Top 5
genes (%)

Top 10
genes
(%)

Phen-Gen

93

97

98

97

98

98

Phenotype
only

30

66

72

25

51

68

Phen-Gen

58

78

84

90

97

98

Phenotype
only

13

23

26

12

17

18

Phen-Gen

51

67

72

92

97

97

Phenotype
only

12

26

40

13

29

54

Phen-Gen

87

89

89

87

87

87

Phenotype
only

39

87

89

26

50

65

Phen-Gen

47

61

64

83

87

87

Phenotype
only

5

18

20

14

22

23

Phen-Gen

49

67

70

81

82

82

Phenotype
only

5

20

26

3

16

43

Missense & Nonsense
Known

Masked

Unknown

Splice site
Known

Masked

Unknown

12

Dominant

Recessive

Top
gene
(%)

Top 5
genes
(%)

Top 10
genes
(%)

Top gene
(%)

Top 5
genes (%)

Top 10
genes
(%)

Phen-Gen

94

98

98

97

98

98

Phenotype
only

38

87

89

26

59

73

Phen-Gen

55

69

74

88

97

97

Phenotype
only

12

23

25

11

21

23

Phen-Gen

25

47

75

96

97

97

Phenotype
only

2

12

16

7

25

65

Phen-Gen

93

97

97

96

97

97

Phenotype
only

34

76

80

25

53

69

Phen-Gen

56

73

78

89

96

97

Phenotype
only

12

23

25

12

19

20

Phen-Gen

43

61

73

92

96

96

Phenotype
only

8

21

32

11

27

56

Indel

Known

Masked

Unknown

Combined

Known

Masked

Unknown

13

Supplementary Table 3
Performance when only ESP is used as MAF filter
Performance in simulated patients with OMIM-listed disease symptoms and HGMD reported
variants using only ESP common variants (minor allele frequency >1%) for filtration. The results
when all three databases (ESP, dbSNP, 1000 Genomes) are used to define common variants are
copied from Table 1 to indicate a drop in performance. The data shows that using all three
databases to define common variants, confers a 13-21% advantage.

Dominant

Missense +
Nonsense
Splice site
Indels
Combined

MAF
filtration
database
ESP
All 3
ESP
All 3
ESP
All 3
ESP
All 3

Top
gene
(%)
69
82
69
80
66
80
68
81

Top 5
genes
(%)
81
89
80
85
83
88
82
88

Recessive
Top 10
genes
(%)
84
91
82
85
83
94
84
91

Top
gene
(%)
76
97
73
87
73
97
75
96

Top 5
genes
(%)
92
98
86
87
94
98
92
97

Top 10
genes
(%)
94
98
86
87
95
98
94
97

14

Supplementary Table 4
Performance in diseases with compound heterozygous inheritance pattern
Performance for compound heterozygous mutation pairs in coding and genomic regions is
depicted. The table entries reflect the percentage of simulations in each category with the
indicated result. The results are similar to the 96% observed for recessive simulations in Table 1
for coding variants.
Coding

Genomic

Top gene
(%)

Top 5 genes
(%)

Top 10 genes
(%)

Top gene
(%)

Top 5 genes
(%)

Top 10 genes
(%)

Phen-Gen

97

98

98

30

59

62

Genotype only

25

98

98

8

16

35

15

Supplementary Table 5
Robustness to symptomatic heterogeneity
Performance in 44 disorders with variable symptoms is depicted. There were no indels reported
for recessive disorders and only one genomic variant. Hence simulations for these variants were
omitted. The table entries reflect the percentage of simulations in each category with the
indicated result. This is a 5-7% drop off in performance in comparison to known diseases in
Table 1 (92% for dominant and 96% for recessive). These results highlight Phen-Gen’s
robustness to symptomatic heterogeneity.

Phen-Gen

Missense &
Nonsense
Splice site
Indels
Combined

Top gene
(%)

Dominant
Top 5 genes
(%)

Top 10
genes (%)

Top gene
(%)

Recessive
Top 5 genes
(%)

Top 10
genes (%)

88

95

97

90

95

96

86
87
87

89
91
92

89
94
95

86

88

89

89

94

95

16

Supplementary Table 6
Performance in simulated patients for regulatory predictor
The performance in simulated patients with OMIM listed disease symptoms and HGMD
regulatory disease causal variants is shown. Phen-Gen’s genomic predictor was used for these
simulations. The table entries reflect the percentage of simulations in each category with the
indicated result.
Dominant
Top
Top 5 Top 10
gene genes genes
(%)
(%)
(%)

Top
gene
(%)

Recessive
Top 5
Top 10
genes
genes
(%)
(%)

Combined
(dominant + recessive)
Top
Top 5
Top 10
gene
genes
genes
(%)
(%)
(%)

Regulatory
Phen-Gen

58

64

65

40

61

72

49

62

69

Genotype only

1

2

2

34

51

62

19

29

34

Phenotype only

31

43

54

5

11

26

17

26

39

17

Supplementary Table 7
Performance in real patients
The table reflects performance of Phen-Gen for recessive and X-linked implicated variants in
real familial data5 . The trio IDs correspond to the family identifiers in ref 2. Similarly the gene
classification reflects prior knowledge of the gene’s involvement in intellectual disability as
defined in the original publication. Phen-Gen employs a 1% MAF cutoff whereas the original
publication removed all variants reported to dbSNP or observed in their in-house database. For
the latter screen all variants common amongst the families was employed. The performance
using both these cutoff is depicted.

Trio ID
4
4
4
16
18
25
41
42
72
93
12
12
12
12
24
70

Gene
FANCB
PDHA1
GUCY2F
ENOX2
ARHGEF9
GPM6B
ARHGEF9
DDX26B
PDZD11
TRPC5
SYCP2L
VPS13B
C8orf59
PRUNE2
PCNT
IQGAP2

Classification
Unknown
Known
Unknown
Unknown
Known
Unknown
Known
Unknown
Unknown
Candidate
Unknown
Known
Unknown
Unknown
Known
Unknown

Phen-Gen’s Rank
Inclusive
Filtration criteria
of dbSNP
from ref. 2
MAF<1%
3
18
2
5
1
4
1
2
1
8
1
7
1
1
3
13
3
3
1
4
1
2
4
14
2
4
3
7
2
7
1
6

18

References
1.

Yandell, M. et al. Genome Res. 21, 1529–1542 (2011).

2.

Singleton, M.V et al. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 94, 599–610 (2014).

3.

Sifrim, A. et al. Nat Methods 10, 1083–1084 (2013).

4.

Wu, G., Feng, X. & Stein, L. Genome Biol. 11, R53 (2010).

5.

De Ligt, J. et al. N. Engl. J. Med. 367, 1921–9 (2012).

6.

Van Bokhoven, H. Annu. Rev. Genet. 45, 81–104 (2011).

7.

Robinson, P.N. et al. Genome Res. 24, 340–8 (2014).

8.

Brown, S.D. M. & Moore, M.W. Mamm. Genome 23, 632–640 (2012).

9.

Seok, J. et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, 3507–3512 (2013).

10.

Ward, L. D. & Kellis, M. Science 337, 1675–8 (2012).

11.

MacArthur, D.G. et al. Sci. 335 , 823–828 (2012).

12.

Khurana, E. et al. Science 342, 1235587 (2013).

13.

Hardison, R.C. & Ponting, C.P. Genome Res. 21, 1769–1776 (2011).

14.

Petrovski, S., Wang, Q., Heinzen, E.L., Allen, A.S. & Goldstein, D.B. PLoS Genet. 9, (2013).

19

Supplementary Figure 1
Overall Workflow.
Patient disease symptoms are matched against known disorders and the probability of a symptomatic match is assigned
to genes implicated for the respective disorder. These probabilities are permeated to known gene associates using a
random walk with restart on the interaction network. In parallel the patient’s sequencing data is analyzed and the
damaging impact of each variant estimated and pooled within genes. These two predictions are combined to implicate the
gene(s) involved.

Supplementary Figure 2
Distribution of SIFT and PolyPhen-2 scores for damaging and benign nonsynonymous mutations.
The distribution of SIFT and PolyPhen-2 scores for HGMD-reported damaging nonsynonymous mutations and neutral
nonsynonymous fixed substitutions inferred from human-chimp alignment are shown. The plots indicate general
agreement between the two methods.

Supplementary Figure 3
Deleteriousness predictions around splice site.
The figure depicts the probability of deleteriousness around donor and acceptor sites for splice site mutations.

Supplementary Figure 4
Probability of deleteriousness using the genomic predictor
The figure illustrates the predicted deleteriousness of different combination of five annotations: GERP++ (G), PhyloP (P),
near-genic (N), transcription factor binding sites (T), and DNASE hypersensitive sites (D). The predictions are binned
according to the number of annotations (shown on the x-axis). Each bin is further canonically sorted based on the fore
mentioned order of annotations.

Supplementary Figure 5
Confidence intervals for positive and benign mutation set combinations.
The 90% confidence intervals of different combination of genomic annotations are shown. The order from Figure S5 is
maintained. With the four sub-figures representing combinations of the two positive sets (HGMD and GWAS) and the two
neutral sets (common variation in dbSNP and Complete Genomics MAF>0.30), respectively.

Supplementary Figure 6
Histogram of null distribution of deleteriousness of genes.
The top 1 percentile of damaging variants in each gene is shown. The histogram of this null distribution cutoff for all genes
under dominant and recessive inheritance pattern for coding and genomic predictors is shown. Most genes do not harbor
any putative damaging variants and hence the distributions are dominated by the left most bar; which has been truncated
for better visual representation.

Supplementary Figure 7
Performance of variant predictors
The distribution of damaging probabilities assigned to different classes of HGMD variants is shown. The top three panels
employ the coding predictor. A genomic predictor was used for the bottom panel and applied to noncoding regulatory
variants. The histograms depict the distribution of the scored variants. The pie charts on the right explicate the distribution
of omitted and predicted variants in each category. Common variants (light blue) were observed in 1000 Genomes, ESP,
or dbSNP with MAF ≥ 0.01. Commonly mutated genes indicate that the variants failed to exceed the null distribution of the
respective gene (turquoise). Missed indicates that the variant eluded our regions of interest (dark blue).

Supplementary Figure 8
Prediction of heterozygous variants.
The figure depicts how compound heterozygous variants are evaluated. When both damaging variants reside within the
coding region, the coding predictor is used to estimate the damaging impact of these variants. In cases when one or both
variants lay outside the exon boundaries, both variants are evaluated using the genomic predictor.

Supplementary Figure 9
Phen-Gen and VAAST comparison for phenotypically heterogeneous disorders.
The comparison of Phen-Gen and VAAST in simulations using 44 phenotypically heterogeneous disorders and
nonsynonymous mutations in HGMD is shown. In both panels the ability of both methods to narrow down the true gene
search within 1, 5 and 10 genes is depicted. For Phen-Gen, the bar is split into the predictive power based on genotypic
prediction and the added advantage gained from disease symptoms. VAAST only uses the genomic data and assign
multiple genes the same rank at the top of the order. For a fair comparison, the true gene was assigned the worst,
average and best rank among similarly ranked peers. The three components of the bar reflect the performance across
these scenarios.

