Gabora, L. & Lipo, C. (2012). Review of E. Cochrane & A. Gardner (eds.) Evolutionary and
Interpretive Archaeologies: A Dialogue. KIVA: The Journal of Southwestern Anthropology and
History, 87(1), 103–108.

Book Review of
Evolutionary and Interpretive Archaeologies
Edited by Ethan E. Cochrane and Andrew Gardner
Published by the University College London Institute of Archaeology in partnership with
Left Coast Press (http://www.lcoastpress.com/book.php?id=325)
For Kiva: Journal of Southwestern Anthropology and History
Requested by Jeryll Moreno
Liane Gabora
University of British Columbia
and
Carl P. Lipo
California State University Long Beach

	  

1	  

Gabora, L. & Lipo, C. (2012). Review of E. Cochrane & A. Gardner (eds.) Evolutionary and
Interpretive Archaeologies: A Dialogue. KIVA: The Journal of Southwestern Anthropology and
History, 87(1), 103–108.

Evolutionary and Interpretive Archaeologies, edited by Ethan E. Cochrane and Andrew
Gardner, grew out of a seminar at the Institute for Archaeology at University College
London in 2007. It consists of 15 chapters by archaeologists who self-identify themselves
as practitioners who emphasize the benefits of “evolutionary” or “interpretive”
approaches to the study of the archaeological record. While the authors’ theoretical views
are dichotomous, the editors' aim for the book as a whole is not to expound on the
differences between these two kinds of archaeology but to bring forward a richer
understanding of the discipline and to highlight areas of mutual concern. Some chapters
come across as a bit of a sales pitch, but the majority of the contributions emphasize how
each approach can be productively used to address the goals of the other. The book seeks
to contribute to a mutually beneficial and more productive discipline, and overall, it
succeeds in this effort.
The first chapter, by the editors, discusses the history and present state of the
divide between evolutionary and interpretive approaches, and outlines the stance they
each take with respect to a number of unifying themes in archaeological research. The
first theme focuses on the subject matter of archaeology. Evolutionary approaches, they
claim, aim to characterize patterns of stability and change in the distribution of artifact
variants using a conceptual framework based in Darwinian evolutionary theory.
Interpretive approaches, in contrast, which emerged as a reaction against processualist
reductionism, while widely variable in their details, tend to emphasize the role and
perception of acting individuals. While interpretive accounts of the past view are
commonly viewed as less scientific in comparison to evolutionary accounts, those who
pursue interpretations forsake falsifiable explanations for reconstructions of the social,

	  

2	  

Gabora, L. & Lipo, C. (2012). Review of E. Cochrane & A. Gardner (eds.) Evolutionary and
Interpretive Archaeologies: A Dialogue. KIVA: The Journal of Southwestern Anthropology and
History, 87(1), 103–108.

psychological and cultural contexts in which actors interacted to produce history. A
second, related theme centers on a discussion of methods, though this topic is a minor
one in the practice of interpretive archaeology. A third theme explores how evolutionary
approaches tend to be generalizing whereas interpretive approaches tend to be
particularizing. A final theme delves into the different views on the nature of existence
and how these affect the characteristics of evolutionary and interpretive archaeology.
The remainder of the book following this introductory chapter is broken into three
Parts. Part One, titled ‘Theoretical Concerns’, consists of four chapters that aim to
characterize the theoretical groundwork underlying evolutionary and interpretive
approaches. The first, by Cochrane, explains how methods such as seriation and
engineering analysis are used to arrange and describe artifacts using concepts generalized
from evolutionary theory and memetics. Here, the effort to bridge the conceptual
paradigms falters somewhat, since memetics is a problematic derivation of evolutionary
theory that has largely failed to lead to significantly new understandings of cultural
change. A subsequent chapter by Gardner argues that archaeology is incomplete without
taking into account the meaning of material culture as it is actively produced by those
who make, use, and consume it. Gardner emphasizes that interpretive archaeologies use
agency theory to understand the relationships between acting individuals, societies and
institutions. The study of these contexts clearly has some relevancy in evolutionary based
cultural transmission studies, since these interactions form the environment in which
cultural inheritance takes place, and this must ultimately be considered in any
dynamically sufficient explanatory framework. Bentley’s chapter discusses the oftenconfused concepts of style and function, and argues how concepts from population

	  

3	  

Gabora, L. & Lipo, C. (2012). Review of E. Cochrane & A. Gardner (eds.) Evolutionary and
Interpretive Archaeologies: A Dialogue. KIVA: The Journal of Southwestern Anthropology and
History, 87(1), 103–108.

genetics such as drift and selection can be applied to cultural variability. The last chapter
of Part One by Sillar discusses creativity and agency with respect to the Inca state. Sillars
argues that innovation does not occur de novo, and thus a full explanation of change must
include an understanding the motivations and intensions unique to particular groups in
particular times and places. While interesting, his explanation makes use of circular
reasoning in which new variants are used to signal the intentions of those who create
them.
Part Two, titled ‘Contexts of Study’, consists of seven chapters that address a
variety of specific concepts that are used to make sense of the archaeological record. The
chapters by James and Layton focus on notions of violence and conflict. Both chapters
argue that archaeological explanations must link specific interpretations of the
archaeological record using broadly conceived evolutionary frameworks that address
perceived occurrences of violence while recognizing the role of cultural structures and
biases. The chapter by Sommer discusses interpretation of the archaeological record in
terms of cultural groups, tribes, and ethnicity. The next chapter by Glatz, Candler, and
Steele discusses how distributions expected by neutral theory (as per population genetic
explanations) can be used to interpret patterns of ceramic production at BogazköyHattusa. A chapter by Whitehouse asks whether it is possible to reconcile biological and
cultural approaches to embodiment, a topic that relies on principles argued to have
general applicability. Tehrani’s chapter argues that cladistics, a method borrowed from
(and tailored to) biology for arranging sets of entities into branching trees of relatedness,
has been applied to the study of historical relationships amongst artifacts. The concluding
chapter in this section by Hamilton discusses issues pertaining to archaeological aspects

	  

4	  

Gabora, L. & Lipo, C. (2012). Review of E. Cochrane & A. Gardner (eds.) Evolutionary and
Interpretive Archaeologies: A Dialogue. KIVA: The Journal of Southwestern Anthropology and
History, 87(1), 103–108.

of the complex ways in which humans understand and interact with physical landscapes,
though it is unclear how this might accomplished in any specific empirical case.
Part Three, titled ‘Future Directions’, consists of three chapters that integrate
concerns discussed earlier in the book and attempt to delineate the distinctive features of
a coherent, if multi-stranded approach. Colleran and Mace argue that there has been a
tendency to characterize evolutionary and interpretive approaches in extreme terms that
do not do justice to the richness of these traditions. A chapter by Johnson discusses
evolutionary archaeology from an interpretive perspective, and attempts to outline the
goals and intellectual aims of archaeology as a discipline. In the final chapter, Shennan
argues for a Darwinian evolution-based scientific archaeology, and speculates about the
directions in which the field is headed.
Overall, the book is successful in its mission to highlight and integrate different
approaches to the study of the archaeological record. As one reads through the chapters, it
is clear that the two approaches to archaeological research are far from simplistic, and are
not as dichotomous as the title suggests. This may produce a degree of confusion for
anyone seeking a clear and useful answer to the question of which approach leads to
superior interpretations. Interpretive concepts such as violence and relatedness are readily
conceived in evolutionary terms, but it is less clear whether ‘evolutionary’ notions such
as style and function can be profitably used in the construction of interpretations about
personal motivation. It is also not clear that evolutionary approaches are better off with
the introduction of ideas derived from interpretive efforts. One can argue that increasing
the number of parts used in any conceptual frameworks can lead to “better” theory since
the world is always more complex than the models we use to explain it. However, this

	  

5	  

Gabora, L. & Lipo, C. (2012). Review of E. Cochrane & A. Gardner (eds.) Evolutionary and
Interpretive Archaeologies: A Dialogue. KIVA: The Journal of Southwestern Anthropology and
History, 87(1), 103–108.

approach to theory construction confuses the real world with the tools we use to explain
it: the tools are of our construction that are merely sufficient to account for the world to
the degree to which we demand it to be explained. Thus, arbitrarily throwing in more
complexity does not necessarily lead to increased explanatory power. For example,
evolutionary accounts of populations interacting on landscapes may or may not benefit
from the ‘hypercomplexity’ involved in emic understandings of landscapes.
In this sense, the book is not entirely successful. Its failure has much to do with
the way “evolutionary” and “interpretative” are treated as empirical entities rather than
labels for analytic classes. Since labels are the product of classification, the classificatory
units depend entirely on what one is trying to do. Lacking such a purpose, units are
meaningless. Instead of starting with evolutionary and interpretive archaeology as a given,
the editors could have identified the contributions with respect to specific goals in the
explanation of the record. The discussion then might have distinguished those projects in
which science is viewed as merely rigorous study, versus those that view it as the
development and testing of empirically falsifiable theories. We suspect this might reveal
that it is not necessarily the case that all parts of a single argument by a single author can
readily meet the definition of one kind of archaeology or the other. There might still be
two categories that include interpretation (defined as systematic descriptions of the causal
agents that are recognized/asserted as playing a role in observed empirical phenomena)
but this class of approach would be functionally distinguished from scientific
archaeology (those studies that seek to use theory to generate observations that can be
falsified). What one would find is that most of the chapters in this volume that are more
or less “evolutionary” do not necessarily end up in the class of scientific efforts. For

	  

6	  

Gabora, L. & Lipo, C. (2012). Review of E. Cochrane & A. Gardner (eds.) Evolutionary and
Interpretive Archaeologies: A Dialogue. KIVA: The Journal of Southwestern Anthropology and
History, 87(1), 103–108.

example, while making use of evolutionary terms, Bogazkoy-Hattusa’s chapter on neutral
traits in pottery types remains unconcerned about the linkage between the concepts used,
measurement units (here, ceramic taxonomy), and the empirical record, and thus does not
generate potentially falsifiable statements. Herein lies the source of the confusing overlap
between what are initially described as distinct approaches to archaeology. Lacking
attention to linking theory with empirical expectations of the archaeological record, the
volume’s evolutionary archaeology is structurally identical to interpretive accounts.
Absent from the volume are concerns over measurement: how do we know we are
measuring the world in a way that we can make statements that can be wrong? For the
most part, the chapters assume the existence of ‘data’ in the archaeological record with
standard practices and units serving as the means of investigation. However, when
falsifiability is of little concern, one narrative is as good as another despite the language
used in their construction. In these cases, evolutionary theory is simply used as an
interpretive algorithm. Appearing to be evolutionary is not the same as producing a
scientific explanation. In the end, the practical differences of the ‘interpretive’ and
‘evolutionary’ approaches to archaeology in this volume are much smaller than the
ontological divide that separates them.
The book does not address serious concerns that have been raised concerning the
application of biological origins of evolutionary theory to the social sciences (Atran,
2001; Fracchia & Lewontin, 1999; Gabora, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2011; Kauffman, 1999;
Mayr, 1996; Tëmkin & Eldredge, 2007). In LG's view, some of the chapters display
evidence of misunderstanding and mis-application of evolutionary theory, and a tendency
to equate evolution with Darwinism, though there exist non-Darwinian evolutionary

	  

7	  

Gabora, L. & Lipo, C. (2012). Review of E. Cochrane & A. Gardner (eds.) Evolutionary and
Interpretive Archaeologies: A Dialogue. KIVA: The Journal of Southwestern Anthropology and
History, 87(1), 103–108.

approaches to archaeology (e.g., Lipo, 2006; Gabora et al., 2011; Veloz, Tëmkin &
Gabora, 2012). Such approaches capitalize on scientific tools and techniques to
incorporate the kinds of contextual, nondeterministic factors as well as motivational
factors and cognitive and processes by which humans extract meaning and forge
understanding, which as interpretive archaeologists argue profoundly impact patterns of
stability and change in the design of human-made objects.
Despite this deficiency, the volume demonstrates how evolutionary language can
be applied to a wide variety of phenomena traditionally considered in the domain of
anthropological narratives of agents and their motivations. In and of itself, this is a
valuable contribution to the discipline. Using evolutionary theory does not limit one to
esoteric details that lay outside the interests of most anthropologists. A variety of topics
ranging from violence to the body to ethnicity to creativity can be cast in terms of
evolutionary concepts. A major challenge is to characterize artifacts and their changes
over time in terms of meaningful measurement units, incorporating not just the sorts of
vertically transmitted perceptual attributes that are amenable to a biological inheritance
model, but also conceptual factors in adaptive cultural change such as analogical transfer,
competition, or complementarity amongst artifacts.
On the whole, the book is interesting, informative, and definitely worth reading. It
demonstrates the variety of complementary approaches by which, using the remnants of
our ancestors’ efforts to master their world, express themselves, and survive, we are
piecing together a coherent picture of how our humanness emerged. If combined with
attention to measurement, and more formal (as opposed to pop science) understanding of

	  

8	  

Gabora, L. & Lipo, C. (2012). Review of E. Cochrane & A. Gardner (eds.) Evolutionary and
Interpretive Archaeologies: A Dialogue. KIVA: The Journal of Southwestern Anthropology and
History, 87(1), 103–108.

the strengths and weaknesses of how evolutionary theory is currently being applied to
culture, it may be a pivotal stepping-stone toward the archaeology of the future.

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by grants to Gabora from the National Science and Engineering
Research Council of Canada, and the Fund for Scientific Research of Flanders, Belgium.
Lipo would like to thank Mark E. Madsen and Timothy D. Hunt for fruitful discussions
in this area of archaeological inquiry.

References
Atran, S. 2001. The trouble with memes: Inference versus imitation in cultural creation.
Human Nature 12, 351–381.
Fracchia J., & Lewontin, R. C. (1999). Does culture evolve? History and Theory 38, 52–
78.
Gabora, L. (2004). Ideas are not replicators but minds are. Biology & Philosophy, 19(1),
127-143.
Gabora, L. (2006). The fate of evolutionary archaeology: Survival or extinction? World
Archaeology, 38(4), 690-696.
Gabora, L. (2008). The cultural evolution of socially situated cognition. Cognitive
Systems Research, 9(1-2), 104-113.
Gabora, L. (2011). Five clarifications about cultural evolution. Journal of Cognition and
Culture, 11, 61-83.

	  

9	  

Gabora, L. & Lipo, C. (2012). Review of E. Cochrane & A. Gardner (eds.) Evolutionary and
Interpretive Archaeologies: A Dialogue. KIVA: The Journal of Southwestern Anthropology and
History, 87(1), 103–108.

Gabora, L., Leijnen, S., Veloz, T., & Lipo, C. (2011). A non-phylogenetic conceptual
network architecture for organizing classes of material artifacts into cultural
lineages. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
2923-2928). July 20-23, 2011, Boston MA.
Kauffman, S. (1999). Darwinism, neoDarwinism, and the autocatalytic model of culture:
Commentary on the evolution of culture. Psycholoquy, 10, 1–4.
Lipo, C. P. (2006). The resolution of cultural phylogenies using graphs. In Lipo, C. P.,
O’Brien, M. J., Collard, M., & Shena, S. J. (Eds.) Mapping our Ancestors. New
Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.
Mayr, E. (1996). What is a species, and what is not? Philosophy of Science 63, 262–277.
Tëmkin, I., & Eldredge, N. (2007). Phylogenetics and material cultural evolution.
Current Anthropology, 48, 146−153.
Veloz, T., Tempkin, I., & Gabora, L. (2012). A conceptual network-based approach to
inferring cultural phylogenies. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society. August 1-4, 2011, Sapporo Japan.

	  

10	  

