On RAF sets and autocatalytic cycles in random
reaction networks
Alessandro Filisetti1 , Marco Villani2,1 , Chiara Damiani3 , Alex Graudenzi3 ,
Andrea Roli4 , Wim Hordijk5 , and Roberto Serra2,1

arXiv:1502.00793v1 [nlin.AO] 3 Feb 2015

1
2

European Centre for Living Technology, University Ca’ Foscari of Venice, Italy
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Department of Physics, Informatics and
Mathematics
3
University of Milano Bicocca, Department of Informatics, Systems and
Communication
4
University of Bologna, Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
5
SmartAnalytiX.com, Lausanne, Switzerland

Abstract. The emergence of autocatalytic sets of molecules seems to
have played an important role in the origin of life context. Although the
possibility to reproduce this emergence in laboratory has received considerable attention, this is still far from being achieved.
In order to unravel some key properties enabling the emergence of structures potentially able to sustain their own existence and growth, in this
work we investigate the probability to observe them in ensembles of
random catalytic reaction networks characterized by different structural
properties.
From the point of view of network topology, an autocatalytic set have
been defined either in term of strongly connected components (SCCs) or
as reflexively autocatalytic and food-generated sets (RAFs).
We observe that the average level of catalysis differently affects the probability to observe a SCC or a RAF, highlighting the existence of a region
where the former can be observed, whereas the latter cannot. This parameter also affects the composition of the RAF, which can be further
characterized into linear structures, autocatalysis or SCCs.
Interestingly, we show that the different network topology (uniform as
opposed to power-law catalysis systems) does not have a significantly divergent impact on SCCs and RAFs appearance, whereas the proportion
between cleavages and condensations seems instead to play a role.
A major factor that limits the probability of RAF appearance and that
may explain some of the difficulties encountered in laboratory seems to
be the presence of molecules which can accumulate without being substrate or catalyst of any reaction.

1

Introduction

The dynamics of sets of interacting molecular species, in those cases where new
molecular types can be created by the interactions among some of the existing
ones, pose formidable problems. This study is of the outmost importance in

researches on the origin of life (OoL) but its applications might be interesting
also within laboratories or industrial applications.
When only few new molecular types can be generated, the complications
are manageable. The actual interesting case is the one where many types might
appear. In order to study the generic features of this kind of systems, the use
of random molecular species has been introduced [14,10,12,11], in particular
in the context of the so-called binary polymer model [21,9,22] where all the
species are linear strings made out of a binary alphabet. Since catalysis plays a
prominent role in biological processes, it is often also assumed that only catalyzed
reactions take place at an appreciable rate. In the spirit of searching for generic
properties, randomness is also extensively used to determine catalysts: every
molecular species has a certain fixed probability to catalyze a certain reaction.
In this way it is possible to represent the reactions as a directed graph,
where there is an edge from a molecular species to all those species whose production reactions are catalyzed by that species. To complete the picture, it is
worth stressing that only two types of reactions are allowed, condensation (which
creates a new string by concatenating two previous ones) and cleavage (which
generates two strings by separating two parts of a preexisting one). The model
is described in more details in section 2.
The graph described above links catalysts to the products of the reactions
they catalyze; it can therefore be considered as a catalyst → product graph. The
products may in turn catalyze other reactions. It has been often suggested that
the presence of cycles (similar to those that are found in present-day biological
systems [1,6,7,8,9,20,10,12,29]) plays a key role in the dynamics of these systems,
since cycles of catalysts give rise to a collectively autocatalytic system. To be
precise, we will call SCC a Strongly Connected Component [5] of the network
described above, i.e. a subset of the entire network where each node is reachable
(directly or indirectly) from every other node in the subset. A SCC is therefore
composed of one or more molecular types where the formation of each member
is catalyzed by at least another member of the SCC.
While some models (e.g. [19]) suppose that the presence of a catalyst is
sufficient for a reaction to occur, in the binary polymer model considered here,
in order for cleavage or condensation reactions to occur, the substrates must be
present as well. These substrates may belong to what is called the food set F,
which involves for example those molecules of the feed those are supposed to
be freely available or to be continuously supplied from outside; these molecules
might or might not have catalytic properties. Substrates that are not in the food
set may be present too, i.e. molecular species that take part in reactions and are
produced and consumed by the system itself.
The importance of the substrates is properly captured by the notion of Reflexive Autocatalytic and Food generated (RAF) sets, that is a set of molecular
types and reactions where each member can be generated by other members of
the set through a series of catalyzed reactions, starting from F [16,18,17]. Note
that the identification of this structure needs knowledge about all the chemical

species (substrates, products, catalysts) involved in the reaction scheme: a more
detailed description can be found in section 2.
SCCs and RAFs are indeed important tools to analyze and understand the
structure of sets of interacting molecules: note that an SCC may not be a RAF,
given that substrates are not taken into account, and that a RAF may also not
be an SCC, given that cyclic structures are not strictly required (a RAF may
turn out not to have cycles if at least one of the species of the food set is also a
catalyst).
Here below we analyze how frequent SCCs and RAFs are as a function of
the average level of catalysis hci (the average number of reactions catalyzed by
each chemical species). Note that the behavior of the model turns out to be
trivial when hci is very small (no SCCs and no RAFs are observed) or very high
(the system is full of both). Instead, it is interesting to consider an intermediate
region. An outcome of the present work is that there exists a region of hci, similar
results have observed in [17] observing both RA and RAF sets, that we term
the gap region, where SCCs can be observed, but RAFs are not (these sentences
are to be interpreted in a statistical sense, see the results in section 3 for the
details). Therefore, in this region, the very existence of cycles in the catalyst →
product networks does not imply that they actually affect in a sensible way the
main network properties.
In the present work we will investigate protocell systems, compartments
containing sets of molecules able to collectively self-replicate, able to undergo
fission and proliferate [34,26]. Several protocell architectures have been proposed [30,4,13,15,23,24,27,32,33], most of them identify the compartment with a
lipid vesicle that may spontaneously fission under suitable circumstances. In the
specific, we are here interested on a very simple protocell model, where a semipermeable membrane embrace a small physical space where all the key reactions
take place in the aqueous phase, and it allows the passage of small molecules
only [31].
In the present work we investigate sets of autocatalytic reactions where a
constant concentration of some small chemical species is guaranteed: this situation can be maintained by chemo-physical systems as protocells (compartments
containing sets of molecules able to collectively self-replicate, able to undergo fission and proliferate [34,26,31]—an interesting system for both Origin of Life and
technological themes) or CSTRs (Continuous-flow Stirred-Tank Reactor [28]).
Thus, the topological structures having the highest probabilities to emerge in
such systems, by taking a purely graph theoretical approach, will be investigated,
as in previous papers by Kauffman, Steel and Hordijk [17,18], and the existence
of the gap region will be shown. It is however tempting to speculate about the
behavior of a truly dynamical model in this region.
We have already shown in our previous works [14,12,11,10] that, for hci values close to the threshold for SCCs appearance, those that are observed tend
to be fragile, some of their links refer to very rare reactions and do not really
affect the behavior of the system [12,10]. We guess that this behavior is related
to the absence of RAFs, and that by exploring the region close to the second

threshold (i.e. the one for RAFs) one should be able to find more productive networks. Moreover, we noted that (within the size of the systems we explored) the
thresholds of SCCs and RAFs appearance in uniform and power-law catalysis
systems are very similar. Interestingly, RAF systems at different average levels
of catalysis are composed of different mixtures of autocatalysis, SCCs and linear
structures. Different proportions of cleavages and condensations lead to different
probabilities of RAFs appearance, and the presence of a large fraction of reactions producing long molecules (condensations ligating long chemical species)
could inhibit the RAFs appearance as we will be discussed in section 3. So, the
RAF presence is influenced in different ways by different characteristics of the
chemical system.
In section 3 the main results are presented, while the discussion of further
work is deferred to the final section 4.

2

Description of the model and network topologies

A detailed description of the theoretical model can be found in Kauffman [22,21]
and in Filisetti et al. [12,10]. In the following only the main features, useful for
the scope of this work, will be summarized. Random catalytic reaction networks
are composed of a set of species S = (s1 , s2 , · · · , sn ). In particular, species are
concatenation of characters from left to right taken from a finite alphabet, in
this work a binary alphabet A = {1; 0}. Thus, the cardinality |S| of S is |S| =
2M +1 − 2, where M is the maximum length of the system. In accordance with
the original version of the model [21], each si ∈ S can take part to two types
of reaction only: condensation, where two species are concatenated to create a
longer species (e.g. 100 + 10 → 10010), and cleavage, where a species is divided
in two shorter species (e.g. 1001 → 10 + 01); si can be either a substrate or
a product according to the position within the reaction scheme. Each species
has an independent probability psi = 1/|S| to be selected as a substrate for a
reaction, hence in case of condensation two species will be selected while in case
of cleavage just one species will be selected. The overall number of conceivable
reactions R̂, i.e., all the reaction schemes allowed by the combination of all the
possible |S| molecular species, varies according to the constructional method
adopted; in this work we typically adopt the method described in the following.6
Reactions are created so that the product of the reaction cannot be longer
than M , hence the number of conceivable reactions is equal to:
R̂ = 2 ·

M
X

2i · (i − 1)

(1)

i=2

where the multiplicative term 2 indicates that each reaction scheme is in principle valid both for cleavage reactions and condensation reactions.7 Not all the
6
7

The only exception is presented in the final part of the results section.
Forward and backward reactions, during the creation of the reactions graph, are in
principle handled as two separated reactions.

reactions belonging to R̂ are catalyzed. So, it is possible to compute an average
level of catalysis hci = R/|S| which denotes the average number of reactions catalyzed by each single species.8 Therefore, each catalysis can be represented as a
pair (rk , si ) where rk ∈ R̂ stands for the selected reaction and si ∈ S behaves as
a catalyst for rk .
The procedure of catalysis assignation leads to different catalytic reaction
network topologies. In this work, two kinds of topologies will be assessed, based
on uniform and preferential assignation. In the former case, each si ∈ S has the
same probability pik = 1/|S| to be a catalyst for a whatever reaction k, while in
the latter case pik is determined by the chemical characteristics of the involved
species. In real systems, researchers observed that very few species can catalyze
many reactions, whereas many species catalyze only one reaction, or none. This
situation can be represented by means of a catalysis distribution having the
shape of a power law, our second topology.9
The entire set C = (rk , sj ) of catalysis form what we call “artificial chemistry”, hence different random instantiations of C lead to different random catalytic reaction networks, i.e., different “artificial chemistries”; in figure 1 an
example of a complete reaction graph is depicted while in figure 2 the catalyst
→ product representation of the graph shown in figure 1 is reported.
The structural role of backward reactions is evaluated as well. Thus, artificial
chemistries imposing the presence of both forward and reverse reactions will be
created.10 It is worthwhile to notice that introducing reverse reactions leads to a
double number of reactions catalyzed, so in case of reverse reactions the number
of reactions to catalyze is divided by 2, R̂ → R̂/2.
Analysis will be carried out measuring the emergence of reflexively autocatalytic sets (RAF sets) on the complete graph CRN = (S, R, C), where C represents catalysis, and investigating the strongly connected components emerging in
the graph representation considering catalysts and products only, hence showing
the catalytic activity of the system without taking care of the presence and the
nature of the substrates. In figure 1 two examples of RAF sets and two SCCs
are shown. In particular, the group of molecular species and reactions belonging
8

9

10

Since different M will be assessed, in this work we prefer to adopt the average level of
catalysis hci, as in [16], instead of the standard reaction probability p, as we adopted
in our previous works [10,12], and Kauffman [21] and others [2,25] in important
works on this topic. Nevertheless, according to |S|, it is always possible to move
from hci to p and vice-versa.
We obtain the power law distribution by slightly modifying the algorithm proposed
by Barabási and Albert [3]. We increase pik as a function of the already catalyzed
reactions, i.e., the probability to catalyze a reaction is weighted with the number
P|S|
of reactions already catalyzed so that pik = #ri / z=1 #rz , where #ri and #rz
indicate the number of reactions already catalyzed by the i-th and the z-th species
respectively. In such a way, we obtain a power-law distribution in the number of
reactions each chemical species can catalyze.
Since the analysis are static and only statistic structural properties of the networks
will be assessed, the choice on which reaction is the direct one and which is the
reverse one is only implementative and does not affect the analysis.

Fig. 1. The picture shows an example of representation of a catalytic reaction network
by means of a complete reaction graph, taking into account both molecular species and
reactions. Circles stand for molecular species and in particular bold circles represent
species belonging to the food set F . Squares depict reactions, straight arrows indicate
the participation of a species to the reaction as substrate (edge points to the reaction)
or product (edge starts from the reaction). Catalysis are represented by dotted gray
arrows. For the sake of comprehension, both molecular species and reactions forming
RAFs and SCCs are grouped together.

to the group named “RAF + SCC” form a SCC and a RAF at the same time.
On the opposite, the other two reaction structures are, from left to right, a SCC
only and a RAF set only.

3

Results

As discussed above, we investigate here catalytic reaction networks, where only
small molecular species have a constant concentration (this situation can be
maintained by protocells [31], or CSTR systems [12]). In the following, scenarios
where the length of the buffered species (the “foodset” of the from which RAF
structures are built) ranges from 2 (|S| = 6) to 4 (|S| = 62) will be considered.
We are interested now in analyzing the role of different scenarios on both
the presence and the internal structure of RAFs within protocells. The assessed
scenarios involve different distributions of the chemicals’ catalyzing capabilities
(a uniform distribution, and a slightly more realistic power-law distribution,
which allows the presence of a little number of highly versatile catalysts), the
presence or absence of backward reactions, and the possibility for long chemical
species to be not suitable for participating in any reaction, leading in such a
way to the accumulation of useless chemical species (for example, because lack
of solubility or folding difficulties).

Fig. 2. The picture shows the catalyst → product representation of the complete graph
C shown in figure 2. In this representation just the catalytic activity of the reaction
network is depicted, and no information about the substrate of the reactions are present.
Circles stand for molecular species and in particular bold circles represent species
belonging to the food set F . In this case straight arrows indicate the catalysis of a
particular molecular species by means of its catalyst. By means of this representation,
the two SCCs are clearly visible and they are formed from s1 1, s1 2, s1 3 and s1 4, s1 6, s1 7
respectively.

3.1

Strongly Connected Components and RAFs

The first observation regards the presence of SCCs and RAFs within the reaction graphs in accordance with a foodset composed of species up to length 2
only, i.e., when the membrane allows the transfer of chemicals having maximum
length 2. Figure 3 shows the fraction of network instances showing at least 1
SCC (1 RAF), by varying hci and M . It can be observed that the SCCs and
RAFs transition zones significantly differ (the higher the maximum length of
the system, the higher the transition slope): the vast region between 1.0 and
2.5 levels of catalysis is therefore rich of SCC structures unable to self-sustain
because the failed fulfilling the closure condition. 11
The showed case regards scale-free topologies without backward reactions
(obviously, in these experiments we maintain constant the total number of reactions). It is worth mentioning that the bias induced on the system topology
by the pairing of forward-backward reactions do not change the positions of the
transition zones nor their slopes (data not shown here), as long as condensation
and cleavages are equally present - we will discuss the effect of uneven presence
of condensation and cleavages in the next paragraph. Remarkably, almost iden11

It is important to notice that in [17] the transition is found at 1.25. Such a difference is basically related to a different way to count forward and reverse reactions.
Hordijk [17] consider both forward and backward reactions as a unique reaction
whereas in our work, though it is clear that they account for the same reaction
scheme, we consider them as two different reactions.

tical behaviors hold for random topologies having the same number of chemical
species and reactions (data not shown, and [17]).12

Fig. 3. The fraction of simulations showing at least 1 RAF (left) and 1 SCC (right), by
varying hci and M in networks with forward reactions only. F contains all the species
up to length 2. On the x-axis the average level of catalysis hci is represented while
on the y-axis the fraction of network instances (out of 1000 networks for each hci) is
depicted.

3.2

The inner RAF structure

The aforementioned results are derived from systems with protocell membranes
that allow the diffusion of chemical species up to length 2 ( “BU F2 ” scenario).
Since F does not show any catalytic activity, in that case all RAFs are necessarily
composed of at least one SCC. On the contrary, if we extend the membrane semipermeability to longer species, some of these objects may be able to catalyze
some chemical reactions: this is a crucial change, because the formation of RAFs
composed of linear structures (on the catalyst → products graph) turn out to
be possible, thus catalytic roots are buffered ( “BU F3 ” scenario).
This change in F composition has an apparently huge effect on the presence
of RAF, which appears also at low level of catalysis (figure 4); note however that
the difference among chemistries with different maximum lengths M ( “MaxLen
M ” systems) consists mainly in lower and lower probabilities of choosing the
buffered species as root of linear structures on the catalyst → products graph
12

In [17], the authors show the so-called RA sets—which are reflexively autocatalytic
but not necessarily food-generated—whose transition and nature correspond to that
of SCC, where the transitions happen on the same zones of scale-free topologies in
case of non catalytic activity of the foodset molecular species, i.e, “BU F2 ” scenario
in this work.

Fig. 4. TOP: Fraction of simulations showing at least 1 RAF. MIDDLE: fraction of
RAFs having at least 1 SCC. BOTTOM: fraction of RAFs having at least 1 autocatalysis. On the x-axis hci is represented, F is composed of all the species up to length 2
(left panel) and 3 (right panel). For each hci and for each value of M , 1000 network
instances have been created. For computational reasons, once the 100% of networks
with a specific hci contain at least a RAF set, the system automatically goes to the
next M , thus in some cases the analysis on SCC does not reach a hci = 4, the maximum
level of catalysis evaluated.

(a more interesting use of the “MaxLen M ” scenarios is presented in the next
paragraph). Indeed, the presence of the 2.5 threshold can be grasped on the
final part of “MaxLen 8” scenarios: it is a clue that the line showing greatest
chemistries (where there is a very low probability of choosing small molecules as
catalysts) tends towards the plot of “BU F2 ” scenario (where small molecules

are not catalysts). Such ample systems (and the “BU F2 ” scenario as well) may
represent a good approximation of real chemistries.
More interesting differences are observed when comparing the fraction of systems having at least one SCC or one autocatalysis within the obtained RAFs. 13
At low catalysis levels, within the “BU F2 ” scenario, almost all RAFs contain
an autocatalysis, whereas the formation of other SCC structures inside the RAF
is unlikely; on the contrary, as the average catalysis level grows up, the fraction of RAFs entailing an SSC tends to 1 (slightly before the 2.5 zone) - note
that these RAFs still have an high probability of containing an autocatalysis as
well. The situation within the “BU F3 ” scenario differs substantially: the sum
of SCCs and autocatalysis do not reach the 100%, and this gap increases as the
maximum allowed length decreases, that is, the prevailing structures for a large
zone of catalysis level are linear chains on the catalyst → product graph. SCCs
and autocatalysis play a minor role. 14
Within a scenario that allows the diffusion of chemical species up to length 4
(data not shown here), the growth in the probability to observe a RAF happens
even earlier than in the “BU F3 ” scenario, whereas the presence of SCCs and
autocatalysis within the RAF is almost identical between the two cases (indeed,
the probability of having SCCs and autocatalysis are identical, not depending
on the number of the buffered chemical species). So, in “BU F4 ” scenario the
presence of linear chains on the catalyst → product graph is even more significant. Remarkably, similar graphs and values hold for the scale-free topologies
we tested (same number of chemical species and reactions).
3.3

Cleavages, condensations and irreversibility

Chemical reactions are generally reversible, in the sense that the reaction proceeds both forward (from reactants to products) and backward (in the opposite
direction); however, note that, when far from equilibrium, the rates of the two
processes are not equal. Particular environments (as aqueous phases rather than
oleic phases) can hugely influence the reaction rates of all cleavages and/or of all
condensations, whereas the presence or absence of catalysts can hugely influence
the reaction rates of some specific reactions (for instance the particular sets of
compartments, chemical species and reactions present inside the current living
systems can hugely influence the reaction rates inside cells).
Hence, in case of similar rates the proportion between cleavages and condensations is 50 : 50, whereas in case of particular environments or particular
living systems this proportion could constitute a relatively free parameter. In
neutral environments the variation of this parameter do not have particular consequences: however, this is not the case where the concentration of small species
is kept constant.
13

14

It is worth stressing that an autocatalysis is a strongly connected component, nevertheless we decided to deal with them separately.
At high catalysis levels almost each RAF owns at least one SCC and one autocatalysis, so with our measurements it is not possible to observe the exact RAFs’ structure.
This aspect will be analyzed in further works.

Indeed, since the membrane tends to allow the free transfer to small molecules
only, the apparent symmetry of this situation is broken: whereas it is possible
to continuously construct long molecules by simply concatenating (by means of
recursive condensation reactions) the always present small ones, it is not possible to continuously cleave long molecules, because their presence is not similarly
guaranteed. Thus, it is not possible to observe RAF if just cleavages are present.
Figure 5 shows the influence of different levels of the proportion between cleavages and condensations on the presence of RAF in chemical sets and on the
position of their previously commented transition, in the case “BU F2 ” scenario. In this case, note that, because the product of reactions involving buffered
molecules are buffered molecules and because these buffered molecules do not
catalyze anything, in presence of only cleavages nothing happen (data not shown
here).

Fig. 5. The fraction of simulations with a food set composed of all the species up to
length 2 showing at least 1 RAF, by varying the average level of catalysis and the maximum chemical species length. The plots show situations where the proportion between
condensations and cleavages is 100 : 0 (left), all condensations; 75 : 25 (middle); 25 : 75
(right). The case 0 : 100 (all cleavages) is devoid of RAFs, hence graph is not shown
here while the case 50 : 50 is shown in figure 4 left top.

Note that if we allow all the possible condensations and cleavages among
the existing molecules up to length L, the relative proportion of cleavages and
condensation is obtained by a purely combinatorial argument. In this case the
number of conceivable reactions is equal to:
L
X
R̂1 =
[2i · (i − 1)] + |S|2

(2)

i=2

where the first term stands for the cleavage reactions and the second term
for the condensation reactions [12]. It is worth stressing that, as L increases and
preventing the presence of reverse reactions, the number of conceivable condensation reactions tends to become
PL higher than the number of conceivable cleavages, according to the ratio [ i=2 2i · (i − 1)]/|S|2 . In other words, the “purely

Fig. 6. Fraction of random systems, with the “purely combinatorial” quotient between
cleavages and condensations, having at least 1 RAF, with food till length 2 and (c) till
length 3

combinatorial” proportion between cleavages and condensations is in favor of
condensations, and this advantage increases with the diversity of the present
chemical species.
Following this idea, there may exist lots of condensations whose products
are longer than L. This second method, applied to the same number of chemical
species, leads to a very different number of reactions: so the question arises as how
can we compare these two methods, and what can we say about their physical
plausibility. We can observe that in (the relatively simple) pre-biotic environment very long molecules rarely appear, because of generic physical-chemical
constraints. Thus, we think that the more correct model interpretation of the
L limit should be: “chemical species longer than L are not suitable for further
chemical processes, because of physical-chemical constraints” (for example, lack
of solubility). A large fraction of the condensations leads therefore to not suitable
products, which cannot play an active role within the system; thus the creation
of this kind of “garbage” can inhibit the formation of RAFs (see figure 6).

4

Conclusion

The comprehension of the properties of sets of many interacting molecules poses
formidable problems, and it is still a big challenge to obtain them in laboratory.
In this work we aim at revealing some properties of abstract realizations
of catalytic reaction networks, with particular regard to the presence of structures potentially able to sustain their own existence and growth (the Reflexively
Autocatalytic Food generated sets, briefly RAFs). Our investigations take into
account different scenarios, involving different distributions of the chemicals’
catalyzing capabilities, the presence or absence of backward reactions, and the

presence or absence of long chemical species that lead to the accumulation of
useless chemical species.
We confirmed that there is an ample region where the systems have autocatalytic structures, which are nevertheless unable to self-sustain (RAFs are
not present); interestingly, this region shows the same amplitude across different topologies and/or settings. At a sufficient level of catalysis, complete RAFs
emerge, whose presence and composition (different proportion of strongly connected components, autocatalysis and linear chains) depend on some parameters (average level of catalysis, number of buffered chemical species, proportion
between cleavages and condensations) and is independent on other characteristics (uniform or scale-free topology, presence or absence of backward reactions).
Finally, we discussed two different ways to build artificial networks and their
physical implications.
We think that these hints could be useful for the comprehension of the emergence of sets of molecules able to collectively self-replicate in OoL scenarios, and
for the designing of new artificial protocells.

Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results has received funding from the European
UnionSeventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement
n. 284625 and from “INSITE - The Innovation Society, Sustainability, and ICT” Pr.ref.
271574, under the 7th FWP - FET programme. The final publication is available
at Springer via http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-12745-3 10.

References
1. B. Alberts, A. Johnson, J. Lewis, M. Raff, K. Roberts, and P. Walter. Molecular
Biology of the Cell, Fifth Edition. Garland Science, 4 edition, 2005.
2. R. Bagley and J. D. Farmer. Spontaneous emergence of a metabolism. Artificial
Life II. Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, X:93–141, 1992.
3. A.-L. Barabási and R. Albert. Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science,
1999.
4. T. Carletti, R. Serra, M. Villani, I. Poli, and A. Filisetti. Sufficient conditions for
emergent synchronization in protocell models. J Theor Biol, 254(4):741–751, 2008.
5. R. Diester. Graph theory. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 2005.
6. F. Dyson. Origins of life. Cambridge University Press, 1985.
7. M. Eigen and P. Schuster. The hypercycle. a principle of natural self-organization.
part A: Emergence of the hypercycle. Die Naturwissenschaften, 11(64), 1977.
8. M. Eigen and P. Schuster. The hypercycle: a principle of natural self-organization.
Springer, 1979.
9. J. Farmer and S. Kauffman. Autocatalytic replication of polymers. Physica D:
Nonlinear Phenomena, 220:50–67, 1986.
10. A. Filisetti, A. Graudenzi, R. Serra, M. Villani, D. De Lucrezia, R. M. Fuchslin,
S. A. Kauffman, N. Packard, and I. Poli. A stochastic model of the emergence of
autocatalytic cycles. Journal of Systems Chemistry, 2(1):2, 2011.

11. A. Filisetti, A. Graudenzi, R. Serra, M. Villani, D. De Lucrezia, and I. Poli. The
role of energy in a stochastic model of the emergence of autocatalytic sets. In
L. T, G. M, H. Bersini, P. Bourgine, M. Dorigo, and R. Doursat, editors, Advances
in Artificial Life, ECAL 2011 Proceedings of the Eleventh European Conference
on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living Systems, pages 227–234. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 2011.
12. A. Filisetti, A. Graudenzi, R. Serra, M. Villani, R. M. Füchslin, N. Packard, S. a.
Kauffman, and I. Poli. A stochastic model of autocatalytic reaction networks.
Theory in biosciences = Theorie in den Biowissenschaften, pages 1–9, Oct. 2011.
13. A. Filisetti, R. Serra, T. Carletti, M. Villani, and I. Poli. Non-linear protocell
models: synchronization and chaos. The European Physical Journal B, 77(2):249–
256, June 2010.
14. A. Filisetti, R. Serra, M. Villani, A. Graudenzi, R. M. Füchslin, and I. Poli. The
influence of the residence time on the dynamics of catalytic reaction networks.
Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications - Neural Nets WIRN10 - Proceedings of the 20th Italian Workshop on Neural Nets, pages 243–251, 2011.
15. T. Ganti. Chemoton Theory, Vol. I: Theory of fluyd machineries: Vol. II: Theory
of livin system. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum, 2003.
16. W. Hordijk, S. A. Kauffman, and M. Steel. Required Levels of Catalysis for Emergence of Autocatalytic Sets in Models of Chemical Reaction Systems. International
Journal of Molecular Sciences, 12(5):3085–3101, May 2011.
17. W. Hordijk and M. Steel. Detecting autocatalytic, self-sustaining sets in chemical
reaction systems. Journal of theoretical biology, 227(4):451–461, Apr. 2004.
18. W. Hordijk, M. Steel, and S. Kauffman. The Structure of Autocatalytic Sets:
Evolvability, Enablement, and Emergence. page 12, May 2012.
19. S. Jain and S. Krishna. Autocatalytic set and the growth of complexity in an
evolutionary model. Phys Rev Lett, 81:5684–5687, 1998.
20. S. Jain and S. Krishna. A model for the emergence of cooperation, interdependence,
and structure in evolving networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., USA, 98(2):543–547,
2001.
21. S. A. Kauffman. Autocatalytic sets of proteins. J Theor Biol, 119(1):1–24, 1986.
22. S. A. Kauffman. The origins of order. New York: Oxford University Press, 1993.
23. P. Luisi, F. Ferri, and P. Stano. Approaches to semi-synthetic minimal cells: a
review. Naturwissenschaften, 93(1):1–13, 2006.
24. S. S. Mansy, J. P. Schrum, M. Krishnamurthy, S. Tobé, D. A. Treco, and J. W.
Szostak. Template-directed synthesis of a genetic polymer in a model protocell.
Nature, 454(7200):122–125, 2008.
25. E. Mossel and M. Steel. Random biochemical networks: the probability of selfsustaining autocatalysis. Journal of theoretical biology, 233(3):327–36, Apr. 2005.
26. S. Rasmussen, L. Chen, M. Nilsson, and S. Abe. Bridging nonliving and living
matter. Artificial life, 9(3):269–316, Jan. 2003.
27. T. Rocheleau, S. Rasmussen, P. E. Nielsen, M. N. Jacobi, and H. Ziock. Emergence
of protocellular growth laws. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 362(1486):1841–
1845, 2007.
28. L. Schmidt. The Engineering of Chemical Reactions. Oxford University Press,
1998.
29. D. Segre, D. Lancet, O. Kedem, and Y. Pilpel. Graded autocatalysis replication
domain (gard): kinetic analysis of self-replication in mutually catalytic sets. Orig.
Life Evol. Biosph., 1998.
30. R. Serra, T. Carletti, and I. Poli. Syncronization phenomena in surface-reaction
models of protocells. Artificial life, 123(2):123–38, 2007.

31. R. Serra, A. Filisetti, M. Villani, A. Graudenzi, C. Damiani, and T. Panini. A
stochastic model of catalytic reaction networks in protocells. Under Revision,
2014.
32. R. R. V. Solé, A. Munteanu, C. Rodriguez-Caso, J. Macı́a, and J. Mac\’\ia. Synthetic protocell biology: from reproduction to computation. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci, 362(1486):1727–1739, 2007.
33. P. F. Stadler. Dynamics of autocatalytic reaction networks. IV: Inhomogeneous
replicator networks. Bio Systems, 26(1):1–19, Jan. 1991.
34. J. W. Szostak, D. P. Bartel, and P. L. Luisi. Synthesizing life. Nature,
409(6818):387–390, 2001.

