Scaling from traits to ecosystems: Developing a general Trait Driver Theory via
integrating trait-based and metabolic scaling theories

Short title:

Scaling from traits to ecosystems

Authors:

Brian J. Enquist*

(benquist@email.arizona.edu)1,2

Jon Norberg

(jon.norberg@ecology.su.se)3,4

Stephen P. Bonser

(s.bonser@unsw.edu.au)5

Cyrille Violle

(cyrille.violle@cefe.cnrs.fr)1,6

Colleen T. Webb

(Colleen.Webb@ColoState.edu)7

Amanda Henderson

(amandahenderson@email.arizona.edu)1

Lindsey L. Sloat

(llsloat@email.arizona.edu)1

Van M. Savage*

(vsavage@ucla.edu)2,8,9

1

Dept. of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona, Bioscience West,
Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.

2

Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Rd, Santa Fe, NM 87501, USA

3

Dept. of Systems Ecology, Stockholm University, 18697 Stockholm, Sweden

4

Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm University, 18697 Stockholm, Sweden

5

Evolution and Ecology Research Centre and School of Biological, Earth and
Environmental Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney NSW,
2052, Australia

6

CNRS, Centre d'Ecologie Fonctionnelle et Evolutive, UMR 5175, Montpellier, France

1

7

Dept. of Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80524, USA

8

Dept. of Biomathematics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles,
CA 90095

9

Dept. of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095

* Contributed equally to the paper

Corresponding author:

Brian J. Enquist

Affiliation:

Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
University of Arizona

Address:

1041 E. Lowell St., Tucson, AZ 85721

Phone:

(520) 626-3336

Email:

benquist@email.arizona.edu

2

Abstract
Aim: More powerful tests of biodiversity theories need to move beyond species
richness and explicitly focus on mechanisms generating diversity via trait composition
and diversity. The rise of trait-based ecology has led to an increased focus on the
distribution and dynamics of traits in communities. However, a general theory of traitbased ecology, that can apply across different scales (e.g., species that differ in size)
and gradients (e.g., temperature), has yet to be formulated. While research focused on
metabolic and allometric scaling theory provides the basis for such a theory it does not
explicitly account for differences traits within and across taxa, such as variation in the
optimal temperature for growth. Here we synthesize trait-based and metabolic scaling
approaches into a framework that we term “Trait Drivers Theory” or TDT. It shows
that the shape and dynamics of trait distributions can be uniquely linked to fundamental
drivers of community assembly and how the community will respond to future drivers.
To assess predictions and assumptions of TDT, we review several theoretical studies,
recent empirical studies spanning local and biogeographic gradients. Further, we
analyze how the shift in trait distributions influences ecosystem productivity across an
elevational gradient and a 140-year long ecological experiment. We argue that our
general TDT provides a baseline for (i) recasting the predictions of ecological theories
based on species richness in terms of the shape of trait distributions; and (ii) integrating
how specific traits, including body size, and functional diversity ‘scale up’ to influence
the dynamics of species assemblages across climatic gradients and how shifts in
functional composition influences ecosystem functioning. Further, it offers a novel
framework to integrate trait, metabolic/allometric, and species-richness based

3

approaches in order to build a more predictive functional biogeography to show how
assemblages of species have and will respond to climate change.

Key words: functional traits, community ecology, functional biogeography, allometric
scaling, global climate change

4

I. Introduction
Understanding and explaining species richness patterns have had far-reaching influence
on the development of ecology. Biodiversity science strives to understand the drivers
and consequences of variation in the number of species, and how species abundances
change across spatial and temporal scales (MacArthur, 1972; Rosenzweig, 1995).
These changes in species richness have also been linked with changes in ecosystem
functioning. The Biodiversity Ecosystem Functioning (BEF) hypothesis states that
ecosystems with greater biodiversity are more productive and stable (Naeem et al.,
1994; Tilman et al., 1997; Tilman, 2001). Attempts to answer these questions have led
to debates that polarized the field (Wardle, 2002), and a growing consensus that species
numbers alone do not inform us about all important aspects of ecosystem functioning
and community responses to environmental change (Chapin et al., 2000; Díaz &
Cabido, 2001; Stevens et al., 2003; Diaz et al., 2007).

More recently, trait-based approaches have focused on recasting classical questions
from the species richness literature (Lavorel & Garnier, 2002; McGill et al., 2006;
Violle et al., 2007; Hillebrand & Matthiessen, 2009; Lamanna et al., 2014). Instead of
species richness, there is an attempt to focus on functional traits and diversity in trait
values (Díaz & Cabido, 2001; Lavorel & Garnier, 2002; Petchey & Gaston, 2002;
Mason et al., 2005; Roscher et al., 2012). In addition, metabolic scaling theory or MST
has focused on the central role of body size as a critical driver of ecological, ecosystem,
and evolutionary patterns and processes (Enquist et al., 1998; Enquist et al., 2003;
Savage et al., 2004; Gillooly et al., 2005). One could also ask about diversity in the

5

number and/or range of trait or body size values and to some degree, this depends on
how traits are defined. The premise is that measures of traits, including body size, can
better reveal the mechanisms and forces that ultimately structure biological diversity
(Grime, 2006; McGill et al., 2006; Stegen et al., 2009) and increase the generality and
predictability of ecological models (Díaz et al., 2004; Webb et al., 2010; Kattge et al.,
2011). Trait-based approaches have especially received attention for plant life histories
and strategies due to a renewed interest in measuring traits across different
environments and scales (Craine, 2009). While this has long been part of comparative
physiology and ecology (see Grime, 1977; Arnold, 1983), it is now being heralded as
its central paradigm (Westoby & Wright, 2006; Craine, 2009). Similarly, trait-based
approaches are being used to disentangle the forces that structure larger scale
biodiversity gradients (Reich & Oleksyn, 2004; Han et al., 2005; Reich, 2005; Swenson
& Enquist, 2007; Safi et al., 2011; Belmaker & Jetz, 2013) and to predict large-scale
ecosystem shifts due to climate change (Elser et al., 2010; Frenne et al., 2013).

Central limitations of trait-based ecology
An important limitation to developing a more predictive trait-based ecology is that its
focus and implementation has relied almost entirely on empirical correlations and null
models (for example see discussion in Swenson, 2013). There is a need for theory and
quantitative arguments to move beyond pattern searching. Further, trait-based ecology
has largely developed independently from metabolic scaling theory where the role of
body size – arguably a key trait - is central to scaling up organismal processes.
Nonetheless, a key focus of trait-based ecology is to identify the general processes

6

underlying trait-based ecology (Suding et al., 2008b; Enquist, 2010; Shipley, 2010;
Webb et al., 2010; Weiher et al., 2011). Such an advance would help guide the
explosion of trait-based data collection (Kattge et al., 2011; Dell et al., 2013), develop
a more predictive ecology, and to organize rapidly developing directions in trait-based
ecology (McGill et al., 2006; Funk et al., 2008; Suding et al., 2008b; Shipley, 2010;
Lavorel et al., 2011; Boulangeat et al., 2012).

Another limitation is the debate about whether biodiversity, trait diversity, or both are
important for ecosystem functioning (Loreau et al., 2001; Hooper et al., 2004). We
agree with Cardinale et al. (2007) that this debate is largely a false dichotomy.
Increasingly, the evidence shows that both the number of species and types of species
in an ecosystem impact biomass production For example, focusing solely on species
number, however, has resulted in sometimes positive, negative or null relationships
between species richness and ecosystem functioning (Grace et al., 2007; Roscher et al.,
2012).

Lastly, because trait-based ecology measures properties of individuals that are linked to
the environment and because it attempts to make predictions for ecosystem functioning,
it must be able to scale from individuals to ecosystems. However, achieving this
requires an exciting but extremely challenging synthesis of physiology, population
biology, evolutionary biology, community ecology, ecosystem ecology, and global
ecology (Webb et al., 2010; Reich, 2014). In this paper we suggest combining traitbased approaches with metabolic scaling theory to make some progress on this

7

problem.

Here, we present a novel theoretical framework to scale from traits to communities to
ecosystems and to link measures of diversity. We argue that trait-based ecology can be
made more predictive by synthesizing several key areas of research and to focus on the
shape and dynamics of trait distributions. Our approach is to develop more of a
predictive theory for how environmental changes, including land use and shifts in
abiotic factors across geographic and temporal gradients, influence biodiversity and
ecosystem functioning (Naeem et al., 2009). We show how starting with a few simple
but general assumptions allows us to build a foundation by which more detailed and
complex aspects of ecology and evolution can be added. We show how our approach
can reformulate and generalize the arguments Chapin et al. (2000), McGill et al.
(2006), and Violle et al. (2014) by integrating several insights from trait-based ecology
(Garnier & Navas, 2012) and metabolic scaling theory (West et al., 1997; Enquist et
al., 1998; Gillooly et al., 2001). In doing so, we can derive a synthetic theory to begin
to (i) assess differing assumptions underlying the assembly of species; (ii) assess the
relative importance of hypothesized drivers of trait composition and diversity; and (iii)
build a more predictive and dynamical framework for scaling from traits to
communities and ecosystems. We call this theory, Trait Driver Theory or TDT, because
it links how the dynamics of biotic and abiotic environment then drive the performance
of individuals and ecosystems via their traits. Combining MST with trait-driver
approaches allows TDT to work across scales also addresses one of MST’s key
criticisms: it does not incorporate ecological variation – such as trait variation - and

8

cannot be applied to understanding the forces that shape the diversity and dynamics of
local communities (Tilman et al., 2004; Coomes, 2006).

II. Trait Driver Theory
TDT is based on a synthesis of three influential bodies of work. The first are trait-based
approaches that are largely encapsulated in Grime’s Mass Ratio Hypothesis or MRH
(Grime, 1998). The MRH states that ecosystem functioning is determined by the
characteristics or traits of the dominant (largest biomass) species. Implicit in the MRH
is the idea that traits of the dominant species are a more relevant measure than species
richness. The second component is the generalized and quantitative approach to traitbased ecology through Norberg et al. (2001) who used a mathematical framework to
link the distribution dynamics of phenotypic traits with environmental change and
ecosystem functioning (Norberg et al., 2001; Norberg, 2004; Savage et al., 2007;
Shipley, 2010). The third component is Metabolic Scaling Theory (MST). MST can be
used to predict how variation in organismic size and the traits associated with
metabolism will then influence individual performance (growth and resource use) and
how these performance measures will then scale up to influence communities and
ecosystems (Enquist et al., 1998; Enquist et al., 2003; Enquist et al., 2009; YvonDurocher et al., 2012). MST achieves this by showing how variation in individual rates
of mass growth, dM/dt, and metabolism, B, can linked to variation in a few key traits
(e.g. body size, M, and traits related to cellular metabolism and allocation; see West et
al., 2002; Enquist et al., 2007b; Enquist et al., 2009; von Allmen et al., 2012).

9

The central assumptions of trait based ecology and the ‘Holy Grail’ of trait-based
ecology - Trait-based ecology assumes that there are traits that are functional, meaning
they link the environment to variation in whole-organism performance and ultimately
fitness (Violle et al., 2007; see Fig.1). That is, as shown in Fig. 1, variation in traits
influence organismal performance (e.g., metabolism, growth rate, demographic rates,
etc.) and ultimately fitness (Ackerly & Monson, 2003; Garnier et al., 2004; Lavorel et
al., 2007; Violle et al., 2007). This approach has been recently validated with a
comparative study linking variation in individual-level traits with variation in life
history and demography parameters (Adler et al., 2014). Another key assumption of
trait-based ecology is that traits of individuals can be used to predict individual
performance that can be effectively summed or scaled up to the functioning of
ecosystems (Lavorel & Garnier, 2002; Suding et al., 2008b). The raison d'être and the
‘Holy Grail’ of trait-based ecology is to use functional traits, rather than species
identities, to better predict community and ecosystem dynamics (Lavorel & Garnier,
2002; Lavorel et al., 2007; Suding & Goldstein, 2008).

Linking traits, individual performance, communities, and ecosystem functioning
We start by extending Grime’s MRH. Grime argued that dominant traits rather than
species number drive ecosystem functioning, in order to identify the dominant traits.
As a result, it is crucial to measure the trait frequency distribution defined by biomass
for the assemblage. An important question is in order to assess the MRH should one
use abundance or biomass weighted mean trait values to best estimate the frequency
distributions. TDT also focuses on the trait frequency distribution C(z) — the histogram

10

of biomass across individuals characterized by a given trait value, z, summed across all
individuals within and across species. Thus, C(z) captures both intra- and interspecific
trait differences. However, unlike the MRH use of the mean and current interest in
using community-weighted mean traits, we are interested in the overall shape of the
distribution of phenotypes described by the moments—variance, skewness, kurtosis—
beyond the mean. We can link individual growth rate and the population per capita
growth rates via how traits influence organismal performance via the growth function,

! ! =

1
!"(!)
!(!)
!"

(1)
where !(!)/!" is the biomass growth rate for all individuals with a given trait value z
(see Supplemental Document). By integrating the growth equation across all values of
the trait across individuals, we can derive dynamic equations for how total community
biomass, CTot, depends on the shape of the biomass-trait distribution, C(z), and how that
shape itself changes in time. Consequently, the Net Primary biomass Production or
NPP is
dCTot
=
dt

∫ f ( z)C ( z) dz

(2)
(see also Norberg et al., 2001; Lavorel & Garnier, 2002; Vile et al., 2006). Eqn. 2
requires understanding what sets the form of f(z).

11

Linking dynamics of trait distributions to environmental change and immigration Starting with Norberg et al. (2001) and Savage et al. (2007), we focus on how traits that
strongly influence organismal growth rate are influenced by the environment, E. In
Fig. 2 we show an example of how variation in a given trait, z, translates to variation in
per capita growth rate across an environmental gradient. This example assumes that all
individuals in the assemblage ultimately compete for similar limiting resources, and
that, there is an optimal environment where growth is fastest (Fig. 2). Although our
approach starts with a single trait, trait-based models can straightforwardly incorporate
multiple, correlated traits (Savage et al., 2007 ; see also Supplemental Document). By
incorporating temporal environmental forcing into the growth function, TDT predicts
how the distribution of traits, C(z), responds to both biotic and abiotic drivers (Norberg
et al., 2001; Savage et al., 2007).

The shape and the dynamics of the trait distribution ultimately reflect a balance
between two rates – the introduction/immigration of traits, I, into an assemblage and
the outcome of variation in the performance, f, of those traits within the assemblage. A
general trait-based equation for growth and immigration is given by

dC ( z )
= f !" z, E, C ( z )#$C ( z ) + I !" z, E, C ( z )#$
dt
(3)
Here, we now explicitly include the effects of the environment, E, and the trait
distribution C(z) as part of the growth, f, and immigration, I, functions because they
can influence both via environmental change, competition, facilitation, sampling effects
or other biological interactions such as density dependence (Savage et al., 2007). The

12

second term, the immigration function, I, reflects the external input of individuals into
the community stemming from dispersal as well as the introduction of traits into the
assemblage from other factors including evolutionary processes (mutations) and
potential seed banks.

Next, we use two assumptions to constrain the form of eqns 2-3. First, a central tenet of
TDT and a well-grounded concept in ecology and evolution is that across an
environmental gradient, E, organisms will tend to have a unimodal functional response
in their performance and fitness functions (Fig 2). As a result, a shift in the
environment, E, will affect the per capita population growth rate and thus which traits
are dominant in the community or assemblage (Whittaker et al., 1973; Davis & Shaw,
2001) and the rate of trait evolution (Levins, 1968). Second, there are specific traits that
link environmental drivers to individual growth rate, and the trait driven per capita
biomass growth rate, dC(z)/dt (Fig. 1; (Arnold, 1983)). The performance or growth
function f(z) then is a result from an environment mediated tradeoff between traits, such
as investment in growth versus defense or from investment in growth rate versus
desiccation resistance. As a result, for a constant environment, E, there are optimal trait
values, zopt, that maximize the growth function given the environment.

In the case of a single trait optimum, we approximate this as a symmetric function such
as a Gaussian or quadratic tradeoff !(!) ∝ 1 −

!!!!"# !
!!

where!! ! is the trait

breadth of the tradeoff function. If the environment is constant and immigration, I, is
zero, individuals with traits that match, zopt, will gradually replace all other individuals,

13

and the trait distribution will collapse on a single point for the optimal trait value zopt
(Norberg et al. 2001). Thus, TDT is consistent with a competitive trait hierarchy view
of assemblage interactions (Goldberg & Landa, 1991; Freckleton & Watkinson, 2001;
Mayfield & Levine, 2010; Kunstler et al., 2011) as well as a population source-sink
view of assemblage (Pulliam, 1988) and metapopulation perspective of trait dynamics
across environmental gradients (Davis & Shaw, 2001). As we discuss below, additional
biotic and abiotic interactions and processes can also be shown to influence the shape
of the trait distribution via growth function and immigration (Weiher & Keddy, 1995).

III. Predictions of TDT –
Next, we emphasize the central predictions of Trait Driver Theory. These predictions
are also summarized in Table 1 in terms of how different measures of the trait
distribution can provide novel insight and predictions regarding the main drivers of the
current composition of the species assemblage as well as the future dynamics of the
species assemblage.

Prediction (1): Shifts in the environment will cause shifts in the trait distribution (Fig.
3; Table 1).
Prediction (2): The difference between the optimal trait and the observed mean trait, as
well as the trait variance, provide a measure of the capacity of a community to respond
to environmental change (Fig 3 and S1; Table 1).

14

Shifts in the abiotic or biotic environments, represented by E and C(z) respectively, will
lead to corresponding shifts in the community trait distribution. The magnitude of the
shift over some time and the rate of change of the shift can both be calculated from eqn
2. According to eqn 2, the value of the optimal trait will change with the environment
(e.g. Ackerly, 2003), while the mean trait of the community will approach the optima
but with a lag in time according to how long it takes for either trait plasticity and/or the
processes of species sorting and selection to act (Ghalambor et al., 2007). In
environments where the optimal trait value is changing quickly relative to generation
times or plasticity, there may be little capacity for the mean community trait, !, to track
these changes. In such circumstances, !, may never, or only rarely, be expressed at an
optimal value for the current environment. Nonetheless, we expect that for most
communities, the difference between the optimal trait, zopt (E), and the observed mean
trait, !, or Δ ! , will be a measure of how the community has responded/will respond to
environmental change. Norberg et al. (2001) derive the general expression

Δ ! = !!"# ! − !
(4)
where Δ ! quantifies the community trait “lag” in relation to the current environment.
This measure is analogous to the ‘lag load’ in evolutionary theory (Maynard Smith,
1976). We can thus define !Δ/!" as the response capacity of a community. Eqn. 4
predicts that capability of the assemblage to respond to directional shifts in the
environment will be directly proportional to the trait variance, !Δ/!" ∝ !.
Importantly, within TDT, directional selection for more optimal trait values need not

15

always lead to an increase in per capita growth rate, f. Because of trade-offs between
traits and frequency and density-dependent effects on performance and fitness, the
performance (and fitness) associated with the new optimum value likely differs from
the fitness and growth rate in the previous environment (Antonovics, 1976; Dieckmann
& Ferrière, 2004; Ferriere & Legendre, 2013). For example in Fig. 3 we highlight a
hypothetical example of a shift in the community trait distribution from wet to dry that
comes with a decrease in optimal performance. Extensions of TDT can in principle
include these effects (Savage et al., 2007).

In sum, predictions 1-2 formalize Chapin et al. ’s conceptual framework (Chapin et al.,
2000) for the development of a predictive trait-based ecology. In the case of multiple
traits underlying growth, f, differing trait combinations could lead to similar growth
rates in differing environments (see also Marks & Lechowicz, 2006). We note that these
predictions implicitly ignore the effects of frequency dependence but elaborations of
TDT can include these effects (see eqn. 5 in Savage et al. 2007).

Prediction (3): The skewness of the trait distribution can be an indicator of past or
ongoing immigration and/or environmental change due to lags between growth,
reproduction, and mortality (Table 1).

Because of time lags between environmental change and the time scale of organismal
responses (growth, demography etc.), the trait distribution of an assemblage will not be
able to instantaneously track environmental change, and skewness in the trait

16

distribution will develop (see also Figs. 3, S1). Alternatively, skewness may reflect
differential immigration of traits from one side of a habitat or a community that
contains ‘sink’ populations (Pulliam, 1988) supported via immigration. Neutral theory
(Hubbell, 2001), in which traits have no demographic effects, could also lead to skewed
distributions due to neutral trait evolution. The implication is that trait-based ecology
can infer the dynamics of trait assemblages via assessing the shape of contemporary
trait distributions. Combining information on the shape trait distributions with
additional information such as dispersal history and/or size distributions would help
separate lag effects from drift and differential immigration.

Prediction (4): The rate of change of net ecosystem productivity in response to
environmental change can be predicted via the growth function, f, and the shape of the
community biomass-trait distribution C(z) at some initial time (Table 1)

In the simple case of a single trait with a single environmental driver, Norberg et al.
(2001) derived a general expression linking the dynamics of the trait distribution by
noting eqn. 2, equation 3 can be approximated as
&
∂2 f ( z, E, C(z))
dCTot #
(CTot + I
≈ % f ( z, E, C ( z )) z=z +
V
dt
∂z 2
%$
('
z=z

(5)
Eqn. 5 follows from a Taylor expansion that effectively linearizes the equations. If the
terms in brackets depend on total biomass, dCTot/dt would scale non-linearly with total
biomass, but in the simplest case, these terms are independent of total biomass

17

implying that production scales linearly with total biomass. In eqn. 5 the net primary
production, !!!"# /!" , is equal to the growth rate of the mean community trait, !, plus
the second term that accounts for how much variation there is in the community trait
distribution, V. Because the growth function, f(z,E), has a maximum at zopt, we expect
the second derivative term to be negative, as long as z is in the neighborhood of zopt
(Norberg et al. 2001; see also discussion in Supplemental Document) reflecting the
increasing reduction in growth rate as trait €
values increasingly differ from zopt, (see Fig.
2 and eqn. 4). The unimodal shape is the simplest assumption requiring only the mean
and variance. There is reason to expect that f can be approximated as unimodal. For
example, growth rates typically exhibit unimodal response with measures of
temperature, pH, etc. (McGill et al., 2006). Again, the term I gives the addition of
biomass through immigration/dispersal.

Prediction (5): Within a community whose growth rate depends on a single trait, an
increase in the variance of that trait will lead to a decrease in net primary production
(Table 1).

An additional prediction is that for communities whose growth is driven by a single key
trait, larger trait variance, V, will decrease the net primary production for the whole
community because a higher proportion of individuals differ from zopt (Norberg et al.,
2001). This idea of a tradeoff between short term productivity and long-term response
to environment is reflected by agricultural imperatives with agricultural issues where
short-term productivity is emphasized and variance in traits is minimized in trait values

18

and short term productivity is maximized. Elaborations of TDT have shown that
incorporating multiple limiting resources, multiple traits and trait covariation (Savage
et al. 2007) can weaken, nullify, or even reverse the predicted negative relationship
between dCTot/dt and V.

From eqns 3 and 4, the rate at which a community can track environmental change will
be greater when there is greater trait variance. Intuitively, greater variance leads to
more extreme traits being immediately available to respond to environmental change.
Thus, the rate of response will also depend upon the specific form of the growth
function f (e.g., for a given value of z, how does f vary across an environmental
gradient?; (see Savage et al., 2007 and discussion in Supplemental Document). For
example, if f is a simple Gaussian or polynomial function with E (Fig 1), then the value
of dΔ dt can be approximately proportional to the community trait variance, V.
Building on the work of Norberg et al. (2001) and Savage et al. (2007), these equations

€

can be extended to include higher-order moments such as skewness and kurtosis.

Extending TDT via recasting and assessing different ecological hypotheses about
diversity

As TDT predicts that over time only one phenotype should dominate a given area
characterized by a given environment and important question is what maintains
diversity (trait variation) within an assemblage? According to TDT trait variance can
be increased by many differ ways. Immigration, I, from outside the assemblage, as well

19

as from a directionally shifting or a temporally variable environment (Norberg et al.
2001; Savage et al. 2007) can increase and/or maintain trait variation. Further,
theoretical elaborations of TDT have shown that the diversity of phenotypes (traits)
present in a given assemblage can be influenced by tradeoffs between traits that
influence growth. For example, tradeoffs between allocation to predator defense and
growth rate (Norberg et al. 2001; Savage et al. 2007) can increase the variance of a
given trait. In a variable environment, correlations between traits that underlie the
growth function, f, leads to the survival of organisms with trait values that are less
favorable in the current environment but may be well suited for new environments that
arise. Thus, phenotypic trait correlations among traits can ramify to have quantitative
effects on ecosystem dynamics (lowering NPP) and enable assemblages to better track
environmental change (Savage et al. 2007).

Additionally, trait variation can also stem from additional ecological hypotheses for
biological diversity. An exciting aspect of TDT is that differing ecological hypotheses
based on species richness can be recast in terms of traits. In Table 1 and Fig. S1 we
overview the predictions of the different theories as recast in the light of TDT. As a
result, TDT can then be used to ‘scale up’ the implications of many differing classic
and current hypotheses for species richness via the assumptions of trait distributions
implicit in these theories. Thus, TDT also offers a starting basis to assess differing
hypotheses regarding diversity, community dynamics and ecosystem functioning.
Differing ecological theories based on species richness (neutral theory, abiotic filtering,
competitive exclusion, Chesson’s storage effect, or rare species advantages; see

20

discussion Supplemental Document) as well as the effects of abiotic processes (shifts
due to environmental change, disturbance) will uniquely influence the shape of the
community trait distribution and the potential of the assemblage to maintain diversity,
as reflected in changes in the trait variance, dV/dt. The relative strengths of abiotic,
biotic, and neutral processes will lead to different shapes of trait distributions that will
have different implications for responses of community to directional shifts in the
environment as well as ecosystem functioning.

IV. Extending and Parameterizing Trait Driver Theory
Scaling from individuals to ecosystems using Metabolic Scaling Theory
So far, Trait Driver Theory (TDT) assumes that there is no variation in organismal size.
Instead, the total biomass associated with a trait, z, is denoted by C(z). This notation
avoids ever needing to account for individual organismal mass, M, or even the number
of individuals with mass. However, body size can vary greatly – it is also an important
trait that influences variation in organismal metabolism (Peters, 1983), population
growth rate (Savage et al 2004), and abundance (Damuth, 1981; Enquist et al., 1998).
The scaling equations in Metabolic Scaling Theory or MST differ from TDT so far as
they are phrased in terms of individual mass. In order to integrate these theories, we
use three insights from MST (West et al., 1997; Savage et al., 2004; Enquist et al.,
2007b; Enquist et al., 2009; West et al., 2009), to explicitly formulate TDT to work
across scales in organismal size, M, and environmental changes or gradients in
temperature, T. As we show, MST provides the basis to formally link traits, organismal
growth rate, and ecosystem fluxes (Enquist et al., 2007a; Enquist et al., 2007b).

21

First, MST is explicit about how the organismal growth is dependent upon the size of
the organism. In the case of MST, we start with how organismal biomass growth rate,
!"/!" , is related to whole-organism metabolic rate, B, and organismal mass, M, as
!"
= !! (!)!!
!"
(6)
where b0(z) is a metabolic coefficient that depends on a single or set (meaning z is a
vector) set of traits. The allometric scaling exponent ! is hypothesized to reflect the
branching geometry of vascular networks (Enquist et al., 2007b). Theory and empirical
data point to ! ≈ 3/4 for large size ranges (Enquist et al., 2007c; Savage et al., 2008).
Eqn 6 has recently been shown to be a good characterization of tree growth
(Stephenson et al., 2014) and is a specific case of a more generic growth function
(West et al., 2001; Moses et al., 2008) that can be applied to both plants and animals.
While we focus here on a specific plant growth model, we note that other trait-based
models have recently been developed for animals and phytoplankton (Ricker, 1979;
Muller et al., 2001; West et al., 2001; Litchman & Klausmeier, 2008) and they could
also be used to parameterize TDT. Below, we elaborate eqn. 6 to explicitly include the
traits for plants that underlie b0 and how we can use this equation as the basis for a
general trait-based growth function.

To integrate MST into TDT, we first recognize that, C(z), the biomass associated with
trait z can be expressed as ! ! =

!" ! !, ! =

!" ! !, ! !, where C(z,M) is

the mass density of individuals with both trait value z and individual mass M, while

22

N(z,M) is the number density of individuals that have both trait value z and individual
mass M. In this expression, we have integrated over all possible values of mass, M, so
that have the total biomass of all individuals with trait z. Furthermore, note that
integrating this over all traits, z, gives the total biomass, !!"! =

!" ! ! =

!" !" ! !, ! !.

To integrate MST into TDT we solve for the conditions of steady state where N(z,M) is
not changing in time. It can be shown (see Sup. Doc) the equation for the scaling of
NPP with the total biomass of the assemblage is,
!
!!!"!
= !! ! !!!
!!

!

!!"!

(7)
where dCTot/dt scales isometrically with CTot and the C subscript denotes that the
average, denoted by brackets < > is taken with respect to the biomass. This equation is
in the most generic form of a general TDT equation. Note, that the TDT growth
function, f, is now
!

! ! = !! ! !!!
(8)
and can be expanded and expressed in terms of the biomass-weighted central moments of
the trait z, such as the variance, skewness, and kurtosis (see below). Again, the exponent, 1/4 is the idealized case and empirical values that may deviate from!! ≈ 3/4 can be used.

Incorporating environmental tradeoffs in the growth function, f

23

Eqn. (8) alone would predict that the per capita growth rate will increase forever as the
trait, b0, and mass-specific metabolic rate increase. In reality, though, there is some
range of trait values at which the organism can grow. This is because there are tradeoffs
in performance and fitness. Decreases in growth when, for a given value of E, the trait
value gets either too small or too large. In the case of a given leaf trait such as leaf size
or leaf investment (closely associated with variation in photosytnthetic rates and the
specific leaf area), at some point, continued increases in leaf nitrogen may ultimately
limit resource uptake as high N would result in individuals more prone to herbivores,
pathogens etc. and/or will result in water transport demands that would increasingly be
maladaptive for a given local environment. Ultimately, one cannot have an infinitely
large leaf, an infinitely thin leaf, or a plant that is all leaf area. Thus, deviation away
from b0,opt would be associated with a tradeoff between specific trait values and plant
performance (such as growth rate, survivorship and/or reproduction; (see also
Ghalambor et al., 2007)).

Incorporating tradeoffs between trait values, the environment, and performance is
central to TDT. We can incorporate these tradeoffs in a general form by multiplying the
scaling relationship by a quadratic function. As a result, f(b0) is maximal at the optimal
trait, b0,opt, and the niche width defined by !!!! where
! ! = !! (!)!

!

!
!

!! − !!,!"#
1−
!!!!

!

(9)

24

Here, the second term is the tradeoff function and c0 is an overall constant coefficient.
Expressing f(b0) across an environmental gradient, f(b0, E) would then reveal a
unimodal growth function (Fig. 2).

The second insight from MST shows that the metabolic normalization, b0, can be linked
to specific traits. For the plant growth function, building on the insights from the
relative growth rate literature (Evans, 1972; Lambers et al., 1989; Poorter, 1989),
Enquist et al. (2007b), derived an extension to eqn 6 that explicitly details the traits that
together define b0 and hence f so that

b0 ∝

c " aL % !
$ ' AL β L
ω # mL &

(10)
Eqn. 10 shows that, in addition to plant size, M, the rate of growth is governed by the
scaling exponent, θ, and five traits: (i) !! , the net leaf photosynthetic rate (grams of
carbon per area per unit time); (ii) aL/mL, the specific leaf area or SLA, the quotient of
area of the leaf, aL, and the mass of a leaf, mL; (iii) !, the carbon fraction of plant
tissue; (iv) c the carbon use efficiency of whole-plant metabolism, and (v) !! , the leaf
mass fraction (the ratio of total leaf mass to total plant mass) which is a measure of
allocation to leaves. As a result, we can parameterize TDT with specific traits that
underlie b0

V. Additional Predictions of Trait Driver Theory

25

In the second column of Table 1 we summarize additional TDT predictions for scaling
up community or assemblage trait distributions to predict several ecosystem level
effects. Specifically, the shape of the trait distribution as measured via the central
moments of the distribution

Prediction (6): Ecosystem net primary productivity, dCTot/dt will scale with the total
biomass but will be influenced differently by the mean and variance of the community
trait distribution.

A third insight from MST allows us to more formally link TDT with MST by including
organismal mass dependence into TDT. In particular, most assemblages of organisms will
be characterized by a distribution of sizes. For plants, following the arguments in Enquist
et al. (2009), we can substitute the distribution of the number of individuals as a function of
their size, M or the size-spectra, N(M). For the idealized case of ! ≈ 3/4, they show that
! ! ∝ !!!!/! and link the total biomass, CTot, with the size of the largest individual, Mb
!/!

where !! ∝ !!"! .

This allows us to consider a few special cases of Eqn. (7) that relate

TDT and scaling equations already in the literature.

In the case of a given assemblage where there is no size distribution and only a single mass
value, M*, or a very small range of mass values, the scaling of NPP becomes
!"" =

!
!!!"!
= (!∗ )!! !! !
!"

! !!"!

(11)

26

!

The term (!∗ )!! can be thought of as an overall normalization to the growth function f(z)
from TDT. As such, this result reveals that TDT, as originally formulated (see Eqn 3),
ignores variation in individual mass. Thus, based on Eqn. (6), growth functions within TDT
!

should have a roughly (!∗ )!! hidden with the normalization constant for their growth
function. In the case where (i) organisms within the community or assemblage can differ
greatly in their sizes; (ii) z and M are uncorrelated; and (iii) the number density is a
separable function, such that ! !, ! = !(!)!(!), it can be shown that the growth
equation can be expressed two different ways. Each way depends on how one averages the
trait distribution. In the first case we have,
!
!!!"!
!
= ! !! (!) !!"!
!"

(12)
and in the second case we have

!
!!!"!
= ! !! (!) !!!
!"

!

!!"!

(13)
where k is a proportionality constant. Eqn 13 is equivalent to Eqn. (12) but expresses the
growth function more in terms of the TDT framework such that the right side appears to
have an overall linear dependence in CTOT. As a result, in eqn. (12) we have a mixture of
types of averages, with !! (!) being the abundance average of the function b0(z) while
!

! !!

!

!

is the biomass average of !!! . Both equations are equivalent ways to express the

scaling of NPP function. Eqn. (12) is a more simple expression and only involves using the
abundance average of the trait distribution. Eqn. 12 consolidates the organism mass

27

average with the 3/5 scaling dependence of CTOT. These derivations help to clarify when
trait-based studies should use biomass or abundance weighted values in their studies.

Both equations assume a community steady state approximation where N(z,M) is not
changing in time. If this is violated (e.g. the community trait abundance or number
distribution N(z,M) is changing), then deviations from Eqns. 12-13 are expected.
Nonetheless, these equations provide a basis for linking the scaling of organismal growth
rate and trait variation of individuals with ecosystem-level processes. For all of these
equations and cases, the functions inside the averages can be expended in terms of
moments as done for TDT for biomass-weighted averages or as done in Savage (Savage,
2004) for abundance-weighted averages.

Putting all of this together with Eqn. (5) yields the prediction that equation 12 and 13
are then modified by the shape of the trait distribution, where for a given E, growth is
reduced with departure from b0,opt,
!!!"!
≈ ! !! !
!"

+

!! − !!,!"#
1−
!!!!

!

!! !
!! !

! !
! !! (!) !!"!
!!!

(14)
The second term captures the reduction of production due to deviation from bopt .
Equation (14) represents a formal integration of foundations of TDT from Norberg et
al. (2001) with MST from West et al. (1997) and Enquist et al. (2009). Because the
growth function, f(z,E), has a maximum at zopt (Fig 2) we expect the second derivative
!!!

term, !! ! to be negative, as long as ! is in the neighborhood of zopt . Importantly, Eqn.

28

14 enables one to parameterize TDT with a specific trait based growth function.
Further, it enables the integration of physiological performance curves for how the key
integrative trait, b0, varies across a given environmental gradient, E. Eqn. (8) predicts
that dCTot/dt will increase with increasing community biomass, CTot. Note, here, the role
of the relative breadth of species performance curves (see Fig. 1) is represented by !!!! .

Prediction (7): Eqn. 14 and 16 generates specific and testable relationships for the
scaling of trait means, dispersion, and ecosystem production (see Table 3).

Eqn (14) predicts that there is a range of mean trait values for which increases in the
variance of traits, V(b0), will decrease Net Primary Productivity, !!!"# /!", and shifts
in <b0> will lead to corresponding shifts in !!!"# /!". This will occur whenever the
mean trait value is near the maximum of the growth function, which should occur
frequently because evolution is driving the mean trait to match the optimal trait with
some lag time. However, there are also mean trait values for which increases in the
variance of traits, V(b0), will increase Net Primary Productivity (NPP), !!!"# /!", and
shifts in <b0> will lead to corresponding shifts in !!!"# /!". This will happen when the
mean trait value is further from the optimal trait value and below an inflection point in
the growth function that occurs for small trait values (see the example of a shift from
historically wet climate regime to a dry regime in Figure 3). Intriguingly, this scenario
suggests that trait variance can potentially act to either increase or decrease NPP
depending on if the current trait distribution is close to the local trait optimum or not.
So, if the assemblage is close to the optimal value, increases in trait variance will

29

typically decrease NPP. This contrasts with biodiversity theories in which increasing
variance (increased trait diversity) tends to increase NPP. Importantly, Eqn. 14 shows
the influence of variation, V, of the traits that underlie b0 observed within the
community.

Integrating MST into a more generalized TDT lists several key traits for TDT. We
explore predictions of TDT in the special case of a single trait driver such as specific
leaf area, SLA= !! !! . First, a change in the environment will likely be associated
with a shift in the mean value of SLA. Second, using Eqn. 12 and 14 we expect that
!!!"#
!"

∝

! !
!"# − !!"# !!"!
. Thus, a shift that increases the abundance weighted

mean trait value of <SLA> will lead1 to an increase in NPP. Preliminary support of this
prediction comes from empirical studies that have noted that increases in the mean
community SLA is closely linked with increases in ecosystem productivity (Garnier et
al., 2004; Violle et al., 2007) and follows from TDT. Third, due to the productivityvariance tradeoff predicted by TDT, an increase in the community variance in SLA or
VSLA, will lead to a decrease in productivity so long as the mean community SLA is
close to the optimum value.

As we discuss below, TDT provides a foundation that can be modified by additional
factors. When there are multiple trait shifts that may covary, measuring all of the traits
listed in eqn. 11 would allow more detailed predictions. Of all the traits specified by

1

Note, because the growth equation f is for more instantaneous measures of growth this prediction is based
on rates of more instantaneous NPP and not necessarily annual net primary production. So, accurate testing of
this prediction with annual productivity data should make sure to standardize for growing season lengths.

30

eqn 11, there appears to be evidence that SLA may vary more across environmental
gradients than other traits and be more important for linking changes in a trait driver or
environment, E, with variation in local plant growth (see Supplemental Document). It
varies across taxa (up to three orders of magnitude or approximately 1000 fold) and
directionally varies across environmental gradients in soil moisture, irradiance, and
temperature (see Garnier et al., 2004; Wright et al., 2005; Poorter et al., 2009). SLA
has also been noted to vary considerably within species in response to local changes in
climate and abiotic conditions (Shipley, 2000; Cornwell & Ackerly, 2009; Jung et al.,
2010; Sides et al., 2014).

VI. Methods: Assessing TDT Assumptions and Predictions
Quantifying the shape of trait distributions - In order to assess predictions of TDT, it is
necessary to quantify the biomass distribution of traits, C(z), in a species assemblage.
This involves enough measurements of the trait values and body masses to obtain
accurate estimates of the underlying distributions, as guided by sampling theory and
statistics (Baraloto et al., 2010; Paine et al., 2011). The sampling must occur across all
individuals within our group and thus incorporates both inter- and intraspecific trait
variability (see Supplemental Document, and Violle et al., 2012)). The sampling
protocols often make choices that limit accurate measurements of within-species
variability more than across-species variability. Indeed, simultaneous measurements of
intra- and interspecific trait measures are rarely collected (Ackerly, 2003; Baraloto et
al., 2010). However, intra-specific variation in traits are important to determine the
breadth of the distribution (Violle & Jiang, 2009; Sides et al., 2014). Trait abundance or

31

biomass distributions, C(z), can be approximated through sampling (see Supplemental
Document), so that predictions of TDT can be tested without explicitly measuring the
traits of all individuals.

There are two reasonable approximations for community trait distributions. The first
approximation method calculates the weighted trait distribution by taking the mean
species trait value and multiplying by a measure of dominance (cover, biomass,
abundance (Grime, 1998)). This method can be implemented by calculating the central
moments of the joint-distribution. In the Supplemental Document we show the
equations used to approximate the community trait moments in particular the
community weighted mean, variance, skewness, and kurtosis respectively (CWM,
CWV, CWS, and CWK). Community weighted metrics, however, ignore intraspecific
variation. Increasingly it is becoming clear that intraspecific variation can contribute to
a considerable amount of trait variation (Messier et al., 2010) and that relying on
species mean trait values may not provide a robust measure of the shape of a trait
distributions (Violle et al., 2012).

A second method utilizes sampling theories to help avoid the time-consuming work of
sampling the traits of all individuals. Sub-sampling individuals can be used to better
approximate how intraspecific variation influences the community distribution. In the
Supplemental Document we develop this new method and provide code to implement
this method (see discussion in SI). The method utilizes sub-sampling individuals to
obtain a better approximation of how intraspecific variation influences the community

32

distribution. By subsampling individuals to estimate intraspecific trait variation within
each species, one can begin to incorporate intraspecific variation around mean trait
values for each species. We expect that utilizing this method in addition to the
incorporation of how MST influences the scaling of the number of individuals will
improve estimates for the shape of trait distributions. In short, by subsampling
individuals for each species within a given assemblage one can begin to incorporate
intraspecific variation around mean trait values for each species.

Testing predictions of TDT - We tested several of the specific TDT predictions (Table
1) and assumptions using several examples that allow us to assess temporal and spatial
variations of trait distributions. First, we searched the literature to determine if trait
distributions measured from individuals actually do shift across local environmental
gradients. Second, we assessed the dynamics of trait distributions and ecosystem
carbon flux measures using data from an elevational gradient in Colorado. Third, we
assessed the temporal dynamics of trait distributions and ecosystem net primary
productivity using the Park Grass Experiment (PGE) from Rothamsted, UK. Lastly, to
assess potential linkages with larger scale biogeographic gradients we review recent
studies that assess shifts in trait distributions across large-scale biogeographic
environmental gradients.

We primarily focus on assemblage variation in one trait, SLA, because it appears to
vary more than other traits in eqn 11. Thus, we begin to assess predictions from TDT
(Table 3) by substituting the mean SLA value for b0 . If other traits in eqn 11 also vary
or covary with each other across gradients, TDT would allow us to explore this as well.
33

For example, a shift in the mean community carbon use efficiency (or c) will lead to a
decrease in NPP as observed (DeLucia et al., 2007). Utilizing eqn. 11 we can now
codify several additional TDT predictions based on SLA (see Table 3).

Shifts in trait distributions and ecosystem measures across local abiotic gradients –
We tested several predictions generated by TDT (Table 1) with data collected along an
elevational gradient in Colorado. We (Henderson, Sloat and Enquist) have measured
community composition, ecosystem fluxes and traits of all individuals in several
communities across an elevational gradient within subalpine communities near the
Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL, Gunnison Co., CO, USA). Sites
ranged from 2,460 m to 3,380 m and had similar slope, aspect and vegetation. The
lowest elevation site is characterized as a semi-arid sagebrush scrub whereas subalpine
meadow communities dominate at the higher elevations. Leaf traits were measured
from every individual within a 1.2 x 1.2m plot. Measures of total ecosystem carbon
production, community weighted SLA and variances were obtained by harvesting
biomass and measuring total ecosystem carbon fluxes or Net Ecosystem Production,
NEP (umol CO2 m-2 sec-1). A more detailed listing of the methods used in our analyses
is given in the Supplemental Document.

Local Tests of TDT Predictions - We next tested several predictions generated by TDT
(Table 1) with data from the Park Grass Experiment (PGE) data from Rothamsted, UK.
The PGE follows grassland plant community composition over a 140-yr period. Started
in 1956, it is the oldest ecological experiment in the world (Silvertown et al., 2006).

34

The dataset is unique as it allows us to assess community responses to an
environmental driver - the experimental altering of soil nutrient availability. We use
this dataset to assess how a change in the environment, E, in this case soil nutrients,
differentially influences community composition and ecosystem function via the trait
distribution, C(z). Within this experimental setup, the main environmental driver is a
nutrient addition in the fertilized plot. We first focused on quantifying community SLA
frequency distributions. However, as a more direct test of TDT, we also assessed two
other key traits, plant height and seed size (see Supplemental Document). To
approximate the trait distribution, C(z), we assigned species mean traits to species
found within the PGE from the LEDA database (Kleyer et al., 2008). A detailed listing
of the methods used in our analyses is given in the Supplemental Document including
background of the Park Grass Experiment.

VII. Results
Community trait shifts across local gradients - Numerous studies have documented
shifts in the traits of communities and assemblages across environmental gradients
(Fonseca et al., 2000; Ackerly, 2003; Choler, 2005; Swenson & Enquist, 2007).
However, many studies generally calculate a species mean trait as part of a species list
thus ignoring intra-specific variation. In contrast, several recent studies have measured
traits within communities to assess community-level trait shifts (Gaucherand &
Lavorel, 2007; Lavorel et al., 2008; Albert et al., 2010; Hulshof et al., 2013). For
example, Cornwell and Ackerly (2009) show that across a gradient of water

35

availability, the community mean and intraspecific mean SLA significantly shifted such
that drier environments have lower mean SLA (Fig. 4A).

Shifts of community trait distributions across environmental gradients - Data from our
elevational gradient at the Rocky Mountain Biological Lab, Gothic CO (see Bryant et
al., 2008; Sides et al., 2014; Sloat et al., 2014), provide one of the first studies to
measure the functional traits of every single individual within a given community (Fig
4B). Few studies have fully documented the community trait distribution by measuring
trait values from every individual within the community. In this system increasing
elevation is associated with a decrease in temperature and increase in precipitation, and
these changes drive the observed increase in SLA with elevation (Sides et al., 2014).
With increasing elevation, leaves have less structural durability, and lower life spans
due to a shorter growing season but have higher photosynthetic rates (Enquist,
Henderson, Sloat unpublished data ). According to TDT the elevational trend in SLA is
due to a shift in the optimum trait value based on temperature and water availability,
with a corresponding shift in the range of successful trait values.

Assessing shifts in inter- and interaspecific trait variation allows us to assess two
central assumptions of TDT. First, trait distributions show directional shifts across
gradients. According to Eqn. 10, for a given E, those individuals with phenotypes that
are closer to the mean community value should have, on average, the highest growth
rates. Previous studies along this same gradient and study site have documented a rapid
turnover of species with elevation (Bryant et al., 2008). Figure 4B indicates that the

36

strong species diversity gradient is also reflected by a shift in traits. Note the range of
trait variation is approximately 2-3 orders of magnitude. This range of trait values
observed within communities in our gradient is approximately ½ of the fraction of the
variation observed in SLA across the globe across all plants (Reich et al., 1997). So,
across the span of about ~25km distance between their study sites, we observe a
significant fraction of the trait variation that is observed within species across the globe.
As more studies document shifts in SLA across strong environmental gradients (such as
elevation, flooding, soil water availability, disturbance), it is becoming clear that the
magnitude of change can be nearly as large the global variation in the trait (Elser et al.,
2010; Violle et al., 2012). These results suggest that more local studies of community
trait distributions are reasonable proxies or natural laboratories for scaling up traitbased ecology across large global climate gradients as well as to predict future climate
change scenarios.

Second, analyses from Sides et al. (2014) and Cornwell and Ackerly (2009) also provide a
key assessment to a core assumption of TDT. According to TDT, for a given environment,
E, if there is a mean optimal phenotype that maximizes growth rate given an environmental
tradeoff (Fig. 2) then a external filters and/or selection/plasticity will then promote
convergence of traits around this local optimal phenotype (Norberg et al. 2001; see also
Violle et al., 2012). Both of these studies show that patterns of intra-specific mean trait
shifts across an environmental gradient are in the same direction as the interspecific
community shift across the gradient (see Fig.4A). In other words, intraspecific trait
variation in local populations shift in the same direction as the community trait distribution.

37

This is consistent with the expectation that either selection and/ or phenotypic plasticity has
resulted in individuals that adjust their phenotypes to better match an optimal phenotype
within each community.

Shifts of assemblage trait distributions across broad environmental gradients - Across
broad-scale geographic gradients, recent geographic trait mapping analyses from
Swenson et al. (2012) and Šímová et al. (2014) show that the mean assemblage trait
value of many plant functional traits vary directionally across biogeographic scales.
Geographic variation in the mean tree assemblage SLA as well as tree size (height, a
proxy for plant mass, m) shows significant shifts in both traits across gradients at the
biogeographic scale (Fig 5). As is assumed in TDT, across a given environmental
gradient, E, the mean community value, C(z) or C(b0) will shift. Indeed, across North
American, Šímová et al. find that the mean assemblage SLA is positively correlated
with annual precipitation (r2=0.539) but negatively related to annual temperature
seasonality (r2=-0.440) (see Table 2 in Šímová et al. (2014)).

Building better models for variation in ecosystem function via the shape of trait
distributions and Metabolic Scaling Theory –
At the local scale measures of trait distributions associated with our theory in principle
can be used to scale up to ecosystem function as well as to predict potential future
community responses to climate change. In support of this we do find that a shift in the
community specific leaf area is associated with a corresponding shift in net ecosystem
productivity or carbon flux or Net Ecosystem Production – the net carbon uptake of the

38

ecosystem (umol CO2 m-2 sec-1). Focusing on the key trait SLA and variation in
community biomass, CTot, to log transformed data, we fit a simplified version of the
b
TDT scaling model NEP ∝ CWM SLA ⋅ CWVSLA ⋅ CTot
using site as a factor and

allowing the scaling exponent, b, to float. Here the values CWM SLA and CWVSLA
are the community abundance weighted mean and variance in SLA respectively. The
fitted model predicts 0.778 of the variation in net ecosystem production or NEP
(df=22, F = 11.04, p < 0.0001, AIC = -24.39). Further, increasing variance, CWVSLA
decreases NEP. So, after for controlling for site level differences, communities with
more variance in SLA had lower NEP. In contrast, variation in species diversity
explains none of the variation NEP in this system (r2=0.029, p = 0.3617, AIC = 7.92).
Additional analyses underscore the importance of both CWM SLA and CWVSLA on
influencing variation NEP across this elevational gradient (see Supplemental
Information). Together, these results support several key predictions of TDT - the shift
in the mean of C(b0) is closely tied to environmental drivers and that shifts in the mean
and variance of C(b0) is a primary driver of variation in community carbon flux (Fig
4C-D).

Across broad climatic gradients, recently Michaletz et al. (2014) utilized MST to
predict variation in annual net primary productivity (NPP, grams of biomass per area
per year). In support of MST, rates of growing season NPP scaled with total autotrophic
biomass indistinguishable from the allometrically ideal value of 3/5 predicted value in
eqn. 12. Their analysis support another prediction of TDT that controlling for scaled

39

effects of total biomass, CTot, on NPP shows that shifts in b0 , primarily because of
shifts in <SLA> , will also shift variation in NPP (Fig. 7).

At larger biogeographic scales, assemblage trait maps such as Fig 5 could then be used
to predict ecosystem functioning. At these larger geographic scales, if the distribution
of SLA still reasonably approximate rates of biomass production, then, according to
TDT, regions with high mean SLA and low variance should have the highest rates of
instantaneous net primary production. In general, recent compilation of geographic
variation in instantaneous rates of terrestrial ecosystem NPP from remotely sensed data
indicate that areas with the highest instantaneous rates of NPP do generally correspond2
to assemblages with high mean and low variance in SLA. However, according to eqn.
16 one should also control for total system biomass (which correlates with variation in
tree height) as well as variation in the other traits that also can influence NPP.
Nonetheless, the correspondence between biogeographic variation traits and predictions
from TDT is a promising future direction.

Temporal trait shifts across fertilization gradients – The results from the long-term
dynamics and fertilization experiment from Rothamsted are given in Tables 2-3 as well
as Figure 6 and S3-S5. Within the Rothamsted dataset, all of the traits studied, the
biomass-weighted distribution of the trait specific leaf area, SLA, was associated with
the most prominent shifts in the central moments of communities in response to
fertilization (Fig S1, Table 2; see also Supplemental Document). For both fertilized and

2

http://daac.ornl.gov/NPP/npp_home. shtml#

40

control plots, all four moments of the community SLA distribution changed
significantly. The overall effect of fertilization on the community trait distribution is
consistent with fertilization differentially favoring certain phenotypes (Chapin &
Shaver, 1985; Suding et al., 2005) and a replacement of slower growing species with
faster growing species (Grime & Hunt, 1975; Chapin, 1980; Knops & Reinhart, 2000).
Similar to past findings, across all plots, the community mean SLA increased (see
Knops & Reinhart, 2000; Craine et al., 2001) and the variance decreased. The
directional community trait shift is reflected in increased skewness values (differing
from zero). Fertilization also led to a shift in the kurtosis but only for SLA values.
Specifically, SLA shifted from negative kurtosis values to zero or positive kurtosis
values suggestive that fertilization increased rates of competitive exclusion of
suboptimal trait values leading to a more peaked trait distribution. Intriguingly, the
direction and rate of change for fertilized versus control plots differed in sign and
magnitude indicating that the trait distributions of control and experimental plots
steadily diverged over time.

The Park Grass Experiment supports several predictions from TDT. First, TDT predicts
that a shift in an environmental driver (fertilization in this case) should primarily be
seen as a shift in traits associated with growth rate. Of all of the traits assessed, SLA
showed the strongest shifts over time (Table 1). The other traits showed relatively little
to no change over time. The disproportionate shift in SLA is consistent to expectations
from TDT as SLA is the only trait directly linked to the growth function, f(b0). Second,
consistent with a shifting in an optimal phenotype, the skewness of the fertilized plot

41

increased over time. Third, consistent with a productivity-trait variance tradeoff, the
annual net primary productivity (NPP) was positively correlated with community mean
and kurtosis of the SLA distribution but negatively correlated with variance in SLA
(Fig. 6; Table 3), Lastly, shifts in the trait distribution are more closely tied to NPP than
species richness (see Table 3). We observe a weak to negative correlation between
species richness and NPP (Fig. 6A; Table S1), which is opposite to a hypothesized
positive relationship predicted solely from Biodiversity and Ecosystem Functioning
(BEF) theory on species richness (Tilman et al., 1997).

Discussion
We have shown that Trait Driver Theory or TDT can formalize numerous assumptions
and approaches in trait-based ecology. We provide examples of how this can be done
for several different biodiversity hypotheses in terms of the dispersion of traits (Table 1
& 3). We further argue that ecological theories need to move beyond species richness
and be recast in terms of organismal performance via functional traits. As a result,
TDT offers an alternative framework to the standard taxonomic approach for linking
biodiversity and ecosystem functioning, where primacy has been placed on the
importance of species richness. TDT instead focuses on the importance of ‘trait
diversity’ via the shape of the trait distribution of individuals and shared performance
currencies (e.g., growth). Because TDT incorporates intraspecific variation, it
necessarily includes natural selection as a process that shapes the trait distribution. By
incorporating interspecific trait variation, it also includes “selective” processes at
higher levels of organization within the community, such as species sorting (see also

42

Shipley et al. (2010)). We show that using TDT to analyze these processes leads to
several predictions opposite to predictions made by Biodiversity Ecosystem Function
theory (Tilman et al., 1997; Naeem & Wright, 2003; see also Table 3), it also offers a
useful alternative hypothesis by which to assess the linkage between ‘diversity’
(whether measured by species richness or via the trait distribution) and ecosystem
functioning.

TDT also offers a predictive framework for management. Increasingly, trait-based
approaches to management have shown that a focus on trait shifts due to land use, as
well as management and agricultural practice, can yield deeper insight into the
processes of concern to managers (Garnier & Navas, 2012). For example, biomass
production, the timings of peak production and plant digestibility, response time to
disturbance can be predicted from the shape of the community trait distribution as well
as many of the plant traits underlying our general growth equation (see studies and
references listed in Garnier & Navas, 2012).

Our analyses find that none of the central-moments of the trait distribution in the Park
Grass dataset are correlated with species richness (see Table S1 in the Supplemental
Document). Indeed, species richness does not appear to be a reliable proxy for how the
diversity of phenotypes and trait distributions respond to environmental change.
Further, across large biogeographic gradients, recent studies have found that total
functional trait space and dispersion are unrelated to species richness (Safi et al., 2011;
Lamanna et al., 2014; Šímová et al., 2014). The potential for improved predictions

43

using trait distributions linked to metabolic scaling fundamentally comes down to the
increase in information contained in traits that is not necessarily present in a species
richness-based approach (Tilman et al., 1997) or even a phylogenetic approach to
community ecology (Cavender-Bares et al., 2009). Although TDT is based on
simplifying assumptions, it helps to better connect and scale trait-based ecology and
MST with large-scale ecology and biogeography. It integrates and builds upon prior
work that (i) developed highly mechanistic trait-based models (Norberg et al., 2001;
Zhang, 2013) and other work that predicted how individual growth rates change across
scale with size and temperature (Enquist et al., 2007a). TDT thus enables ecological
theories to be ‘scaled up’ to predict and test the consequences of how organismal
response to climate change will ramify at the community and ecosystem levels across
both local- and large-scale gradients in geography (space) and fluctuations in time
(climate change).

It is becoming clear that multiple assembly processes—abiotic filtering, biological
enemies, competition, facilitation, below ground competition—likely operate
simultaneously and at differing scales to structure communities and larger scale species
assemblages (Grime, 2006; Cavender-Bares et al., 2009; Swenson & Enquist, 2009;
Mayfield & Levine, 2010). The result is that the distribution of some traits may be
more over- or under-dispersed than others. Future work should better link empirical
data with theory to test the community and ecosystem responses when multiple trait
drivers influence trait variance and when trait optima are strongly influenced by
differing levels of ecological interactions (competition, predation, mutualism etc.). Our

44

work has primarily focused on the traits and environmental drivers that underlie growth
rate. Indeed, refining and extending TDT will also require better identification of the
above and below ground traits that influence growth rate. Lastly, analysis of the shift
in the mean and variance of assemblage values of many plant functional traits as well
as stand biomass across biogeographic scales may provide the necessary basis to
predict ecosystem functioning across large scales. Focusing on variation in specific
leaf area, SLA, TDT predicts that the distribution of SLA will influence rates of
biomass production. Correcting for the effects of stand biomass (see Eqn. 8),
assemblages with high mean SLA and low variance should have the highest rates of
instantaneous net primary production. In general, recent compilation of geographic
variation in instantaneous rates of NPP from remotely sensed data indicate that areas
with the highest instantaneous rates of NPP generally do correspond (Zhao et al., 2005;
Zhao & Running, 2010) to assemblages with high mean and low variance in SLA
regions identified by Swenson et al. (2012) and Simova et al. (2014) . TDT also
predicts that while regions with relatively lower trait variance will be more sensitive to
rapid directional climate change, assemblages with greater variance, however, would be
expected to more closely track climate change. Future tests of TDT at the scale of
global ecology should more formally assess the predictions of TDT at this scale by
assessing the specific relationships between the trait distribution, vegetation biomass,
and possible covariation of other traits.

The TDT prediction of an inverse relationship between trait variance and production is
not necessarily in conflict with either “positive species complementarity”—niche

45

partitioning allow species to capture more resources in ways that are complementary in
both space and time (Tilman, 1999) or “transgressive overyielding” where species use
resources in ways that are complementary in space or time to stably coexist with one
another so that more diverse communities capture a greater fraction of available
resources and produce more biomass than even their most productive species (see
Tilman et al. 1997). TDT needs to be reconciled with these ideas because recent
studies confirmed that within biodiversity experiments, “positive species
complementarity” does enhance ecosystem productivity (Cardinale et al., 2007). Given
TDT, a natural question is how are trait distributions modified when complementarity
effects are strong? Effects such as complementarity can be incorporated into TDT
growth functions as explained in Savage et al. (2007).

In sum, we have argued that more powerful tests of biodiversity theories need to move
beyond species richness and explicitly focus on mechanisms generating diversity via
trait composition and diversity via the shape of trait distributions. The rise of trait-based
ecology has led to an increased focus on the distribution and dynamics of traits across
broad geographic and climatic gradients and how these distributions influence
ecosystem function. However, a trait-based ecology that is explicitly formulated to
apply across different scales (e.g., species that differ in size) and gradients (e.g.,
environmental temperatures) has yet to be articulated. The Trait Drivers Theory, TDT,
presented here is a formalization of essential steps for mechanistically linking and
scaling functional traits for individuals with the dynamics of ecological communities
and ecosystem functioning. This TDT approach builds upon and complements existing

46

trait-based approaches in ecology (e.g. Grime, 1998; Lavorel & Garnier, 2002; Kraft et
al., 2008; Suding et al., 2008a). It is appealing because it can connect individual
physiology and traits with ecosystem dynamics and how both respond to climate
change (Suding et al., 2008b), geographic gradients, and differing ecological processes
(e.g. niche versus neutral see Weiher et al. 2011). Given the increasing ability to
remotely sense numerous traits of terrestrial vegetation (Doughty et al., 2011; Asner et
al., 2014) and the increasing access to both plant and animal trait data (Kattge et al.,
2011), TDT and its elaborations are ripe for providing empirically-grounded,
mechanistic models of ecosystem dynamics from local to large scales.

Acknowledgments
We thank Mark Westoby who provided enthusiasm and input during the writing of
initial drafts of this paper. We also thank the ARC-NZ Vegetation Network, working
group 36, led by VMS, for their generosity and support in bringing us all together to
meet and to initiate this collaboration and paper. We thank other members of working
group 36, especially Christine Lamanna, Tony Dell, Mick McCarthy, and Graham D.
Farquhar, who helped us solidify our central arguments. C.V. was supported by a Marie
Curie International Outgoing Fellowship within the 7th European Community
Framework Program (DiversiTraits project, no. 221060). B.J.E. and V.M.S. were
supported by an NSF ATB award and BJE by an NSF Macrosystems award. C.T.W.
was supported by NSF Grant DEB-0618097. JN was supported by the Swedish
research council and FORMAS grant EKOKLIM. Lastly, we thank the Park Grass

47

staff, in particular Andy Macdonald and Margaret Glendining for assistance with and
making available the Park Grass data.

48

1
2
3
4
5
6

Table 1. Summary of the core predictions from Trait Drivers Theory for how the different central moments of the trait distribution will
respond to differing biotic and abiotic forces and how they will then in turn influence community dynamics and ecosystem functioning.
Trait Driver Theory (TDT) can incorporate each of these forces via the shape of the trait biomass distribution, C(z), to then make specific
predictions for how each can drive the dynamics of C(z) and ecosystem functioning (see text). Parameterizing predictions for specific cases
depends upon the traits that affect the growth rate, f.
Moment of Community Trait
Predictions for rate of community response
Distribution, C(z)
to a changing environment
I. Mean
(a) Will shift if environmental change alters value of
zopt and time scales are not too rapid and oscillatory
(b) Lags zopt by an amount that depends on rate of change
in environment, rates of immigration, and the forces that
influence the variance.
II. Variance
(a) Decreases with strong abiotic filtering.
(b) Decreases with strong rates of competitive exclusion
(c) Can increase with immigration and reduced competition.
(d) Under neutral theory, if no immigration or mutation,
variance will decrease over time so as to decrease response
abilities over time.
III. Skewness

IV. Kurtosis

(a) Skewness values > or < 0 can reflect a lag between z
and zopt and a rapidly changing community due to an
environmental driver or extreme limit to a trait value.
(b) Increases in skewness can indicate a response to rapid
environmental changes or the importance of rare species
€
advantages in local coexistence.
(a) Positive kurtosis reflects competitive exclusion or other
types of biotic exclusion
(b) Kurtosis close to -1.2 reflects a uniform distribution
consistent with uniform niche partitioning.
(c) More negative values could reflect the coexistence of
contrasting ecological strategies, recent or sudden
environmental change.

Predicted Ecosystem Effects
(i) Will shift productivity according to form of growth
equation, f.

(i) Increased variance implies lower productivity for fixed or
stable environment.
(ii) Increased variance accelerates community response to
environmental changes.
(iii) Increased variance will lead to increased stability of ecosystem
functioning by reducing the lag of z and zopt in varying
environments.
(i) Depending upon kurtosis and variance value, productivity
should be reduced compared with a community with similar
variance but skewness equal to zero.

€

(i) If the trait mean equals zopt, forces that decrease kurtosis will
decrease producitity while forces that increase kurtosis will
increase productivity.
(ii) In a varying environment, greater kurtosis will lead to increased
stability of ecosystem functioning by reducing the lag of z and
zopt.

€

SLA

Moment of Community
Trait Biomass Distribution,
C(z)
Mean (CWM)
Variance (CWV)
Skewness (CWS)
Kurtosis (CWK)

0.65*** (-)
0.48** (+)
0.13ns.
0.69*** (-)

0.40** (+)
0.26* (-)
0.29* (-)
0.10ns.

Corresponding
TDT Predictions
in Table 1
See I.a and I.b
See II. a-e
See III a-b
See IV a-b

Height

Table 2. Observed temporal changes in the central moments of the community trait distribution C(z) in the Park Grass Experiment.
Predictions from Trait Driver Theory correspond to the cells indicated in Table 1. As an estimate of the central-moments of C(z) we
estimated the community weighted values for the mean, variance, skewness and kurtosis (CWM, CWV, CWS, and CWK, respectively).
Values are the Pearson product-moment correlations, r, are for the three main traits investigated, specific leaf area or SLA (aL/mL), adult
height, and seed size. In accordance with TDT, for the trait SLA, the distributions of the fertilized and unfertilized plots have diverged for
all trait moments. Further, in accordance with TDT, increasing fertilization leads to an increasing skew of the SLA distribution, but not for
seed size and reproductive height, traits that do not directly underlie the growth equation, indicating that fertilization is a strong
environmental driver that influences plant growth. Correlations are for both unfertilized: plot 2 and fertilized: plot 16. *, P < 0.05 ; **, P <
0.01 ; ***, P < 0.001 ; ns., not significant; (-), negative relationship; (+) positive relationship. Observed shifts in the central moments of
SLA are generally in accordance to predictions from TDT (see Table 1 and text for details).

Mean (CWM)
Variance (CWV)
Skewness (CWS)
Kurtosis (CWK)

0.61** (-)
0.27* (-)
0.17ns.
0.38** (+)

0.04ns.
0.51** (+)
0.02ns.
0.20ns.

See I.a and I.b
See II. a-e
See III a-b
See IV a-b

Seed
mass

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Control
(Unfertilized)

Fertilized

Mean (CWM)
Variance (CWV)
Skewness (CWS)
Kurtosis (CWK)

0.21ns.
0.38** (-)
0.56** (-)
0.31* (-)

0.01ns.
0.01ns.
0.00ns.
0.01ns.

See I.a and I.b
See II. a-e
See III a-b
See IV a-b

Table 3. Correlations between trait moments and variation in annual Net Primary Productivity
for the Park Grass experiment. Also listed are the predicted signs of the correlations made from
Trait Driver Theory (see text and Table 1) and from Biodiversity-Ecosystem Functioning
Theory (assuming the theory of Tilman et al. 1997 where variability in trait SLA is a good
proxy for variation in species richness via niche or trait space). Note, both theories make
opposite predictions for the signs of the correlations. NP = no specific prediction is made as
such predictions would depend upon specifics of system. As an estimate of the centralmoments of C(z) we estimated the community biomass weighted values for the mean, variance,
skewness and kurtosis (CWM, CWV, CWS, and CWK, respectively).
Central Moment of

Observed correlations

Community Trait

Predicted Response –

Predicted Response –

Trait Driver Theory

Biodiversity Theory

SLA

Distribution
Mean (CWM)

0.71*** (+)

+

NP

Variance (CWV)

0.45*** (-)

-

+

Skewness (CWS)

0.28*** (+)

NP

NP

Kurtosis (CWK)

0.19*** (+)

+

-

*, P < 0.05 ; **, P < 0.01 ; ***, P < 0.001 ; ns., not significant
(-), negative relationship; (+) positive relationship

References
Ackerly, D.D. (2003) Community assembly, niche conservatism, and adaptive evolution in
changing environments. International Journal of Plant Sciences, 164, S165-S184.
Ackerly, D.D. & Monson, R.K. (2003) Waking the sleeping giant: The evolutionary
foundations of plant function. International Jounal of Plant Sciences, 164, S1-S6.
Adler, P.B., Salguero-Gómez, R., Compagnoni, A., Hsu, J.S., Ray-Mukherjee, J., MbeauAche, C. & Franco, M. (2014) Functional traits explain variation in plant life
history strategies. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111, 740-745.
Albert, C.H., Thuiller, W., Yoccoz, N., Soudan, A., Boucher, F., Saccone, P. & Lavorel, S.
(2010) Intraspecific functional variability: extent, structure and sources of variation.
Journal of Ecology, 98, 604-613.
Antonovics, J. (1976) The nature of limits to natural selection. Annals of the Missouri
Botanical Garden, 224-247.
Arnold, S.J. (1983) Morphology, performance, and fitness. Amer. Zool. , 23, 347-361.
Asner, G.P., Martin, R.E., Tupayachi, R., Anderson, C.B., Sinca, F., Carranza-Jiménez, L.
& Martinez, P. (2014) Amazonian functional diversity from forest canopy chemical
assembly. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111, 5604-5609.
Baraloto, C., Timothy Paine, C.E., Patiño, S., Bonal, D., Hérault, B. & Chave, J. (2010)
Functional trait variation and sampling strategies in species-rich plant communities.
Functional Ecology, 24, 208-216.
Belmaker, J. & Jetz, W. (2013) Spatial scaling of functional structure in bird and mammal
assemblages. American Naturalist 181, 464-478.
Boulangeat, I., Philippe, P., Abdulhak, S., Douzet, R., Garraud, L., Lavergne, S., Lavorel,
S., Van Es, J., Vittoz, P. & Thuiller, W. (2012) Improving plant functional groups
for dynamic models of biodiversity: at the crossroads between functional and
community ecology. Global Change Biology, 18, 3464-3475.
Bryant, J.A., Lamanna, C., Morlon, H., Kerkhoff, A.J., Enquist, B.J. & Green, J.L. (2008)
Microbes on mountainsides: Contrasting elevational patterns of bacterial and plant
diversity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 105, 11505-11511.
Cardinale, B.J., Wright, J.P., Cadotte, M.W., Carroll, I.T., Hector, A., Srivastava, D.S.,
Loreau, M. & Weis, J.J. (2007) Impacts of plant diversity on biomass production
increase through time because of species complementarity. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 104, 18123-18128.
Cavender-Bares, J., Kozak, K., Fine, P. & Kembel, S. (2009) The merging of community
ecology and phylogenetic biology. Ecology Letters, 12, 693-715.
Chapin, F.S. & Shaver, G.R. (1985) Individualistic Growth Response of Tundra Plant
Species to Environmental Manipulations in the Field. Ecology, 66, 564-576.
Chapin, F.S.I. (1980) The mineral nutrition of wild plants. Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics, 11, 233-260.
Chapin, F.S.I., Zavaleta, E.S., Eviner, V.T., Naylor, R.L., Vitousek, P.M., Reynolds, H.L.,
Hooper, D.U., Lavorel, S., Sala, O.E., Hobbie, S.E., Mack, M.C. & Diaz, S. (2000)
Consequences of changing biodiversity. Nature, 405, 234-242.
Choler, P. (2005) Consistent shifts in alpine plant traits along a mesotopographical
gradient. Arctic, Antarctic, and Alpine Research, 37, 444-453.

49

Coomes, D.A. (2006) Challenges to the generality of WBE theory. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution, 21, 593-596.
Cornwell, W. & Ackerly, D.D. (2009) Community assembly and shifts in plant trait
distributions across an environmental gradient in coastal California. Ecological
Monographs, 79, 109-126.
Craine, J.M. (2009) Resource strategies of wild plants. Princeton University Press.
Craine, J.M., Froehle, J., Tilman, D.G., Wedin, D.A. & Chapin, I.F.S. (2001) The
relationships among root and leaf traits of 76 grassland species and relative
abundance along fertility and disturbance gradients. Oikos, 93, 274-285.
Damuth, J. (1981) Population-Density and Body Size in Mammals. Nature, 290, 699-700.
Davis, M.B. & Shaw, R.G. (2001) Range shifts and adaptive responses to quaternary
climate change. Science, 292, 673-679.
Dell, A.I., Pawar, S. & Savage, V.M. (2013) The thermal dependence of biological traits.
Ecology 94, 1205-1206
DeLucia, E., Drake, J.E., Thomas, R.B. & Gonzalez-Meler, M. (2007) Forest carbon use
efficiency: is respiration a constant fraction of gross primary production? Global
Change Biology, 13, 1157-1167.
Diaz, S., Lavorel, S., De Bello, F., Quétier, F., Grigulis, K. & Robson, M. (2007)
Incorporating plant functional diversity effects in ecosystem service assessments.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 36, 20684-20689.
Díaz, S. & Cabido, M. (2001) Vive la difference: plant functional diversity matterns to
ecosystem processes. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 16, 646-655.
Díaz, S., Hodgson, J.G., Thompson, K., Cabido, M., Cornelissen, J.H.C., Jalili, A.,
Montserrat-Marti, G., Grime, J.P., Zarrinkamar, F., Asri, S., Band, R., Basconcelo,
S., Castro-Diez, P., Funes, G., Hamzehee, B., Khoshnevi, M., Perez- Harguindeguy,
N., Perez-Rontome, M.C., Shirvany, F.A., Vendramini, F., Yazdani, S., AbbasAzimi, R., Bogaard, A., Boustani, S., Charles, M., Dehghan, M., de Torres-Espuny,
L., Falczuk, V., Guerrero-Campo, J., Hynd, A., Jones, G., Kowsary, E., KazemiSaeed, F., Maestro-Martinez, M., Romo-Diez, A., Shaw, S., Siavash, B., VillarSalvador, P. & R., Z.M. (2004) The plant traits that drive ecosystems: Evidence
from three continents. Journal of Vegetation Science, 15, 295-304.
Dieckmann, U. & Ferrière, R. (2004) Adaptive dynamics and evolving biodiversity.
Evolutionary conservation biology, 188-224.
Doughty, C.E., Asner, G.P. & Martin, R.E. (2011) Predicting tropical plant physiology
from leaf and canopy spectroscopy. Oecologia 165, 289-299.
Elser, J.J., Fagan, W.F., Kerkhoff, A.J., Swenson, N.G. & Enquist, B.J. (2010) Biological
stoichiometry of plant production: metabolism, scaling and ecological response to
global change. New Phytologist, 186, 593-608.
Enquist, B.J. (2010) Wanted: A general and predictive theory for trait-based plant ecology.
BioScience, 60, 854-855.
Enquist, B.J., Brown, J.H. & West, G.B. (1998) Allometric scaling of plant energetics and
population density. Nature, 395, 163.
Enquist, B.J., West, G.B. & Brown, J.H. (2009) Extensions and evaluations of a general
quantitative theory of forest structure and dynamics. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 106, 7046-7051.

50

Enquist, B.J., Kerkhoff, A.J., Huxman, T.E. & Economo, E.P. (2007a) Adaptive
differences in plant physiology and ecosystem invariants: Insights from a Metabolic
Scaling Model. Global Change Biology, 13, 591-609.
Enquist, B.J., Economo, E.P., Huxman, T.E., Allen, A.P., Ignace, D.D. & Gillooly, J.F.
(2003) Scaling metabolism from organisms to ecosystems. Nature, 423, 639-642.
Enquist, B.J., Kerkhoff, A.J., Stark, S.C., Swenson, N.G., McCarthy, M.C. & Price, C.A.
(2007b) A general integrative model for scaling plant growth, carbon flux, and
functional trait spectra. Nature, 449, 218-222.
Enquist, B.J., Allen, A.P., Brown, J.H., Gillooly, J.F., Kerkhoff, A.J., Niklas, K.J., Price,
C.A. & West, G.B. (2007c) Biological scaling: Does the exception prove the rule?
Nature, 445, E9-E10.
Evans, G.C. (1972) The quantitative analysis of plant growth. University of California
Press, Berkeley.
Ferriere, R. & Legendre, S. (2013) Eco-evolutionary feedbacks, adaptive dynamics and
evolutionary rescue theory. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences, 368, 20120081.
Fonseca, C.R., Overton, J.M., Collins, B. & Westoby, M. (2000) Shifts in traitcombinations along rainfall and phosphorus gradients. Journal of Ecology, 88, 964977.
Freckleton, R.P. & Watkinson, A.R. (2001) Predicting competition coefficients for plant
mixtures: reciprocity ; transitivity and correlations with life-history traits. Ecology
Letters ;, 4, 348-357.
Frenne, P., Graae, B.J., Rodríguez-Sánchez, F., Kolb, A., Chabrerie, O., Decocq, G., Kort,
H., Schrijver, A., Diekmann, M. & Eriksson, O. (2013) Latitudinal gradients as
natural laboratories to infer species' responses to temperature. Journal of Ecology,
Funk, J.L., Cleland, E.E., Suding, K.N. & Zavaleta, E.S. (2008) Restoration through
reassembly: plant traits and invasion resistance. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 23,
695-703.
Garnier, E. & Navas, M.-L. (2012) A trait-based approach to comparative functional plant
ecology: concepts, methods and applications for agroecology. A review. Agronomy
for Sustainable Development, 32, 365-399.
Garnier, E., Cortez, J., Billes, G., Navas, M.-L., Roumet, C., Debussche, M., Laurent, G.,
Blanchard, A., Aubry, D., Bellmann, A., Neill, C. & Toussaint, J.-P. (2004) Plant
functional markers capture ecosystem properties during secondary succession.
Ecology, 85, 2630-2637.
Gaucherand, S. & Lavorel, S. (2007) New method for rapid assessment of the functional
composition of herbaceous plant communities. Austral Ecology, 32, 927-936.
Ghalambor, C.K., McKay, J.K., Carroll, S.P. & Reznick, D.N. (2007) Adaptive versus
non-adaptive phenotypic plasticity and the potential for contemporary adaptation in
new environments. Functional ecology, 21, 394-407.
Gillooly, J., Allen, A.P., West, G.B. & Brown, J.H. (2005) The rate of DNA evolution:
Effects of body size and temperature on the molecular clock. Proceedings of teh
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102, 140-145.
Gillooly, J.F., Brown, J.H., West, G.B., Savage, V.M. & Charnov, E.L. (2001) Effects of
size and temperature on metabolic rate. Science, 293, 2248-2251.

51

Goldberg, D.E. & Landa, K. (1991) Competitive effect and response: hierarchies and
correlated traits in the early stages of competition. The Journal of Ecology, 10131030.
Grace, J.B., Michael Anderson, T., Smith, M.D., Seabloom, E., Andelman, S.J., Meche, G.,
Weiher, E., Allain, L.K., Jutila, H. & Sankaran, M. (2007) Does species diversity
limit productivity in natural grassland communities? Ecology Letters, 10, 680-689.
Grime, J.P. (1977) Evidence for the existance of three primary strategies in plants and its
relevance to ecological and evolutionary theory. American Naturalist, 111, 11691194.
Grime, J.P. (1998) Benefits of plant diversity to ecosystems: Immediate, filter and founder
effects. Journal of Ecology, 86, 902-910.
Grime, J.P. (2006) Trait convergence and trait divergence in herbaceous plant
communities: Mechanisms and consequences. Journal of Vegetation Science, 17,
255-260.
Grime, J.P. & Hunt, R. (1975) Relatve growth-rate: its range and adaptive significance in a
local flora. Journal of Ecology, 63, 393-422.
Han, W., Fang, J. & Guo, D. (2005) Leaf N and P stoichiometry across 753 terrestrial plant
species in China. New Phytologist, 168, 377-385.
Hillebrand, H. & Matthiessen, B. (2009) Biodiversity in a complex world: consolidation
and progress in functional biodiversity research. Ecology Letters, 12, 1405-1419.
Hooper, D.U., Chapin, F.S.I., Ewel, J.J., Hector, A., Inchausti, P., Lavorel, S., Lawton,
J.H., Lodge, D.M., Loreau, M., Naeem, S., Schmid, B., Setälä, H., Symstad, A.J.,
Vandermeer, J. & Wardle, D.A. (2004) Effects of biodiversity on ecosystem
functioning: A consensis of current knowledge. Ecological Monographs, 75, 3-35.
Hubbell, S.P. (2001) The Unified Neutral Theory of Biodiversity and Biogeography.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Hulshof, C.M., Violle, C., Spasojevic, M.J., McGill, B., Damschen, E., Harrison, S. &
Enquist, B.J. (2013) Intra-specific and inter-specific variation in specific leaf area
reveal the importance of abiotic and biotic drivers of species diversity across
elevation and latitude. Journal of Vegetation Science,
Jung, V., Violle, C., Mondy, C., Hoffmann, L. & Muller, S. (2010) Intraspecific variability
and trait-based community assembly. Journal of Ecology, 98, 1134-1140.
Kattge, J., Díaz, S., Lavorel, S., Prentice, I.C., Leadley, P., Bönisch, G., Garnier, E.,
Westoby, M., Reich, P.B., Wright, I.J., Cornelissen, J.H.C., Violle, C., Harrison,
S.P., van Bodegom, P.M., Reichstein, M., Enquist, B.J., Soudzilovskaia, N.A.,
Ackerly, D.D., Anand, M., Atkin, O., Bahn, M., Baker, T.R., Baldocchi, D.,
Bekker, R., Blanco, C.C., Blonder, B., Bond, W.J., Bradstock, R., Bunker, D.E.,
Casanoves, F., Cavender-Bares, J., Chambers, J.Q., Chapin Iii, F.S., Chave, J.,
Coomes, D., Cornwell, W.K., Craine, J.M., Dobrin, B.H., Duarte, L., Durka, W.,
Elser, J., Esser, G., Estiarte, M., Fagan, W.F., Fang, J., Fernández-Méndez, F.,
Fidelis, A., Finegan, B., Flores, O., Ford, H., Frank, D., Freschet, G.T., Fyllas,
N.M., Gallagher, R.V., Green, W.A., Gutierrez, A.G., Hickler, T., Higgins, S.I.,
Hodgson, J.G., Jalili, A., Jansen, S., Joly, C.A., Kerkhoff, A.J., Kirkup, D.,
Kitajima, K., Kleyer, M., Klotz, S., Knops, J.M.H., Kramer, K., Kühn, I.,
Kurokawa, H., Laughlin, D., Lee, T.D., Leishman, M., Lens, F., Lenz, T., Lewis,
S.L., Lloyd, J., Llusià, J., Louault, F., Ma, S., Mahecha, M.D., Manning, P.,

52

Massad, T., Medlyn, B.E., Messier, J., Moles, A.T., Müller, S.C., Nadrowski, K.,
Naeem, S., Niinemets, Ü., Nöllert, S., Nüske, A., Ogaya, R., Oleksyn, J.,
Onipchenko, V.G., Onoda, Y., Ordoñez, J., Overbeck, G., Ozinga, W.A., Patiño, S.,
Paula, S., Pausas, J.G., Peñuelas, J., Phillips, O.L., Pillar, V., Poorter, H., Poorter,
L., Poschlod, P., Prinzing, A., Proulx, R., Rammig, A., Reinsch, S., Reu, B., Sack,
L., Salgado-Negret, B., Sardans, J., Shiodera, S., Shipley, B., Siefert, A., Sosinski,
E., Soussana, J.F., Swaine, E., Swenson, N., Thompson, K., Thornton, P., Waldram,
M., Weiher, E., White, M., White, S., Wright, S.J., Yguel, B., Zaehle, S., Zanne,
A.E. & Wirth, C. (2011) TRY – a global database of plant traits. Global Change
Biology, 17, 2905–2935.
Kleyer, M., Bekker, R.M., Knevel, I.C., Bakker, J.P., Thompson, K., Sonnenschein, M.,
Poschlod, P., van Groenendael, J.M., Klimes, L., Klimesova, J., Klotz, S., Rusch,
G.M., Hermy, M., Adriaens, D., Boedeltje, G. & Bossuyt, B., Dannemann, A.,
Endels, P., Gotzenberger, L., Hodgson, J. G., Jackel, A. K., Kuhn, I., Kunzmann,
D., Ozinga, W. A., Romermann, C., Stadler, M., Schlegelmilch, J., Steendam, H. J.,
Tackenberg, O., Wilmann, B., Cornelissen, J. H. C., Eriksson, O., Garnier, E., Peco,
B. (2008) The LEDA Traitbase: a database of life-history traits of Northwest
European flora. Journal of Ecology, 96, 1266-1274.
Knops, J.M. & Reinhart, K. (2000) Specific Leaf Area Along a Nitrogen Fertilization
Gradient. The American Midland Naturalist, 144, 265-272.
Kraft, N.J.B., Valencia, R. & Ackerly, D.D. (2008) Functional traits and niche-based tree
community assembly in an Amazonian forest. Science, 322, 580-582.
Kunstler, G., Albert, C.H., Courbaud, B., Lavergne, S., Thuiller, W., Vieilledent, G.,
Zimmermann, N.E. & Coomes, D.A. (2011) Effects of competition on tree radialgrowth vary in importance but not in intensity along climatic gradients. Journal of
Ecology, 99, 300-312.
Lamanna, C.A., Benjamin Blonder, Cyrille Violle, Nathan J. B. Kraft, Brody Sandel, Irena
Simova, John C. Donoghue II, Jens-Christian Svenning, Brian J. McGill, Brad
Boyle, Steven Dolins, Peter M. Jørgensen, Aaron Marcuse-Kubitza, Naia MoruetaHolme, Robert K. Peet, William Piel, Jim Regetz, Mark Schildhauer, Nick Spencer,
Barbara M. Theirs, Susan K. Wiser & Enquist, B.J. (2014) Functional trait space
and the latitudinal diversity gradient. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, In Press
Lambers, H., Freijsen, N., Poorter, H., Hirose, T. & van der Werff, H. (1989) Analyses of
growth based on net assimilation rate and nitrogen productivity: Their physiological
background. Variation in growth rate and productivity of higher plants. (ed. by H.
Lambers, M.L. Cambridge, H. Konings and T.L. Pons), pp. 1-17. SPB Academic
Publishing, The Hague, The Netherlands.
Lavorel, S. & Garnier, E. (2002) Predicting changes in community composition and
ecosystem functioning from plant traits: revisiting the Holy Grail. Functional
Ecology, 16, 545-556.
Lavorel, S., Grigulis, K., Lamarque, P., Colace, M.-P., Garden, D., Girel, J., Pellet, G. &
Douzet, R. (2011) Using plant functional traits to understand the landscape
distribution of multiple ecosystem services. Journal of Ecology, 99, 135-147.
Lavorel, S., Díaz, S., Cornelissen, J.H.C., Garnier, E., Harrison, S.P., McIntyre, S., Pausas,
J.G., Pérez-Harguindeguy, N., Roumet, C. & Urcelay, C. (2007) Plant functional

53

types: are we getting any closer to the Holy Grail? Terrestrial ecosystems in a
changing world, pp. 149-164. Springer.
Lavorel, S., Grigulis, K., McIntyr, S., Williams, N., Garden, D., Dorrough, J., Berman, S.,
Quétier, F., Thebault, A. & Bonis, A. (2008) Assessing functional diversity in the
field: methodology matters! Functional Ecology, 22, 134-147.
Levins, R. (1968) Evolution in Changing Environments. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, N.J.
Litchman, E. & Klausmeier, C.A. (2008) Trait-based community ecology of
phytoplankton. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics, 39, 615-639.
Loreau, M., Naeem, S., Inchausti, P., Bengtsson, J., Grime, J.P., hector, A., Hooper, D.U.,
Huston, M.A., Raffaelli, D., Schmid, B., Tilman, D. & Wardle, D.A. (2001)
Biodiversity and ecosystem functioning: current knowledge and future challenges.
Science, 294, 804-808.
MacArthur, R.H. (1972) Geographical Ecology: Patterns in the Distribution of Species.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Marks, C. & Lechowicz, M. (2006) Alternative designs and the evolution of functional
diversity. American Naturalist, 167, 55-67.
Mason, N.W.H., Mouillot, D., Lee, W.G. & Wilson, J.B. (2005) Functional richness,
functional evenness and functional divergence : the primary components of
functional diversity. Oikos, 111, 112-118.
Mayfield, M.M. & Levine, J.M. (2010) Opposing effects of competitive exclusion on the
phylogenetic structure of communities. Ecology Letters, 13, 1085-1093.
Maynard Smith, J. (1976) What determines the rate of evolution? American Naturalist,
110, 331-338.
McGill, B.J., Enquist, B.J., Weiher, E. & Westoby, M. (2006) Rebuilding community
ecology from functional traits. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 21, 178-185.
Messier, J., McGill, B.J. & Lechowicz , M.J. (2010) How do traits vary across ecological
scales? A case for trait-based ecology. Ecology Letters, 13, 838-848.
Michaletz, S.T., Cheng, D., Kerkhoff, A.J. & Enquist, B.J. (2014) Convergence of
terrestrial plant production across global climate gradients. Nature, advance online
publication
Moses, M.E., Hou, C., Woodruff, W.H., West, G.B., Nekola, J.C., Zuo, W. & Brown, J.H.
(2008) Revisiting a model of ontogenetic growth: estimating model parameters
from theory and data. The American Naturalist, 171, 632-645.
Muller, E.B., Nisbet, R.M., Kooijman, S., Elser, J.J. & McCauley, E. (2001) Stoichiometric
food quality and herbivore dynamics. Ecology Letters, 4, 519-529.
Naeem, S. & Wright, J.P. (2003) Disentangling biodiversity effects on ecosystem
functioning: deriving solutions to a seemingly insurmountable problem. Ecology
Letters 6, 567-579.
Naeem, S., Thompson, L.J., Lawler, S.P., Lawton, J.H. & Woodfin, R.M. (1994) Declining
biodiversity can alter the performance of ecosystems. Nature, 368, 734-737.
Naeem, S., Bunker, D.E., Hector, A., Loreau, M. & Perrings, C. (2009) Can we predict the
effects of global change on biodiversity loss and ecosystem functioning?
Biodiversity, Ecosystem Functioning, and Human Wellbeing An Ecological and
Economic Perspective (ed. by S. Naeem, D.E. Bunker, A. Hector, M. Loreau and C.
Perrings), pp. 290-298. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

54

Norberg, J. (2004) Biodiversity and ecosystem functioning: A complex adaptive systems
approach. Limnology and Oceanography, 49, 1269-1277.
Norberg, J., Swaney, D.P., Dushoff, J., Lin, J., Casagrandi, R. & Levin, S.A. (2001)
Phenotypic diversity and ecosystem functioning in changing environments: a
theoretical framework. PNAS, 98, 11376-11381.
Paine, C., Baraloto, C., Chave, J. & Hérault, B. (2011) Functional traits of individual trees
reveal ecological constriants on community assembly in tropical rain forests. Oikos,
120 720-727.
Petchey, O.L. & Gaston, K.J. (2002) Functional diversity (FD), species richness and
community composition. Ecology Letters, 5, 402 - 411.
Peters, R.H. (1983) The Ecological Implications of Body Size. Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge.
Poorter, H. (1989) Interspecific variation in relative growth rate: on ecological causes and
physiological consequences. Causes and Consequences of Variation in Growth
Rate and Productivity in Higher Plants (ed. by H. Lambers, M.L. Cambridge, H.
Konings and T.L. Pons). SPB Academic Publishing, The Hague.
Poorter, H., Niinemets, Ü., Poorter, L., Wright, I.J. & Villar , R. (2009) Causes and
consequences of variation in leaf mass per area (LMA): a meta-analysis. New
Phytologist 565–588, 565–588.
Pulliam, R.H. (1988) Sources, Sinks, and Population Regulation. American Naturalist, 132,
652-661.
Reich, P.B. (2005) Global biogeography of plant chemistry: filling in the blanks. New
Phytologist, 168, 263-266.
Reich, P.B. (2014) The world-wide ‘fast–slow’plant economics spectrum: a traits
manifesto. Journal of Ecology, 102, 275-301.
Reich, P.B. & Oleksyn, J. (2004) Global patterns of plant leaf N and P in relation to
temperature and latitude. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 101, 11001-11006.
Reich, P.B., Walters, M.B. & Ellsworth, D.S. (1997) From tropics to tundra: Global
convergence in plant functioning. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 94, 13730-13734.
Ricker, W.E. (1979) Growth rates and models. Fish Physiology, pp. 677-743. Academic
Press, New York.
Roscher, C., Schumacher, J., Gubsch, M., Lipowsky, A., Weigelt, A., Buchmann, N.,
Schmid, B. & Schulze, E.-D. (2012) Using plant functional traits to explain
diversity–productivity relationships. PloS one, 7, e36760.
Rosenzweig, M.L. (1995) Species Diversity in Space and Time. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Safi, K., Cianciaruso, M.V., Loyola, R.D., Brito, D., Armour-Marshall, K. & Diniz-Filho,
J.A.F. (2011) Understanding global patterns of mammalian functional and
phylogenetic diversity. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences, 366, 2536-2544.
Savage, V.M. (2004) Improved approximations to scaling relationships for species,
populations, and ecosystems across latitudinal and elevational gradients. Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 227, 525-534.

55

Savage, V.M., Webb, C.T. & Norberg, J. (2007) A general multi-trait-based framework for
studying the effects of biodiversity on ecosystem functioning. Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 247, 213-229.
Savage, V.M., Deeds, E.J. & Fontana, W. (2008) Sizing Up Allometric Scaling Theory.
PLoS Comput Biol, 4, e1000171.
Savage, V.M., Gillooly, J.F., Brown, J.H., West, G.B. & Charnov, E.L. (2004) Effects of
body size and temperature on population growth. American Naturalist, 163, E429E441.
Shipley, B. (2000) Plasticity in relative growth rate and its components following a change
in irradiance. Plant Cell and Environment, 23, 1207-1216.
Shipley, B. (2010) From Plant Traits to Vegetation Structure. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Sides, C.B., Enquist B.J., Ebersole, J.J., Smith, M.N., Henderson, A.N. & L.L., S. (2014)
Revisiting Darwin’s hypothesis: Does greater intraspecific variability increase
species’ ecological breadth? American Journal of Botany,
Silvertown, J., Poulton, P., Johnston, A.E., Edwards, G., Heard, M. & Biss, P.M. (2006)
The Park Grass Experiment 1856 - 2006: its contribution to Ecology. Journal of
Ecology, 94, 801-814.
Šímová, I., Violle, C., Kraft, N.J.B., Storch, D., Jens-Christian Svenning, Boyle, B.,
Donoghue, J., Jorgensen, P., McGill, B., Morureta-Holme, N., Peet, R.K., Wiser,
S.K., Piel, W., Regetz, J., Shildhauer, M., Thiers, B. & Enquist, B.J. (2014) Shifts
in trait means and variances in North American tree assemblages: species richness
patterns are loosely related to the functional space. Ecography, (In Press)
Sloat, L.L., Henderson, A., Lamanna, C.A. & B.J., E. (2014) The effect of the foresummer
drought on carbon exchange in subalpine meadows. Ecosystems, (In Press)
Stegen, J.C., Enquist, B.J. & Ferrière, R. (2009) Advancing the metabolic theory of
biodiversity. Ecology Letters, 12, 1001-1015.
Stephenson, N.L., Das, A.J., Condit, R., Russo, S.E., Baker, P.J., Beckman, N.G., Coomes,
D.A., Lines, E.R., Morris, W.K. & Rüger, N. (2014) Rate of tree carbon
accumulation increases continuously with tree size. Nature, 507, 90-93.
Stevens, R.D., Cox, S.B., Strauss, R.E. & Willig, M.R. (2003) Patterns of functional
diversity across an extensive environmental gradient: vertebrate consumers, hidden
treatments and latitudinal trends. Ecology Letters, 6, 1099-1108.
Suding, K., Lavorel, S., Chapin, F., Cornelissen, J., Diaz, S., Garnier, E., Goldberg, D.,
Hooper, D., Jackson, S. & Navas, M.-L. (2008a) Scaling environmental change
through the community-level: a trait-based response-and-effect framework for
plants. Global Change Biology, 14, 1125-1140.
Suding, K.N. & Goldstein, L.J. (2008) Testing the Holy Grail framework: using functional
traits to predict ecosystem change. New Phytologist, 180, 559-562.
Suding, K.N., Collins, S.L., Gough, L., Clark, C., Cleland, E.E., Gross, K.L., Milchunas,
D.G. & Pennings, S. (2005) Functional- and abundance-based mechanisms explain
diversity loss due to N fertilization. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 102, 4387-4392.
Suding, K.N., Lavorel, S., Chapin, F.S., Cornelissen, J.H.C., DÍAz, S., Garnier, E.,
Goldberg, D., Hooper, D.U., Jackson, S.T. & Navas, M.-L. (2008b) Scaling

56

environmental change through the community-level: a trait-based response-andeffect framework for plants. Global Change Biology, 14, 1125-1140.
Swenson, N.G. (2013) The assembly of tropical tree communities - the advances and
shortcomings of phylogentic and funcitonal trait analyses. Ecography, 36, 264-276.
Swenson, N.G. & Enquist, B.J. (2007) Ecological and evolutionary determinants of a key
plant functional trait: Wood density and its community-wide variation across
latitude and elevation. American Journal of Botany, 94, 451-459.
Swenson, N.G. & Enquist, B.J. (2009) Opposing assembly mechanisms in a Neotropical
dry forest: implications for phylogenetic and functional community ecology.
Ecology, 90, 2161-2170.
Swenson, N.G., Enquist, B.J., Pither, J., Kerkhoff, A.J., Boyle, B., Weiser, M.D., Elser,
J.J., Fagan, W.F., Forero-Montaña, J., Fyllas, N., Kraft, N.J.B., Lake, J.K., Moles,
A.T., Patiño, S., Phillips, O.L., Price, C.A., Reich, P.B., Quesada, C.A., Stegen,
J.C., Valencia, R., Wright, I.J., Wright, S.J., Andelman, S., Jørgensen, P.M., Lacher
Jr, T.E., Monteagudo, A., Núñez-Vargas, M.P., Vasquez-Martínez, R. & Nolting,
K.M. (2012) The biogeography and filtering of woody plant functional diversity in
North and South America. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 21, 798–808.
Tilman, D. (1999) The ecological consequences of changes in biodiversity: A search for
general principles. Ecology ;, 80, 1455-1474.
Tilman, D. (2001) An evolutionary approach to ecosystem functioning. PNAS, 98, 1097910980.
Tilman, D., Lehman, C.L. & Thomson, K.T. (1997) Plant diversity and ecosystem
productivity : Theoretical considerations. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 94, 1857-1861.
Tilman, D., Hillerislambers, J. & Harpole, S., et al. (2004) Does metabolic theory apply to
community ecology? It’s a matter of scale. . Ecology, 85, 1797–1799.
Vile, D., Shipley, B. & Garnier, E. (2006) Ecosystem productivity can be predicted from
potential relative growth rate and species abundance. . 9, 1061–1067.
Violle, C. & Jiang, L. (2009) Towards a trait-based quantification of species niche. Journal
of Plant Ecology-Uk, 2, 87-93.
Violle, C., Reich, P., Pacala, S., ENquist B.J. & Kattge, J. (2014) The emergence of
functional biogeography. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, In
Press
Violle, C., Navas, M.-L., Vile, D., Kazakou, E., Fortunel, C., Hummel, I. & Garnier, E.
(2007) Let the concept of trait be functional! Oikos, 116, 882-892.
Violle, C., Enquist, B.J., McGill, B.J., Jiang, L., Albert, C.c.H., Hulshof, C., Jung, V. &
Messier, J. (2012) The return of the variance: intraspecific variability in community
ecology. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 27, 244-252.
von Allmen, E., Sperry, J., Smith, D., Savage, V., Enquist, B. & Reich, P. (2012) A
species’ specific model of the hydraulic and metabolic allometry of trees II: testing
predictions of water use and growth scaling in ring-and diffuse-porous species.
Funct. Ecol, 26, 1066-1076.
Wardle, D.A. (2002) Ecology by the numbers. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 11, 533534.

57

Webb, C.T., Hoeting, J.A., Ames, G.M., Pyne, M.I. & Poff, N.L. (2010) A structured and
dynamic framework to advance traits-based theory and prediction in ecology.
Ecology Letters, 13, 267-283.
Weiher, E. & Keddy, P.A. (1995) Assembly rules, null models, and trait dispersion: new
questions from old patterns. Oikos, 74, 159-164.
Weiher, E., Freund, D., Bunton, T., Stefanski, A., Lee, T. & Bentivenga, S. (2011)
Advances, challenges and a developing synthesis of ecological community
assembly theory. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 366, 2403-2413.
West, G.B., Brown, J.H. & Enquist, B.J. (1997) A general model for the origin of
allometric scaling laws in biology. Science, 276, 122-126.
West, G.B., Brown, J.H. & Enquist, B.J. (2001) A general model for ontogenetic growth.
Nature, 413, 628-631.
West, G.B., Woodruff, W.H. & Brown, J.H. (2002) Allometric scaling of metabolic rate
from molecules and mitochondria to cells and mammals. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 99, 2473-2478.
West, G.B., Enquist, B.J. & Brown, J.H. (2009) A general quantitative theory of forest
structure and dynamics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106,
7040-7045.
Westoby, M. & Wright, I.J. (2006) Land-plant ecology on the basis of functional traits.
Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 21, 261-268.
Whittaker, R.H., Levin, S.A. & Root, R.B. (1973) Niche, habitat, and ecotope. American
Naturalist, 107, 321-338.
Wright, I.J., Reich, P.B., Cornelissen, J.H.C., Falster, D.S., Groom, P.K., Hikosaka, K.,
Lee, W., Lusk, C.H., Niinemets, U., Oleksyn, J., Osada, N., Poorter, H., Warton,
D.I. & Westoby, M. (2005) Modulation of leaf economic traits and trait
relationships by climate. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 14, 411-421.
Yvon-Durocher, G., Caffrey, J.M., Cescatti, A., Dossena, M., Giorgio, P.d., Gasol, J.M.,
Montoya, J.M., Pumpanen, J., Staehr, P.A., Trimmer, M., Woodward, G. & Allen,
A.P. (2012) Reconciling the temperature dependence of respiration across
timescales and ecosystem types. Nature, 487, 472-476.
Zhang, L., Thygesen, U.H., Knudsen, K., Andersen, K.H. (2013) Trait diversity promotes
stability of community dynamics. Theoretical Ecology 6, 57-69.
Zhao, M. & Running, S.W. (2010) Drought-induced reduction in global terrestrial net
primary production from 2000 through 2009. Science, 329, 940-943.
Zhao, M., Heinsch, F.A., Nemani, R.R. & Running, S.W. (2005) Improvements of the
MODIS terrestrial gross and net primary production global data set. Remote sensing
of Environment, 95, 164-176.

58

Figure Legends
Figure 1. Path diagram representing the relationships of phenotypic traits, z, performance
measures, f, and fitness, w. The arrows on the left are correlations between traits. The
coefficients ! represent the correlation coefficients between traits, z, functions, f, and
ultimately fitness, w. Note, performance measures include growth rate as well as survivorship
and reproductive rates. Metabolic scaling theory explicitly links traits to these performance
functions. Figure modified from Kingsolver and Huey (2003) modified from Arnold (1983)
Figure 2. Graphical representation of two central assumptions of Trait Drivers Theory. Each
curve represents positive performance (here shown as the growth function f) or growth rates of
individuals characterized by a unique trait value, z. Each color then indicates how a given trait
value then translates to variation in organismal growth rate across an environmental gradient,
E. Because of a trade off between traits each trait has an optimal environment where growth is
maximized, each trait exhibits a unimodal response to an environmental gradient, E. At
different points along an environmental gradient different traits are characterized by the highest
growth rate, f. Also, species can differ in the width of their performance curves, σ z2 Here in
two communities, A and B, although several trait values can achieve positive growth in both A
and B (for example in community A, the black, red, yellow, and grey trait all can grow in that
location but within A there is one of t trait, the black trait, that has the highest growth rate).
This trait value then is the optimal trait value, given the potential species pool, for that
community. Note, in this example growth rates are only influenced by E. However, extensions
of TDT (see text) can assess how the growth rate of a given trait value then is influenced by the
presence and dominance of other trait values. Such trait-trait interactions could then modify the
shape and breadth of each growth curve.
Figure 3. Conceptual diagram linking changes in optimal traits in changing environments with
the frequency distributions for that trait in historic versus current environments. In this
example, the optimal trait value (dotted line) has shifted to the right. Individual performance
(growth, fitness, etc.) is highest at the optimal trait expression in an environment. Note,
because the response of an assemblage cannot be instantaneous, the trait distribution has an
increased skew. Further, since the highest trait frequencies are not yet at the optimal trait
expression, the average performance in the current environment is lower than in the historic
environment.
Figure 4. Two examples of shifts in community trait distributions across gradients. A.
Data from Cornwell and Ackerly (2009) showing shifts in the community mean and
intraspecific mean value of the trait distribution for leaf specific area or SLA. Dashed
lines represent least-squares fits for a given species and show the change in the
population mean intra specific variation across the gradient in soil water. Solid points and
the solid line show the least-squares regression for the arithmetic mean community or
interspecific value for SLA. Note, consistent with the assumption of a shift in an ‘optimal
phenotype’ across environmental gradients, intraspecific trait shifts are in the same
direction as the community or interspecific shift B. Data from our Colorado elevational
gradient showing the probability density distributions of SLA based on all individuals in

a 1.3 x 1.3m plot at five sites along an elevational gradient. The number of individuals at
each site is: 2468m = 234, 2710m = 639, 2815m = 938, 3155m = 282, 3380m = 160.
Across the elevational gradient the community trait distribution of all individuals
significantly shifts with changes in the mean community trait and variance. In C and D,
for the Colorado plots we assess how changes in the community weighted mean and
variance of five plots within each site contributes to variation in net ecosystem
production of CO2 (NEP). These plots are partial residual plots showing linearization of
NEP relationships with the community weighted values of mean SLA and variance in
SLA. As predicted by TDT ecosystem carbon flux is positively related to a shift in mean
SLA but negatively related to an increase in community trait variance. In contrast,
variation in species diversity explains none of the variation NEP in this system.
Figure 5. Correlations between annual net primary productivity (NPP) and (A) species
diversity per plot; (B) the plot community biomass-weighted mean, CWM, of the SLA
distribution; (C) the plot community biomass-weighted variance, CWV, of the SLA distribution
for the four selected plots from the Park Grass experiment. Each dot represents the annual
aboveground biomass production of a given plot in a given year. Compare these relationships
to the predictions with Trait Driver Theory and Biodiversity and Ecosystem Functioning
Theory (Table 3). Note that there is a negative correlation between NPP and diversity while the
opposite is predicted by classical biodiversity-ecosystem functioning theory. However, in
accordance with TDT, there is a negative relationship between the variance of the abundance
weighted community trait distribution and a positive relationship between mean weighted trait
and NPP. These results show a direct linkage between a critical trait that influences plant
growth, forces that influence the shape of the trait distribution, and how both changes in trait
mean and variance then shape ecosystem functioning.
Figure 6. In support of Trait Drivers Theory – woody plant net primary production scales with
total assemblage biomass. Further, for a given amount of biomass, NPP will be modified by
shifts in the mean community NPP. However, TDT NPP will also be modified by the
assemblage variance in SLA. Figure modified from Michaletz et al. 2014.
Figure 7. Biogeographic variation in the A. mean species assemblage functional trait leaf
specific area (SLA, m2 g-1) and plant height (m) and B. the standardized effect size (SES) of
the mean trait values across woody plant communities across North America. The mean SLA is
lowest in the low elevation-latitude tropical forests and tends to be highest in temperate forest
and grassland regions. Across broad geographic gradients both the mean and the variance
significantly vary. According to Trait Driver Theory – areas that correspond to high mean SLA
and larger standing stocks of biomass (corresponding to taller mean heights) should have the
highest rates of instantaneous net primary production, NPP. However, NPP will also be
modified by the assemblage variance in SLA. Figure modified from Simova et al. (2014).

z!

Traits

f!

Performance

w!

Fitness

Community A!

Community B!

f (zi, E)

E!

B"

April"gravimetric"soil"water"content"(g"water/g"soil)"

C"

Log10"Community"Weighted"Mean"SLA"

Parital"Residual"of"Net"Ecosystem"ProducJon""
(CO2"umol"mD2"secD1)"

Parital"Residual"of"Net"Ecosystem"ProducJon""
(CO2"umol"mD2"secD1)"

A"

SLA"(mm2"mgD1)"

D"

Community"Weighted"Variance"SLA"

1

2

Low%SLA%

High%SLA%

Mean Assemblage Trait Value

Plant Size (height)

Specific Leaf Area
(SLA)

Trait Value
Standardized Effect Size (SES)

Supplementary Document
I. Using TDT to recast ecological hypotheses
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.

Using TDT to recast ecological hypotheses
Integrating Metabolic Scaling Theory into Trait Drivers Theory
Growth functions across environmental gradients: Incorporating tradeoffs into TDT
Methods: Approximating the shape of the community trait
distribution via community weighted measures.
Methods: Rocky Mountain Biological Lab: Shifts in trait distributions
and ecosystem measures across an elevational gradient
Methods: Park Grass Experiment: Background, Methods, & Discussion
Table S1. Correlations between the central moments of the community trait
distribution of specific leaf area or SLA and species richness
Figure S1 – Trait Driver Theory and examples of the first four central
moments of trait distributions.
Figure S2. Examples of estimation of a community trait distribution from
utilizing either mean trait values and/or intraspecific variation.
Figure S3. Change in the central moments of the community trait distribution
for a key trait – specific leaf area or SLA - in the 140-year long-term Park
Grass experiment.
Figure S4. Change in the central moments of the community trait distribution
for seed size in the 140-year long-term Park Grass experiment
Figure S5. Change in the central moments of the community trait distribution
for adult height in the 140-year long-term Park Grass experiment.
References

!

1!

I. Using TDT to recast ecological hypotheses
A unique attribute of TDT is that several differing ecological theories can now be recast
in terms of how they influence the shape of trait frequency distributions (C(z)). Each of
these theories make differing hypotheses that influence the shape of trait distributions and
the functioning of ecosystems:
(i) H1: Phenotype-environment matching– This hypothesis states that species are more
successful in different parts of the landscape because individuals have different trait
values across space that are better adapted to local features of that space, such that the
mean ‘phenotype’ matches variation in the local environment (Westoby & Wright, 2006).
This distinction builds upon observations that stem back to Schimper (Schimper, 1898;
1903) that form the foundation for understanding changes in fitness and functional traits
and species composition across gradients (Levins, 1968; Westoby & Wright, 2006). A
prediction of this hypothesis is that, either due to convergent evolution or abiotic filtering
of relevant traits, similar environments should be dominated by species with similar trait
values (see discussion in Karr & James, 1975; Mooney, 1977; Orians & Paine, 1983).
(ii) H2: The competitive-ability hierarchy hypothesis –This hypothesis states that the
strength of competition between individuals is driven by the distance between individuals
as measured according to their functional traits (Freckleton & Watkinson (2001)). The
competitive-ability hierarchy hypothesis leads to opposite predictions than the nichebased competition-trait similarity and competition-relatedness hypotheses, see below
(Mayfield & Levine 2010). Here, the resulting competitive hierarchy will cause in a
reduction in the trait variance over time and increased functional clustering because
individuals that share a trait value will outcompete individuals with different trait values
(Freckleton & Watkinson, 2001; Mayfield & Levine, 2010; Kunstler et al., 2011).
(iii) H2: Abiotic filtering - The importance of local abiotic forces are reflected in the
community trait range and variance – Abiotic filtering hypothesis states that increasingly
more stressful environments will limit the range and variance influence. This hypothesis
was formalized by Keddy and colleagues (Keddy, 1992; Weiher & Keddy, 1999; Kraft &
Ackerly, 2010). Similarly, on ecological time scales, due to phenotype-environment
matching, increasingly more stressful environments, E, will increasingly restrict the range
of trait values that could co-occur within a given environment. This ‘trait filtering
hypothesis’ states that the abiotic environment filters trait values so as to limit the
variance and range of the trait distribution. This hypothesis, which can be seen as an
ecological scale version of the ‘favorability’ hypothesis of Terborgh (Terborgh, 1973),
predicts that more physiologically stressful environments (frost, high salinity, drought,
etc.) should place especially rigid filters on the types of phenotypes (i.e., traits) that can
survive and potentially co-occur (e.g. (Kraft et al., 2008)). Note, as discussed above (ii)
and below (iii), the variance and range of a trait distribution C(z) is also influenced by
biotic forces. Similarly, repeated disturbance or environmental variability may minimize
local interactions and could also increase community trait variance ((Grime, 2006).

!

2!

(iv) H3: Strength of local biotic forces is revealed via trait variance and kurtosisDiffering biotic community assembly hypotheses can differentially influence the spacing
of trait values within the range of filtered phenotypes. As stated in (ii), competition for a
common limiting resource would ultimately lead to competitive exclusion (e.g see
Tilman, 1982) resulting in a convergence of ‘superior competitor’ phenotypes (Abrams &
Chen, 2002; Savage et al., 2007; Mayfield & Levine, 2010). This convergence would be
reflected by decreasing variance and an increase in ‘peakedness’ of the trait distribution
or an increase in positive kurtosis (Navas & Violle, 2009). In contract, according to
Chesson (2000), if traits map onto niche differences, increased niche (trait) differentiation
will lead to increasing coexistence of individuals with differing traits. These classical
niche partitioning models predict that competition will limit functional (trait) similarity
(MacArthur & Levins, 1967)and thus increase in the spacing between co-occuring
phenotypes phenotypes (see MacArthur, 1958; Diamond, 1975). Similarly, biological
enemies (Kraft & Ackerly, 2010), facilitation (Brooker et al., 2008), and frequent
disturbance (Grime, 1998) can maintain trait diversity (e.g. an over-dispersion of
phenotypes). Niche packing models result in either a broader or evenly dispersed trait
distribution (high variance) or even a multimodal trait (negative kurtosis) distribution.
(v) H4: Assessing neutral forces via the shape of local and regional trait distributions –
An alternative hypothesis to (ii) and (iii) is that local communities are primarily
structured by stochastic dispersal, drift, and dispersal limitation (Hubbell, 2001). Such a
neutral scenario would predict on average, for traits not associated with dispersal, little to
no difference in the shape of the community trait distribution when sampled across
differing spatial scales. Further, for traits not associated with dispersal ability, there
should be no relationship between trait distribution and changes in the environment.
II. Integrating Metabolic Scaling Theory into Trait Drivers Theory
Within Trait Driver Theory (TDT), the total biomass associated with a trait, z, is denoted
by C(z). This notation avoids ever needing to account for individual mass, M, or number
of individuals with mass. In contrast, the growth equations Metabolic Scaling Theory are
phrased in terms of individual mass, M, where organismal growth rate, dM/dt is given by
!"
= !! (!)!!/!
!"

(1)
where b0(z) is a coefficient that depends on a single or set (meaning z is a vector) set of
traits.
To integrate MST and TDT we first recognize that, C(z), the biomass associated with trait
z can be expressed as ! ! = !" ! !, ! = !" ! !, ! !, where C(z,M) is the
mass density of individuals with both trait value z and individual mass M, while N(z,M) is
the number density of individuals that have both trait value z and individual mass M. In
this expression, we have integrated over all possible values of mass, M, so that have the

!

3!

total biomass of all individuals with trait z. Furthermore, note that integrating this over
all traits, z, gives the total biomass, !!"! = !" ! ! = !" !" ! !, ! !.
Consequently, we can multiply both sides of Eq. (1) by ! !, ! , integrate both sides over
!" !", and multiply and divide the right side by !!"! to obtain
!"

!" !" ! !, ! !! (!)!!/!
!!"!
!" !" ! !, ! !

!"
!" ! !, !
=
!"

(2)
At steady state, N(z,M) is not changing in time, so we can move it inside of the derivative
with respect to time, and we can also move the integrals inside of the derivative because
the integration over all possible traits and masses is not a time dependent object
!
(3)

!" !" ! !, ! !
!!!"!
=
!"
!"

Furthermore, we can express the bracketed term on the right side of Eq. (1) as a mass
average of a growth function as follows
!

!" !" ! !, ! ! !! ! !!!
!" !" ! !, ! !

!

!" !" ! !, ! !! ! !!!

=

!

= !! ! !!!

!" !" ! !, ! !

!

(4)
where the C subscript denotes that the average is taken with respect to the biomass.
Combining all of this, we obtain the equation for the scaling of Net Primary Productivity
or NPP equation
!
!!!"!
= !! ! !!!
!"

!

!!"!

(5)
This equation is in the most generic form of a TDT equation, and the growth function
!

! ! = !! ! !!! can be expanded such that the biomass growth equation can be
expressed in terms of the biomass-weighted central moments of the trait z, such as the
variance, skewness, and kurtosis.
We now consider a few special cases of Eq. (5) to relate to the TDT and scaling equations
already in the literature. In the case that there is only a single mass value, M*, or a very
small range of mass values, the number density becomes ! !, ! = ! ! ! ! − !∗ in
terms of a Dirac-delta function for the mass dependence. Therefore,
!

!" !" !(!)! ! − !∗ ! !! ! !!! =
!∗

!

!
!
!

!" !(!)!∗ !! ! !∗

!

!
!

=

!" !(!)!! ! , and Eq. (4) becomes

4!

!

(!∗ )!!

!
!" !(!)!! !
= (!∗ )!! !! !
!" !(!)

!

(6)
so the scaling of NPP equation becomes
!
!!!"!
= (!∗ )!! !! !
!"

(7)

! !!"!

!

The term (!∗ )!! can be thought of as an overall normalization to the growth function f(z)
from TDT. As such, this result reveals that TDT, as originally formulated, essentially
ignores individual mass. Thus, based on Eq. (1), growth functions within TDT should
!

have a roughly (!∗ )!! hidden with the normalization constant for their growth function.
Conversely, as a special case, we consider the function b0(z) to be a constant b0 that
occurs when z=z*. In this case, ! !, ! = !(!)! ! − ! ∗ and !" !" ! ! ! ! −
!

!

!

! ∗ ! !! ! !!! = !! !" ! ! !! , and Eq. (4) becomes !! !" ! ! !! /!!"! .
Combining these terms gives the scaling of NPP equation
!

(8)

!!!"! !! !" ! ! !!
=
!!"! = !!
!"
!!"!

!

!" ! ! !!

Following the arguments in Enquist et al. (2009), we can substitute ! ! ∝ !!!!/! to
!/!
obtain !! ∝ !!"! where the subscript denotes that largest mass in the group. Using these
relationships

(9)

!!!"!
∝ !!
!"

!!

!

!" !! ! !! ∝ !!

!

!

!

!
!" !!! ∝ !! !!! ∝ !! !!"!

Defining a new constant b0’ to denote the product of b0 with all of the proportionality
constants, the overall scaling of NPP equation becomes
!
!!!"!
!
= !!! !!"!
!"

(10)
in accord with the Net Primary Productivity scaling equation derived by Enquist et al.
(2009).

!

5!

As a final special case, we consider the trait z and the mass M to be uncorrelated and the
number density to be a separable function such that ! !, ! = !(!)!(!). Therefore,
using results from Eq. (9) and the definition of an average, Eq. (4) can be expressed as
!" !(!)!! !
!" !(!)

!

!
!" ! ! !!
!
!
= ! !! (!) !!"!
!" ! ! !

(11)
where k captures the proportionality constants in deriving Eq. (5). Substituting this into
our overall growth equation (Eq. (5)) yields
!
!!!"!
!
= ! !! (!) !!"!
!"

(12)
where the average is now the standard abundance average and is not the biomassweighted average. This is the growth equation in the scaling form for this special case.
Alternatively, for this special case, we could express Eq. (4) as
!

!" !(!)!! !
!" !(!)

!" ! ! ! !!!
!" ! ! !

!

= ! !! (!) !!!

!

(13)
and the NPP scaling equation becomes
!
!!!"!
= ! !! (!) !!! ! !!"!
!"
(14)
This equation is complete equivalent to Eq. (13) but expresses the growth function more
in terms of the TDT framework such that the right side appears to have an overall linear
dependence in CTOT, and as a result, we have a mixture of types of averages, with the
function b0(z) being abundance averaged and the M-1/4 being biomass averaged.
The major results of this section are Eq. (5), which is the most general formulation of the
growth equation because it does not rely on traits or mass being constant or uncorrelated.
In this form, the growth equation is like the TDT formulation, but as the special cases
!

below it reveal, !! ! !!! ! may hide extra dependencies on CTOT. Eq. (7) is the result
when the mass is constant and is expressed in the form of TDT equations such that it is
linear in CTOT and reveals an overall M-1/4 for adjusting the growth function across
groups. Eq. (10) is the special case where the traits are constant and reduces to the exact
scaling equation given in Enquist et al.(2009). Finally, when traits and mass are
uncorrelated, Eq. (13) and Eq. (14) are two different but completely equivalent ways to
express the growth function. Eq. (13) is in the form of scaling equations by consolidating
the mass average with the CTOT dependence, while Eq. (14) is in the form of TDT
equations by keeping two averages around, including one that is an abundance average
and one that is a biomass-weighted average. For all of these equations and cases, the
functions inside the averages can be expended in terms of moments as done for TDT for
biomass-weighted averages or as done in (2004), for abundance-weighted averages.

!

6!

III. Growth functions across environmental gradients: Incorporating trade-offs into
TDT
Importantly, as discussed in the main text, equation 9 predicts an unbounded growth
response such that increasingly larger values of b0 always leads to increased growth,
which realistically cannot continue indefinitely. A key assumption of TDT is that there is
fundamental tradeoff between a given trait value and the performance of an organism
across an environmental gradient, E. The final step to integrate a general TDT that can
link traits, organismal performance, and environmental gradients, is to specify tradeoffs
between underlying traits, growth, and metabolic scaling.
Within a given environment, E, an important question is what would prevent b0 from
becoming infinitely big? or small? In the case of growth rate, possible tradeoffs likely
include the types of limiting resources individuals use or the environmental conditions for
optimal growth. So, individuals that allocate internal resources to specific traits defined
by b0 may reduce the impact of one limiting environmental factor but this would
necessarily incur a disadvantage with respect to another environmental limiting factor.
A trade off or cost function can be formulated within the growth function, f. Multiplying
this cost function by f shows that, for a given E, the growth function has a maximum at
zopt or here b0opt and, as a result, the second derivative of f (the second term in eqn. 5 and
14), will be negative, as long as b0 is close to b0opt .
We can specify a generic form of a trade off by following Norberg et al. (2001). We can
approximate a trade off by first invoking a general quadratic or Gaussian cost function on
the community value ( b0 − b0opt ). We add a cost function to eqn. 5 and 14. This provides a
general form of a trade off. That new cost function that is multiplied by f could be a
( " b − b %2 +
( " b − b %2 +
0
0
opt
'' - or Gaussian function, exp *− $$ 0 2 0opt '' - . Here, σ 2 is
general quadratic *1− $$
2
* # σ
* # σ
& -,
& -,
)
)
the observed standard deviation in the trait or b0 observed within the assemblage. Both
cost functions, reduce to 1 when b0 = b0opt (e.g. for a given environment E, the observed
mean community trait, zopt, and average metabolic normalization, b0 is at the local
optimum). Note, both decrease in value as you go away from b0 − b0opt . Dividing through
by σ 2 defines the penalty for individual growth rate for being away from the optimum.
Thus, for a given environment, E, characterized by a unique b0opt , the growth function can
be made more explicit in terms of a generic trade-off where

f (b0 ) = c0 b0 M

θ −1

" (b − b )2 %
(b0 ) $$1− 0 20,opt ''
σ b0
#
&

(15)

!

7!

This is a modified growth function and is characterized in Fig. 2. It can be made more
specific by incorporating the traits that then define b0. Here, the first term is the general
growth equation from the relative growth rate literature (Poorter, 1989) that has been
more formally derived in metabolic scaling theory. The second term of eqn S1 is the
associated tradeoff. As a result, the second term in the TDT eqn 5 in the main text gives
how much of whole-community biomass production is reduced due to the amount of trait
variance, V, in the community because of the explicit trade off function, the second
d 2 fb0 =b0
derivative of f,
, would then be negative near b0opt . As a result, increasing
db02
variance in b0 would then decrease total community production.
!
IV. Methods: Approximating the shape of the community trait distribution via
community weighted measures.
In order to assess predictions of Trait Drivers Theory, TDT, it is necessary to quantify the
full distribution of traits in a community, C(zi). This involves measuring the trait values
of all individuals and thus incorporates both inter- and intraspecific trait variability.
While measuring traits of all individuals in a community is ideal and several studies have
done so (Gaucherand & Lavorel, 2007; Lavorel et al., 2008; Albert et al., 2010), it is time
consuming work (Baraloto et al.). While there are limitations, the trait biomass
distribution, C(zi), can be approximated and predictions of TDT can be tested without
explicitly measuring the traits of all individuals.
Trait distributions can be approximated in two ways. The first method is straightforward
and calculates the weighted trait distribution by taking the mean species trait value and
multiplying by a measure of dominance (cover, biomass, abundance (Grime, 1998)). This
method can be implemented by calculating the central moments of joint-distribution.
This community weighted variance or CWM is increasingly a standard metric in traitbased ecology (Violle et al., 2007; Garnier & Navas, 2012; Lavorel, 2013) and
represents the trait mean calculated for all species in a community weighted by
species abundances as follows:
nj

CWM j,y = ∑ Ak, j ⋅ zk
k=1

(16)
where nj is the number of species sampled in plot j, Ak,j js the relative abundance of
species k in plot j, and
€ zk is the mean value of species k. Several studies have also
assessed the community weighted variance of the trait distriubiton (see (Lavorel et
al., 2011; Ricotta & Moretti, 2011).
The assemblage variance, V is calculated via the biomass-weighted values for the
community weighted varince (CWVj,y) is given by,
!

8!

nj

CWV j,y = ∑ Ak, j ⋅ ( zk − CWM j,y )

2

k=1

(17)
Further, the central moments skewness and kurtosis (CWSj,y and CWKj,y, respectively)
are given by €
nj

∑ A ⋅ (z
k, j

CWS j,y =

k=1

k

− CWM j,y )

32
CWV j,y

nj

3

∑ A ⋅ (z
k, j

; CWK j,y =

k=1

k

− CWM j,y )

2
CWV j,y

4

−3

(18)
A limitation of this approach, however, is that it ignores the contribution of intraspecific
€
€trait variability. Community trait moments
may also be sensitive to the distribution of
abundances across species. For example, a highly positive community kurtosis value may
just reflect the hyper-dominance of one species and not the true dispersion of traits again
due to intraspecific variation.
A second method utilizes sub-sampling individuals to obtain a better approximation of
how intraspecific variation influences the community distribution. By subsampling
individuals for each species one can begin to incorporate intraspecific variation around
mean trait values for each species.
In Figure S5 we highlight a typical example that we believe can be used to generate two
approximations of the community trait distribution. We use data from Konza Prairie
LTER, Kansas, USA (McAllister et al., 1998). First, data were collected for the
abundance of each species. These data are illustrated in the Figure S4 to estimate the
community trait distribution from mean and variance measure of species traits. We find
that, consequently and counter-intuitively, the inclusion of intra-specific variation will
likely simplify modeling efforts because these types of distributions are much easier to
manipulate and understand analytically. For each species, the standard deviation of trait
variation is equal to the reported standard error multiplied by the square root (where
n=3). In sum, the community trait distribution can be approximated in two ways
(methods B and C). While B emphasizes interspecific variation, C also begins to include
intraspecific variation. Method B is a reasonable approximation and can easily be
implemented by most ecological studies as it only requires interspecific trait information
and local abundance values. Method C requires an additional standardized sub-sampling
method to estimate the standard error for each species but will result in a more accurate
moment approximation.
V. Methods: Rocky Mountain Biological Lab: Shifts in trait distributions and
ecosystem measures across an elevational gradient –
Measuring whole-community trait distributions - We measured community trait
distributions and whole- ecosystem carbon flux data along an elevational gradient near
!

9!

Gothic, Colorado. The elevation gradient ranged between 2,460 to 3,380 m and spans 39
km in geographic distance. The elevational gradient contains five long-term study sites
that run from dry, shrub-dominated high desert in Almont Colorado (2475 m) through the
subalpine zone, to just below tree line (3380 m). The gradient consists of five long-term
study sites that were established by B.J. Enquist in 2003 and has been sampled every year
since. The gradient is located within Washington Gulch and East River valleys near the
Rocky Mountain Biological Lab.
Each study site along the elevation gradient has similar local slope, aspect, and vegetation
physiognomy. The sample area is approximately 50 m2 in area and consist of a mixture
of shrubs, grasses, and forbs. As discussed in Bryant et al. 2008 (Bryant et al. 2008) there
is substantial turnover of plant species between sites with very few of the 120 species
sampled occurring in more than two of the sites. Additionally, shrub cover across the
gradient decreases from a high of 33% at the lowest elevation site to 0% at the highest.
We utilized carbon flux data collected during the summer months of 2010 measured
across the gradient. A species list and phylogeny for species at each site is given by
Bryant and others (2008). All sites contain weather stations on-site or nearby. Each study
site has a similar local slope and south-southwest aspect, and contains a mixture of
herbaceous perennials, grasses, and shrubs. Since 2003, each year, five 1.3 m x 1.3 m
plots have been established haphazardly along the local slope of each study site, with at
least five meters distance between plots.
In 2010 Henderson et al. measured the SLA of in each plot and collected one fully
expanded leaf from every individual. Fresh leaf samples scanned (with petiole) in the
laboratory then dried to a constant mass and weighed. The trait values measured from
every individual in each community were compiled to create individual level trait
distributions for SLA. In total, leaves from 2,253 individuals across 54 species were
collected and measured at the five sites. Species turnover was high, with only 11 species
being found at more than one site and only one species found at more than two sites.
Gas exchange and productivity measures – In 25 plots (5 plots per elevational site) we
measured total ecosystem carbon flux. Carbon flux was measured as instantaneous
daytime peak uptake (ca. 10 am) and nighttime peak respiration (ca. 10 pm) (Saleska and
others 1999). Ambient CO2 was measured by a Li-Cor 7500 infra red gas analyzer for 30
seconds, and then the tent was put in place over the plot and the CO2 concentration within
the tent was measured for 90 seconds (Jasoni and others 2005). Daytime measurements
were only taken under cloudless conditions. The tent was designed to let in 75% of
photosynthetically active radiation (tent fabric by Shelter Systems). Air inside the tent is
well mixed by fans, and the tent chamber was sealed using a long skirt along the base of
the tent that that was covered with a heavy chain. The volume of the tent used along the
gradient was 2.197 m3.
Soil efflux was measured at the same time as NEP using a Li-Cor 6400 portable
photosynthesis machine with the soil chamber. The soil chamber fit inside a PVC soil
collar, which was placed in the plot at least two weeks prior to the first measurement. Soil

!

10!

efflux was measured in two places in each plot along the gradient and one place per plot
for the manipulation.
Carbon flux measurements along the elevational gradient were taken four weeks after
snowmelt and then again at peak season (approximately four weeks after the first
measurement, or when the majority of plants reached maximum height). Each NEP
measurement consisted of daytime peak uptake (at ~10:00) and nighttime respiration (at
22:00). Following the method of Jasoni et al., (2005) ambient CO2 was measured for 30
seconds, and then the tent was lowered and the CO2 concentration within the tent was
measured for 90s, under clear sky and low wind conditions. Air inside the tent was well
mixed by fans, and the chamber was sealed to the ground using a heavy chain.
For data analysis we fit the predicted Trait Drivers Theory model, using multiple
regression in R using the ‘car’ library we fit the following linear model
lm(log10(NEP) ~ CWM.SLA + CWV.SLA + logBio + as.factor(Site)

where CWM.SLA is the community weighted mean SLA and CWV.SLA is the
community weighted variance SLA calculated using the above equations for CWM and
CWV as presented in the vegan package in R. Here, all values of SLA were log
transformed before analyses and logBio is the log10 total above ground biomass at time
of carbon flux measurement. We use the site elevation of the sample as a factor in the
model. The fit of this model r2=0.778, df=22, F=11.04, p < 0.0001, AIC -24.38. All
variance inflation factors were generally less than 5 except for Site where the vif = 5.86
which is still low for a vif value. In this model the effect of CWV.SLA is significant (p=!
0.023, t =!2.45, SE=!0.072 parameter 0.337) but CWVSLA and total biomass is
marginally significant (p=!0.068, t =!-1.921, se = 0.067, parameter=!-0.138; p=0.059; t =!
1.994; se=!0.067, parameter = 0.135).
Variation in Net Ecosystem Production across the gradient appears to be primarily due to
the CWM and CWV of community SLA. Removing the parameter biomass and fitting a
more simplified model with only mean and variance in SLA,
lm(log10(NEP) ~ CWM.SLA + CWV.SLA + as.factor(Site)

predicts a similarly amount of variation in NEP to the full model above (p < 0.0001, r2=!
0.7384 , AIC =-21.40 and both CWMSLA and CWVSLA are now significant within the
model (p=!0.035, t=!2.247, se=!0.358, parameter = 0.803; p=!0.0386, t=!-2.194, se =
0.075, parameter = -0.165)).
Fitting a more simple model just using either plot biomass or plot CWM.SLA with site as
a factor results a poorer fit model when compared with the TDT predicted model with
lower r2 and higher AIC values ( (log10(posNEP)~ log10Bio +as.factor(Site_name, r2=!
0.687 , AIC=17.994; lm(log10(posNEP)~ CWM.SLA +as.factor(Site_name); r2=!0.684,
AIC = -17.704). Further, in both models, the effect of biomass and CWMSLA were
marginally significant (p=!0.064 and p=!0.056 respectively). These results indicate that

!

11!

together the CWM and CWV of community SLA are primary drivers of variation in
community carbon flux.
VI. Methods: Park Grass Experiment: Background, Methods, & Discussion
Background and Methods - The original purpose of Park Grass Experiment (PGE),
started in 1856, was to investigate the effects of high levels of inorganic fertilisers and
organic manure on hay production relative to control treatments (see references within
Crawley et al., 2005) for additional details on methodology). Our analyses mainly
focused on the PGE trait dynamics of Plots 2 and 16. These plots were selected because
of their contrasting botanical composition and species richness (Crawley et al., 2005;
Harpole & Tilman, 2007). Plot 2 (became plot 2/2 in 1996) received farm yard manure
between 1856 and 1863, but since then has received no further manure or fertiliser inputs,
and is now considered to be a control plot. Plot 16, started in 1858, is a fertilized,
unlimed plot that receives annual N, P, K, Na, Mg applications (48kg N ha-1/ as sodium
nitrate in spring; mineral applied in winter: 35kg P ha-1 P as triple superphosphate, 225 kg
K ha-1/as potassium sulphate, 15 kg Na ha-1 as sodium sulphate, 10 kg Mgha-1as
magnesium sulphate). For the Park Grass dataset we approximated the central-moments
of the community trait distribution, C(z) for trait z within plot j and year y using equations
9-11. We analyzed the time-series of these plots in terms of changes in botanical
composition, traits, and species richness. To focus on how experimentally paired local
communities have responded over time we highlighted plots 2 and 16 (the other plots also
showed similar responses).
Assignment of trait values and biomass weighted trait distributions - We assessed
changes in specific leaf area (SLA), seed size, and height. These traits have also been
proposed to capture most functional and life history variation across species (Westoby,
1998; Westoby et al., 2002). Seed size is thought to characterize regenerative traits not
associated with our trait-based growth model developed in eqn 7. Including a
regeneration trait provides a basis to assess if other niche or dispersal based processes
acting on other traits may be more important in structuring the community than traits
associated with growth, dC/dt (see also discussion on effect and response traits (Suding et
al., 2008)). Further, variation in seed size should not directly influence our ecosystem
level predictions for dCTot/dt as this trait is not explicit in eqn 7. According to eqn. 7,
plant height (or size, C) can influence ecosystem NPP. So any large shifts in mean plant
height would be important to note as well. Trait values are for populations sampled in
UK. We used the first four central moments of C(z) for plot j and year y, to calculate the
biomass-weighted mean, variance, skewness, and kurtosis.
Within this experiment, species abundance was measured by cutting aboveground
biomass to ground level from six randomly located quadrats (50cm x 25cm) within each
experimental and control plot. The plant material was then sorted into species, oven dried
at 80 degrees C for 24 hours, and the dry matter determined (Williams, 1978; Crawley et
al., 2005). For each plot, yields were estimated by weighing standing biomass (t/ha at
100% dry matter) from the whole plot, harvested in mid-June. The plots were originally

!

12!

cut by scythe, then by horse-drawn, and then tractor-drawn mowers (Williams, 1978; see
these references for additional methodlogical detail of the PGE); Crawley et al., 2005).
Our analysis of additional fertilization and control plots at Park Grass (plots 3 & 14) also
reveal similar differences in trait distributions (mean, variance, skew, and kurtosis)
between the control and fertilized plots. In sum, for all of the Park Grass plots, our central
conclusions do not change. We observed coordinated shifts in the functional trait
distribution. In Table S1 we show the correlations between the central moments of the
trait distribution and species richness. These correlations include plots 2 (control) & 16
(fertilized) together. None of the central moments have significant correlation with
species richness, indicating that the mechanisms and responses to environmental change
captured by the shape of trait distributions are not captured by species richness. Figure S1
shows the change in the central moments of the community trait distribution for SLA or
the specific leaf area. Figure S4 shows the associated changes in seed size in the 140-year
long-term Park Grass experiment. Figure S5 shows the change in the central moments of
the community trait distribution for adult height in the 140-year long-term Park Grass
experiment
Park Grass Experiment or PGE – Additional Discussion - Fertilization also changed the
shape of the specific leaf area (SLA) trait distribution indicating that the underlying
forces that structure these communities under differing environments changed. For
example, fertilization led to a reduction in the variance (the community mean SLA was
negatively related to the community SLA variance, r2= 0.48, P<0.001), suggesting either
that fertilization was an environmental ‘filter’ on traits and/or competitive exclusion
increased (see Table 2). The observed increase in the skewness and kurtosis of the SLA
distribution with fertilization is in accord with predictions and expectations of TDT
where more quick directional shifts in zopt will lead to a skewed distribution. In contrast,
the control plot trait distribution did not show dramatic changes in the variance or
skewness of the distribution. However, the mean of SLA in the control plot did
significantly decrease suggesting that natural and / or more gradual changes in the local
environment (possibly due to an increase in nitrogen limitation over time and/or climate
change) and/or recovery from past disturbance has influenced the control community.
The kurtosis of the trait distribution in the control plot remained negative and close to 1.2 (a uniform distribution) consistent with an increased role of divergent ecological
forces (niche packing and the role of biotic interactions). In contrast, in the fertilized plot,
the variance of the distribution has decreased and the kurtosis tends to exhibit high
positive values.
In the PGE fertilization can be seen as a specific environmental driver, E. Fertilization
changes soil resource availability and, according to TDT, differentially shifts the
optimum growth rate. Indeed, in support we see a shift in zopt (here being SLA) associated
with fertilization. Analysis of the moments of distributions for two other community
traits, seed size and adult reproductive height, show that these trait means did not
appreciably change with fertilization (Fig S4-S5). Importantly, the community mean of
plant height did not change with fertilization supporting our assumption that observed
change in community NPP was primarily due to changes in SLA, and also that the mean

!

13!

plant size or biomass, C, did not appreciably change. The one change with fertilization
that we do observe is that the community variance of plant height increased. No other
traits show any changes in the fertilized plots. Future work elaborating TDT should
include the role of multiple trait drivers and their associated predictions.

!

14!

SLA

Table S1. Correlations between the central moments of the community trait distribution
of specific leaf area or SLA and species richness, (Plots 2 (control) & 16 (fertilized)
together). None of the moments have significant correlation with species richness,
indicating that the mechanisms and responses to environmental change captured by the
moments are not captured by species richness. This represents one of the great
advantages for Trait Driver Theory (TDT) over theories based on species richness.

!

mean
variance
skewness
kurtosis

Species richness
0.00ns.
0.05ns.
0.08ns.
0.03ns.

15!

Figure S1 – Trait Driver Theory and examples of the first four central moments of trait
distributions: A) mean (the first moment) and variance (the second moment). In this
example, we show two communities with the same mean trait value (dashed line) but
with different variances; B) skew (a combination of the second and third moments).
Skewness in a trait distribution can be caused by (i) time lags in community response to a
new optimum trait value where a long-tail of individuals expressing suboptimal trait
values is present in the community (e.g. see Fig 2), (ii) by lopsided trait immigration into
the community, or (iii) by physical or physiological limits on trait expression (e.g.
hydrological constraints on plant height); and (iv) may reflect rare species advantage. As
shown in this example; and Kurtosis (a measure of the fourth moment relative to the
second moment). Competitive exclusion and/or strong stabilizing selection will give a
highly peaked (4th moment kurtosis) distribution (C) while niche packing reflecting biotic
interactions could give a more uniform distribution (D). Note, a normal trait distribution
is defined by a skewness and kurtosis = 0. The more peaked the distribution the more
positive the kurtosis value (including the logistic, hyperbolic secant, and Laplace
distributions). In contrast, processes that result in the ‘spreading out’ of traits will be
characterized by increasingly more negative kurtosis values. In the case of a uniform
distribution, kurtosis = -1.2. An increasingly bimodal distribution (Bernoulli distribution)
will have kurtosis values = -2. (E). Bimodal distributions could arise where there are
multiple optimal (dashed lines) trait values (F), or where the community is responding to
a recent environmental change where the two peaks represent both an increased
representation of nearly optimal individuals (the high peak) and the continued presence of
individuals with optimal trait values for the historic environment (the low peak) (G).
Dashed lines correspond to the optimal trait value(s).

!

16!

Figure S2. Examples of estimation of a community trait distribution from utilizing either
mean trait values and/or intraspecific variation. In this example we use abundance
information (A) for the percent cover for 16 species from Konza Prairie LTER, Kansas,
USA. Next, a trait measure, the leaf photosynthetic rate, was measured on a minimum of
three leaves on three separate plants. Species means and standard errors were then
calculated for this trait for each species. In (B) using the first method, the trait abundance
distribution was calculated using only the mean trait data for the species in A. Numbers
in the parentheses indicate the number of species in each trait bin, and the peaks
correspond to some of the dominant species in plot (A) that were rank ordered by
abundance and not by photosynthetic rate. Lastly, using the second method, the
community trait distribution of all individuals can be further approximated by integrating
intraspecific subsampling. In (C), for each species, we incorporated intraspecific
variation by using the standard error for this trait as measured in each species and then
assumed a normal distribution around each species mean. We then generated the
community-wide trait distribution by sampling from each species intraspecific trait
distribution (defined by its mean and SE). The resulting distribution (C) is much more
continuous and unimodal than in plot (B), which does not include intra-specific variation.

!

17!

Figure S3. Change in the central moments of the community trait distribution for a key
trait – specific leaf area or SLA - in the 140-year long-term Park Grass experiment.
Regression lines are indicated for significant relationships. Fertilization has caused a
decrease in the variance and an increase in the skewness. Fertilization increases the mean
assemblage specific leaf area (SLA) but reduces the variance. This result indicates a
directional shift in trait optimum, zopt, and a functional shift in the composition of the
community. Further, fertilized plots have become increasingly more skewed and have
increasingly more positive kurtosis values indicating that communities have become
increasingly dominated by a few trait values. Distributions with kurtosis values of -1.2
are characteristic of an ‘overdispersed’ uniform distribution while plots with kurtosis
values greater than 0 are more clumped/peaked than expected from a normal or Gaussian
distribution.

!

18!

Figure S4. Change in the central moments of the community trait distribution for seed
size in the 140-year long-term Park Grass experiment. Significant correlations are
indicated with presence of fitted (dashed) regression lines.

!

19!

Figure S5. Change in the central moments of the community trait distribution for adult
height in the 140-year long-term Park Grass experiment. Significant correlations are
indicated with presence of fitted (dashed) regression lines.

!

20!

References

Abrams,!P.A.!&!Chen,!X.!(2002)!The!effect!of!competition!between!prey!species!on!
the!evolution!of!their!vulnerabilities!to!a!shared!predator.!Evolutionary,
Ecology,Research,!897–909.!
Albert,!C.H.,!Thuiller,!W.,!Yoccoz,!N.,!Soudan,!A.,!Boucher,!F.,!Saccone,!P.!&!Lavorel,!S.!
(2010)!Intraspecific!functional!variability:!extent,!structure!and!sources!of!
variation.!Journal,of,Ecology,!98,!604W613.!
Baraloto,!C.,!Timothy!Paine,!C.E.,!Patiño,!S.,!Bonal,!D.,!Hérault,!B.!&!Chave,!J.!
Functional!trait!variation!and!sampling!strategies!in!speciesWrich!plant!
communities.!Functional,Ecology,!24,!208W216.!
Brooker,!R.W.,!Maestre,!F.T.,!Callaway,!R.M.,!Lortie,!C.L.,!Cavieres,!L.A.,!Kunstler,!G.,!
Liancourt,!P.,!Tielbörger,!K.,!Travis,!J.M.J.,!Anthelme,!F.,!Armas,!C.,!Coll,!L.,!
Corcket,!E.,!Delzon,!S.,!Forey,!E.,!Kikvidze,!Z.,!Olofsson,!J.,!Pugnaire,!F.,!Quiroz,!
C.L.,!Saccone,!P.,!Schiffers,!K.,!Seifan,!M.,!Touzard,!B.!&!Michalet,!R.!(2008)!
Facilitation!in!plant!communities:!the!past,!the!present,!and!the!future.!
Journal,of,Ecology,!96,!18W34.!
Chesson,!P.!(2000)!Mechanisms!of!maintenance!of!species!diversity.!Annual,Review,
of,Ecology,and,Systematics,!31,!343W366.!
Crawley,!M.J.,!Johnston,!A.E.,!Silvertown,!J.,!Dodd,!M.,!De!Mazancourt,!C.,!Heard,!M.S.,!
Henman,!D.F.!&!Edwards,!G.R.!(2005)!Determinants!of!species!richness!in!the!
Park!Grass!Experiment.!American,Naturalist,!165,!179W192.!
Diamond,!J.M.!(1975)!Assembly!of!species!communities.!Ecology,and,Evolution,of,
Communities!(ed.!by!M.L.!Cody!and!J.M.!Diamond),!pp.!342W444.!Harvard!Univ.!
Press,!Cambridge,!MA.!
Enquist,!B.J.,!West,!G.B.!&!Brown,!J.H.!(2009)!Extensions!and!evaluations!of!a!general!
quantitative!theory!of!forest!structure!and!dynamics.!Proceedings,of,the,
National,Academy,of,Sciences,of,the,United,States,of,America,!106,!7046W7051.!
Freckleton,!R.P.!&!Watkinson,!A.R.!(2001)!Predicting!competition!coefficients!for!
plant!mixtures:!reciprocity!;!transitivity!and!correlations!with!lifeWhistory!
traits.!Ecology,Letters,;,!4,!348W357.!
Garnier,!E.!&!Navas,!M.WL.!(2012)!A!traitWbased!approach!to!comparative!functional!
plant!ecology:!concepts,!methods!and!applications!for!agroecology.!A!review.!
Agronomy,for,Sustainable,Development,!32,!365W399.!
Gaucherand,!S.!&!Lavorel,!S.!(2007)!New!method!for!rapid!assessment!of!the!
functional!composition!of!herbaceous!plant!communities.!Austral,Ecology,!
32,!927W936.!
Grime,!J.P.!(1998)!Benefits!of!plant!diversity!to!ecosystems:!Immediate,!filter!and!
founder!effects.!Journal,of,Ecology,!86,!902W910.!

!

21!

Grime,!J.P.!(2006)!Trait!convergence!and!trait!divergence!in!herbaceous!plant!
communities:!Mechanisms!and!consequences.!Journal,of,Vegetation,Science,!
17,!255W260.!
Harpole,!W.S.!&!Tilman,!D.!(2007)!Grassland!species!loss!due!to!reduced!niche!
dimension.!Nature,!446,!791W793.!
Hubbell,!S.P.!(2001)!The,Unified,Neutral,Theory,of,Biodiversity,and,Biogeography.!
Princeton!University!Press,!Princeton,!NJ.!
Karr,!J.R.!&!James,!F.C.!(1975)!Ecomorphological!configurations!and!convergent!
evolution!in!species!and!communities.!Ecology,and,Evolution,of,Communities!
(ed.!by!M.L.!Cody!and!J.M.!Diamond),!pp.!258W291.!Harvard!University!Press,!
Cambridge.!
Keddy,!P.A.!(1992)!Assembly!and!response!rules:!two!goals!for!predictive!
community!ecology.!Journal,of,Vegetation,Science,!3,!157W164.!
Kraft,!N.J.B.!&!Ackerly,!D.D.!(2010)!Functional!trait!and!phylogenetic!tests!of!
community!assembly!across!spatial!scales!in!an!Amazonian!forest.!Ecological,
Monographs,!80,!401W422.!
Kraft,!N.J.B.,!Valencia,!R.!&!Ackerly,!D.D.!(2008)!Functional!traits!and!nicheWbased!
tree!community!assembly!in!an!Amazonian!forest.!Science,!322,!580W582.!
Kunstler,!G.,!Albert,!C.H.,!Courbaud,!B.,!Lavergne,!S.,!Thuiller,!W.,!Vieilledent,!G.,!
Zimmermann,!N.E.!&!Coomes,!D.A.!(2011)!Effects!of!competition!on!tree!
radialWgrowth!vary!in!importance!but!not!in!intensity!along!climatic!
gradients.!Journal,of,Ecology,!99,!300W312.!
Lavorel,!S.!(2013)!Plant!functional!effects!on!ecosystem!services.!Journal,of,Ecology,!
101+4W8.!
Lavorel,!S.,!Grigulis,!K.,!Lamarque,!P.,!Colace,!M.WP.,!Garden,!D.,!Girel,!J.,!Pellet,!G.!&!
Douzet,!R.!(2011)!Using!plant!functional!traits!to!understand!the!landscape!
distribution!of!multiple!ecosystem!services.!Journal,of,Ecology,!99,!135W147.!
Lavorel,!S.,!Grigulis,!K.,!McIntyr,!S.,!Williams,!N.,!Garden,!D.,!Dorrough,!J.,!Berman,!S.,!
Quétier,!F.,!Thebault,!A.!&!Bonis,!A.!(2008)!Assessing!functional!diversity!in!
the!field:!methodology!matters!!Functional,Ecology,!22,!134W147.!
Levins,!R.!(1968)!Evolution,in,Changing,Environments.!Princeton!University!Press,!
Princeton,!N.J.!
MacArthur,!R.H.!(1958)!Population!ecology!of!some!warblers!of!northeastern!
coniferous!forests.!Ecology,!39,!599W619.!
MacArthur,!R.H.!&!Levins,!R.!(1967)!The!limiting!similarity,!convergence,!and!
divergence!of!coexisting!species.!The,American,Naturalist,!101,!377W385.!
Mayfield,!M.M.!&!Levine,!J.M.!(2010)!Opposing!effects!of!competitive!exclusion!on!
the!phylogenetic!structure!of!communities.!Ecology,Letters,!13,!1085W1093.!
McAllister,!C.A.,!Knapp,!A.K.!&!Maragni,!L.A.!(1998)!Is!leafWlevel!photosynthesis!
related!to!plant!success!in!a!highly!productive!grassland?!Oecologia,!117,!40W
46.!
Mooney,!H.!(ed.^eds)!(1977)!Convergent,evolution,in,Chile,and,California:,
mediteranean,climate,ecosystems.!Dowden,!Hutchinson!and!Ross,!
Stroudsburg,!PA.!

!

22!

Navas,!M.WL.!&!Violle,!C.!(2009)!Plant!traits!related!to!competition:!how!do!they!
shape!the!functional!diversity!of!communities?!Community,Ecology,!10,!131W
137.!
Orians,!G.H.!&!Paine,!R.T.!(1983)!Convergent!evolution!at!the!community!level.!
Coevolution!(ed.!by!D.J.!Futuyma!and!M.!Slatkin).!Sinauer,!Sunderland,!MA.!
Poorter,!H.!(1989)!Interspecific!variation!in!relative!growth!rate:!on!ecological!
causes!and!physiological!consequences.!Causes,and,Consequences,of,Variation,
in,Growth,Rate,and,Productivity,in,Higher,Plants!(ed.!by!H.!Lambers,!M.L.!
Cambridge,!H.!Konings!and!T.L.!Pons).!SPB!Academic!Publishing,!The!Hague.!
Ricotta,!C.!&!Moretti,!M.!(2011)!CWM!and!Rao’s!quadratic!diversity:!a!unified!
framework!for!functional!ecology.!Oecologia,!167,!181W188.!
Savage,!V.M.!(2004)!Improved!approximations!to!scaling!relationships!for!species,!
populations,!and!ecosystems!across!latitudinal!and!elevational!gradients.!
Journal,of,Theoretical,Biology,!227,!525W534.!
Savage,!V.M.,!Webb,!C.T.!&!Norberg,!J.!(2007)!A!general!multiWtraitWbased!framework!
for!studying!the!effects!of!biodiversity!on!ecosystem!functioning.!Journal,of,
Theoretical,Biology,!247,!213W229.!
Schimper,!A.F.W.!(1898)!Pflanzengeographie,auf,Physiologischer.!Grundlage,!G.!
Fischer!!
Schimper,!A.F.W.!(1903)!PlantNgeography,Upon,a,Physiological,Basis.!Clarendon,!
Oxford,!UK.!
Suding,!K.N.,!Lavorel,!S.,!Chapin,!F.S.,!Cornelissen,!J.H.C.,!DÍAz,!S.,!Garnier,!E.,!
Goldberg,!D.,!Hooper,!D.U.,!Jackson,!S.T.!&!Navas,!M.WL.!(2008)!Scaling!
environmental!change!through!the!communityWlevel:!a!traitWbased!responseW
andWeffect!framework!for!plants.!Global,Change,Biology,!14,!1125W1140.!
Terborgh,!J.!(1973)!On!the!notion!of!favorableness!in!plant!ecology.!The,American,
Naturalist,!107,!481W501.!
Tilman,!D.!(1982)!Resource,Competition,and,Community,Structure.!Princeton!
University!Press,!Princeton,!NJ.!
Violle,!C.,!Navas,!M.WL.,!Vile,!D.,!Kazakou,!E.,!Fortunel,!C.,!Hummel,!I.!&!Garnier,!E.!
(2007)!Let!the!concept!of!trait!be!functional!!Oikos,!116,!882W892.!
Weiher,!E.!&!Keddy,!P.A.!(1999)!Assembly!rules!as!general!constraints!on!
community!composition.!Ecological,Assembly,Rules:,Perspectives,,Advances,,
Retreats!(ed.!by!E.!Weiher,!And!Keddy,!P.A.).!Cambridge!University!Press,!
Cambridge,!MASS.!
Westoby,!M.!(1998)!A!leafWheightWseed!(LHS)!plant!ecology!strategy!scheme.!Plant,
and,Soil,!199,!213W227.!
Westoby,!M.!&!Wright,!I.J.!(2006)!LandWplant!ecology!on!the!basis!of!functional!traits.!
Trends,in,Ecology,&,Evolution,!21,!261W268.!
Westoby,!M.,!Falster,!D.S.,!Moles,!A.T.,!Vesk,!P.A.!&!Wright,!I.J.!(2002)!Plant!ecological!
strategies:!Some!leading!dimensions!of!variation!between!species.!Annual,
Review,of,Ecology,and,Systematics,!33,!125W159.!
Williams,!E.D.!(1978)!Botanical,Composition,of,the,Park,Grass,plots,at,Rothamsted,
1856N1976.!Rothamsted!Experimental!Station,!Harpenden,!United!Kingdom.!
!

!

23!

