Global Relationships in Fluctuation and Response in Adaptive
Evolution
Chikara Furusawa1∗ and Kunihiko Kaneko2∗

arXiv:1502.00485v1 [q-bio.PE] 2 Feb 2015

1

Quantitative Biology Center,
RIKEN, 6-2-3 Furuedai,

Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan
2

Research Center for Complex Systems Biology,
Univ. of Tokyo, Komaba,
Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan
∗

correspondence:

chikara.furusawa@riken.jp and kaneko@complex.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp

1

Abstract
Cells generally change their internal state to adapt to an environmental change, and accordingly evolve in response to the new conditions. This process involves phenotypic changes
that occur over several different time scales, ranging from faster environmental adaptation
without a corresponding change in the genomic sequence to slower evolutionary dynamics
involving genetic mutations and subsequent selection. In this regard, a question arises as to
whether there are any relationships between such phenotypic changes over the different time
scales at which adaptive evolution occurs. In this study, we analyzed simulated adaptive evolution in a simple cell model, and found that proportionality between concentration changes
in adaptation and evolution over all components, and the proportion coefficients were closely
linked to the change in the growth rate of a cell. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the
phenotypic variances in component concentrations due to (non-genetic) noise and genomic
alternations are proportional across all components. These global relationships in cellular
states were also supported by phenomenological theory and transcriptome analysis of laboratory evolution in Escherichia coli. These findings provide a basis for the development of
a quantitative theory of plasticity and robustness, and to determine the general restriction
of phenotypic changes imposed by evolution.

2

I.

INTRODUCTION

When an environmental condition is changed, biological systems change their state to
adapt and evolve to the environmental change. Despite the recognized importance to characterize the capacity of adaptation and evolution, discussions on evolvability and plasticity
have thus far remained at a qualitative, rather than quantitative, level. On the other hand,
the cellular internal state can now be quantitatively determined by measuring the abundances of a variety of components, including proteins and metabolites. Recent advances
in high-throughput experimental analysis enable quantification of changes within such a
high-dimensional state space [1].
After an environmental change, cells may first respond by changing the abundances of
cellular components without changing the genome sequence. The typical time scale of such
environmental adaptation is generally shorter than several generations. On the other hand,
over the long-term, i.e., over many generations, the internal state is gradually changed by
evolutionary dynamics, in which the genome sequence is altered by mutations and individuals with higher fitness are generally selected. Indeed, experimental data of both changes
in phenotype, reflecting changes in gene expression profiles, and changes in the genomic
sequence throughout the course of evolution are now available; for example, much data are
available from results obtained from the experimental evolution of E. coli [2–4].
Therefore, an important question arises: is there a general relationship between shortterm phenotypic changes in adaptation and long-term phenotypic changes in evolution? Of
course, the phenotypic changes that occur over different time scales are generally caused by
different mechanisms, and thus the existence of any relationship between them would be nontrivial. However, it should be noted that the essence of cellular dynamics is reproduction,
in which the abundance of each cellular component is roughly doubled, and this constraint
imposed by cellular reproduction imposes a restriction on the time development in highdimensional cellular state space. That is, it is possible that a (glivingh) cellular state would
be restricted to a sub-space of the high-dimensional state space, described by a relatively
smaller number of variables. Such restriction to low-dimensional dynamics can provide a
non-trivial link between the phenotypic changes occurring in adaptation and the long-term
changes occurring over the course of evolution [5]. In fact, some studies have suggested
that there is a common trend over the thousands of gene expression changes in adaptation
and evolution, in which genes whose expressions exhibit a larger response to environmental
change tend to also show a larger response in their expression at the evolutionary scale

3

[6, 7]. Furthermore, global cellular behavior is represented by few macroscopic variables
such as the growth rate and fitness of the system, which govern the entire (high-dimensional)
dynamics in a cell. Therefore, it is important to uncover the possible relationships in the
high-dimensional cellular dynamics between the expression of the thousands of proteins and
metabolites and a macroscopic variable such as the growth rate, throughout the process of
adaptation and evolution.
In addition to the phenotypic changes that occur after environmental changes during
adaptation and evolution, the cellular state also generally exhibits fluctuations even under a
constant environment and without genomic alternations, which originate from the stochastic nature of intra-cellular chemical reactions [8, 9]. The possible relationship between such
non-genetic fluctuations and adaptive responses has also garnered much attention recently.
The proportionality between such fluctuations and the evolutionary rate of fitness and phenotype has been demonstrated in bacterial experimental evolution and in simulations of
toy cell models, which are supported by phenomenological theory [12–15], analogous to the
proportionality between the fluctuation and response in statistical physics that has been
well established since Einstein [10, 11]. In the present context, evolution is considered the
response to genetic change, and thus the proportionality between fluctuation and evolutionary rate means that components that are more variable by noise are also more variable by
genetic change.
Considering the suggested proportionality between the response of cellular states to the
environmental change and to genetic change, and also between the response and fluctuations,
one may expect the existence of proportionality among two-by-two quantities, namely, fluctuations and responses induced by environmental (non-genetic) perturbations (noise) and by
genetic changes (mutation). This grand relationship, if confirmed, is of critical importance
to evolutionary biology, as it would provide a theoretical basis for the quantitative study on
the plasticity and robustness underlying adaptive evolution, and could also set a general restriction as to the extent of phenotypic changes possible through (future) evolution. Indeed,
the quantities constituting the relationship can now be measured over high-dimensional cellular dynamics, reflected as changes in the expression of thousands of genes. However, thus
far, experimental confirmation of this grand relationship remains premature, and is in need
of further scrutiny. Accordingly, at this stage, it is important to examine such a relationship
by adopting an integrative approach combining in silico evolution of a cell model consisting of thousands of chemical species, laboratory evolution of bacteria under environmental
stress, and phenomenological theory for time development in a high-dimensional state space.
4

In the present study, we aimed to uncover such statistical laws underlying the fluctuation
and response of high-dimensional state variables occurring through adaptive evolution, and
to connect them with changes in growth rate or fitness.

II.

RESULTS

Evolutionary simulations of a simple cell model
We employed our previously established mutually catalytic reaction network model, as
this model is capable of capturing the basic characteristic of cells such as the power-law
abundances, log-normal fluctuations, fluctuation-response relationship of fitness, adaptation
with fold-change detection, and so forth, in spite of its simplicity [9, 13, 16, 17]. In the model,
the cellular state is represented by a set of molecule numbers (N1 , N2 , · · · , NK ), where Ni
is the number of molecules of the chemical species i, which ranges from i = 1 to K. For the
internal chemical reaction dynamics, we chose a catalytic network among these K chemical
species, where each reaction from some chemical i to some other chemical j is catalyzed
by a third chemical ℓ. Some resources (nutrients) are supplied from the environment by
transportation through the cell membrane with the aid of some other chemicals that are
termed ’transporters’. The environmental condition is given by the concentrations of nutrient
chemicals. Through catalytic reactions, these nutrients are transformed into cell-component
chemicals, and a cell divides when the amount of component chemicals reaches a certain
threshold. Here, to achieve a higher growth rate, the synthesis of the cell components,
transporters, and chemicals that catalyze the synthesis of those components need to be
harmonized with the nutrient uptake. We allowed the above toy-cell model consisting of
catalytic reaction networks to evolve by rewiring the network paths with a given mutation
rate and selecting the pathways with a certain fraction of cells that showed a higher growth
rate (See Methods for details). For a given environmental condition, evolution progresses
so that the cell growth rate, i.e., the inverse of the average division time, is increased
(Fig. 1). To study the response to environmental change, we then switched the nutrient
condition after evolution under a fixed condition for 3000 generations (denoted by the arrow
in Fig. 1). The growth rate initially decreased following this environmental change, and
then recovered through genetic evolution over generations. Next, we explored the phenotypic
state changes in response to the environmental and evolutionary changes in order to evaluate
the relationship between non-genetic and genetic responses upon environmental change.
As phenotypic state variables for the cell, we computed the abundances of each chemical
5

Ni at the division event. Here, it is convenient to choose Xi = log Ni as a phenotypic variable,
since the abundance generally increases exponentially over time through cellular growth, and
perturbation in a network is also generally amplified exponentially. Indeed, this choice of
logarithmic abundances is also relevant to the theoretical argument presented below, as
well as to transcriptome analysis of gene expression. Note also that the abundances Ni are
distributed by cells, even for those sharing the same reaction network, due to stochasticity
in reaction dynamics; thus, the average abundance over all cells is required to study the
mean response of cells, denoted by h· · · i.
After the change in nutrient condition, the abundances of all the components change.
Let us denote the average change of these abundances by: δXiEnv ≡ hXi (1)i − hXi (0)i =
hNi (1)i
, where generation 1 refers to the time point immediately following the envilog hN
i (0)i

ronmental change, and generation 0 denotes the generation right before this nutrient
change. Similarly, we define the response by genetic evolution after m generations by
δXiGen (m) = hXi (m)i − hXi (0)i. Fig. 2 shows the plot of δXiEnv versus δXiGen (m) for
m = 5, 10, and 50. Interestingly, proportionality was found between the environmental and
genetic responses over all components.
Let us now define this proportion coefficient r(m) for

δXiGen (m)
δXiEnv

across components i. This

proportion coefficient r(m) is initially close to 1, but with the increase in generations m, it
decreases towards zero, in conjunction with the recovery of the growth rate. In other words,
evolution shows a common tendency to abolish the changes in components introduced by the
environmental change. This common proportionality across all chemicals suggests that the
proportion coefficient r(m) is a “global variable” over a huge number of chemical species. A
reasonable candidate for such a global variable is the cell growth rate µ. Hence, it is natural
to compare the coefficient r(m) with the growth rate. Toward this end, we again computed
the change in the growth rate δµEnv = µ(1) − µ(0)(< 0) and δµGen (m) = µ(m) − µ(0) at the
m th generation. The ratio δµGen (m)/δµEnv gives an index for the recovery in this growth
rate from the decrease caused by the environmental change, with 0 and 1 representing full
and null recovery, respectively. In Fig. 3, the proportion coefficient r(m) is plotted against
this growth rate recovery δµGen (m)/δµEnv . The proportionality between the two is clearly
discernible.
Recalling the possible relationship between fluctuation and response, as is typical in
statistical physics, we then evaluated whether there also exists a common relationship among
the variances of all the components. Here, as previously reported [9], the distribution of each
Ni follows an approximately log-normal distribution, as confirmed experimentally in the
6

protein abundances in the present cells. Hence, it is again relevant to adopt Xi = log Ni as
a phenotype variable, so that the distribution of Xi follows a roughly Gaussian distribution
[12]. The phenotypic variance Vip (i) for each component i is defined as the variance of Xi in
an isogenic population. On the other hand, the variance due to genetic change Vg (i) is defined
as the variance of mean Xi over a heterogenic distribution, where the mean is computed
across clones of a given genotype (i.e., a network), while the heterogenic distribution is
related to different genotypes (networks) that exist at a given generation.
The results of simulations are given in Fig. 4, which shows proportionality between Vip (i)
and Vg (i) across the components i for the evolved population. As the mutation rate is
increased over evolution, Vg (i) increases as the genotype distribution is broadened, whereas
Vip (i) remains at the same level, so that the ratio Vg (i)/Vip (i) is increased while maintaining
the proportionality. This observed proportionality means that the components that are more
variable owing to noise in the reaction dynamics are also more variable owing to mutation.
So far, we have confirmed the existence of common proportionality between non-genetic
and genetic variances, as well as between the environmental and evolutionary responses. As
the proportionality between the fluctuation and response is a natural outcome in statistical
physics, we compared the response and fluctuations in more detail. However, direct comparison of the phenotypic variance Vip (i) with the environmental response did not show a
clearly discernable proportionality. This is probably due to the discrepancy in the definitions of the two quantities: the variance originates from very high-dimensional dynamics
without any specific directional change, while in the environmental response, only one specific environmental change considering only a few nutrients is applied. To make a more
direct comparison, we then sampled the environmental responses against a variety of external changes introduced by different nutrient conditions to define the average environmental
response Renv (i) = h(δX env )2 i with h· · · i over 104 environmental conditions (see Methods).
As shown in Fig. S1, this average environmental response showed clear proportionality with
Vip (i) and Vg (i), respectively. Hence, the proportionality relationships among two-by-two
quantities, i.e., genetic and non-genetic responses and fluctuations, hold over all components
(see Fig. 5).
Thus, the degree of plasticity required to achieve an adaptive response to a new environment is characterized by fluctuations Vip (i), i.e., those that do not consider environmental
or genetic changes. On the other hand, when cells are exposed to a novel environment, the
potential of adaptation is expected to increase. Therefore, when placed in a novel condition,
it is expected that the phenotypic fluctuations would increase to allow the cells to adapt to
7

the new environment. In Fig. S2, the variances (Vip (i), Vg (i)) are plotted before and after
the environmental change (arrow in Fig. 1). In this case, all of the variances increase while
roughly maintaining their proportionality. After this increase, the variances decrease over
generations under a fixed environmental condition, while the proportionality between Vip (i)
and Vg (i) is maintained.
Theoretical Argument
By using a simple cell model, we have confirmed the common proportionality over thousands of components for genetic and non-genetic variances, and environmental and genetic
responses. The results suggest the existence of a global variable that governs adaptive evolution. Here, the growth rate µ of a cell is a candidate for such a variable, since, for a cell
to maintain its composition, every component has to be synthesized in conjunction with the
growth rate. Indeed, in [5] we considered the dynamics of gene expression
dxi /dt = fi ({xj }) − µxi ,

(1)

where µxi gives the dilution of the concentration by the increase in cell volume V , and xi is
the concentration of the component i, xi = Ni /V . By using Xi = log xi and Fi ({Xj })xi =
fi ({xj }), the original stationary state is given by
Fi ({Xj∗ }) = µ.

(2)

Now, with the change in environmental condition E and genetic change G, the expression Xi
is shifted to Xi∗ + δXi , and µ is shifted to µ + δµ. Assuming that the change in logarithmic
concentration is not so large, and taking only the linear part of the changes and using the
∂Fi
)Xm =Xm∗ , we get
Jacobi matrix Jij = ( ∂X
j
X
Jij δXj (E, G) + γiE δE + γiG δG = δµ(E, G),

(3)

j

where γiE ≡

∂Fi
∂E

and γiG ≡

∂Fi
,
∂G

respectively.

Here, G is a coordinate introduced to represent the genetic change. It is not evident
that the genetic change is represented by only a single variable. However, considering that
under this scenario evolution progresses under a stressed environmental condition, one could
project high-dimensional genetic change in the direction required to increase fitness (growth
rate) under the condition, indicating that a single variable G can be introduced; indeed,
several studies conducted to date support this assumption [12, 13, 15]. Accordingly, the
variable G has the same dimensions as E, and can be scaled so that G and E induce the
8

same degree of change in expression. The genetic evolution following the initial stress δE
is expected to diminish the environmental stresses, so that evolution occurs in the direction
δG < 0, if the environmental change δE is positive. Considering that evolution occurs
through the projected direction in δE, it is natural to assume γiE = γiG (although this
might be a crude approximation). Under the linear conditions of interest, the change in µ is
proportional to δE or δG, with δµ(δE, δG) = α(δE + δG). Note that, again, the direction
of δG is opposite to δE. Thus, we obtain,
δXj (δE, δG) =

X

Lji (δµ(δE, δG) − γi (δE + δG)) = δµ(δE, δG)

X

i

Lji (1 − γi /α).

(4)

i

Then, over the course of evolution δG = 0 to δG(m), under a given environmental condition
E,
δXjGen (m)
δµ(δE, δG(m))
δXj (δE, δG(m))
=
.
=
Env
δXj (δE, 0)
δµ(δE, 0)
δXj

(5)

In other words, all the expression changes are proportional, as confirmed in the present
simulations. To check the validity of the theory, we compared the proportion coefficient
in the expression change (LHS of eq.5) with the change in growth rate (RHS) numerically
through the course of the evolution simulation. As shown in Fig. 3, the relationship of eq.
5 holds rather well. Note that if there is deviation from γiE = γiG over i, the proportionality
over all genes will deviate. In other words, the deviation from δXj (δE, δG) ∝ δXj (δE, 0)
across genes i reflects the deviation between γjE and γjG .
The relationship in the variances Vip (i) and Vg (i) is considered in a similar manner.
Consider that the fluctuation in δE and δG induce fluctuation in each expression i, induced
by either noise or genetic variation. This fluctuation induces variation in the growth rate,
according to δµ = αδE or αδG, so that
h(δXj (δΥ)2 i = hδµ(δΥ)2 i(

X

Lji (1 − γi /α))2 ,

(6)

i

where δΥ is either δE or δG, i.e., phenotypic change induced by variation in the environment
(i.e., noise) or by genetic change (e.g., by mutation), and h· · · i is the average over the
distribution induced by the phenotypic noise or genetic variation. The variance Vip (j) and
Vg (j) are h(δXj (δE))2 i and h(δXj (δG))2 i, respectively, so that
hδµ(δE)2 i
Vip (µ)
Vip (j)
=
=
.
2
Vg (j)
hδµ(δG) i
Vg (µ)

(7)

Thus, the ratio of the two variances takes on the same value independent of j, which is
determined by the ratio of variances in growth rate fluctuations induced by noise to those
9

induced by genetic variation. This relationship was again confirmed in our simulated evolution model (see Fig. S3) (see also [14] for an alternative derivation of the common proportionality between Vip (i)/Vg (i) assuming the common error of catastrophe in the phenotype
distribution).
The above theoretical interpretations on both the proportionality in responses and in
variances suggest the importance of changes in the growth rate. Since the growth rate globally governs all of the concentrations through dilution, its dominance over each component
is a reasonable assumption. To further evaluate the relationship between environmental
and evolutionary dynamics, however, we need to also assume that evolution progresses
as to assimilate environmental change, as Waddington proposed [18]. In our theory, this
genetic assimilation is formulated by the introduction of the variable G that has a similar effect with the environment (or compensates for the environmental stress), so that
∂Fi (xj )/∂E ≈ ∂Fi (xj )/∂G.
Experimental Verification
The theoretical argument and the simulation results demonstrated the existence of a
common proportion coefficient r(m) for

δXiGen (m)
δXiEnv
Env

to the growth rate recovery δµGen (m)/δµ

across components i, and its proportionality

. To verify this relationship, we analyzed the

time-series transcriptome data obtained in an experimental evolution study of E. coli under
conditions of ethanol stress [19, 20]. In this experiment, after cultivation of approximately
1,000 generations (2,500 hours) under 5% ethanol stress, 6 independent ethanol-tolerant
strains were obtained, which exhibited an approximately 2-fold increase in specific growth
rates in comparison to the ancestor. For all independent culture series, mRNA samples were
extracted from approximately 108 cells at 6 different time points, and the absolute expression
levels were quantified by using microarray analysis. All mRNA samples were obtained from
the cells in exponential growth phase, which means that the changes in cellular state over
the time scale of several generations were negligible, and each expression level represented
cells in a steady-growth state (see [20] for details of materials and methods).
Using the time-series expression data of bacterial adaptive evolution, we analyzed the
common proportionality in expression changes. The environmental response of the i-th gene
δXiEnv is defined by the log-transformed ratio of the expression level of the i-th gene obtained 24 hours after exposure to the stress condition to that obtained under the no-stress
condition. Similarly, the evolutionary response at n hours after the exposure to the stress
δXiGen (n) is defined by the log-transformed ratio of the expression level at n hours to that of
10

the non-stress condition. We found a common trend between the environmental and genetic
responses over all genes, as shown in Fig. 6(a). Furthermore, we also found that the proportion coefficient r(n) for δXiGen (n)/δXiEnv is roughly proportional to the growth recovery
ratio δµGen (n)/δµEnv , as shown in Fig. 6(b), where δµGen (n) and δµEnv are the growth rate
differences of n hours and 24 hours after the exposure to stress, respectively. The results
demonstrated that the evolutionary dynamics with growth recovery were accompanied by
gene expression changes to eliminate the phenotypic changes introduced by the new environment, and agreed well with the simulation results of the simple cell model shown in Fig.
2 as well as the theoretical argument presented above.
Furthermore, there is some indirect experimental support for the proposed relationships
between the variances. Stearns and colleagues measured the isogenic variance Vip of five lifehistory traits (such as body weight, lifespan, etc.) in Drosophila melanogaster, as well as
the genetic variance Vg between different genetic lines observed during laboratory evolution
to increase the traits, and observed proportionality between the two [21]. The correlation
between the isogenic variances in trait expression and variance due to mutation (but without
selection) was measured across a few thousand genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Correlation between the two variances was observed [22], whereas proportionality was not so clear.
This is possibly because evolution without selection was applied in the experiment, and
therefore only the variance resulting from random mutation was measured.

III.

DISCUSSION

We have shown proportionality in the change in the concentrations of most intra-cellular
components as a result of adaptive evolution, which was confirmed in simulated evolution
of catalytic reaction network models of cells, laboratory experiments of bacterial evolution,
and phenomenological theory. As the theoretical argument, albeit phenomenological, is
rather general, we expect that the observed relationships obtained from the simulation and
laboratory experiments represent a general phenomenon, independent of the specific models
or organisms considered. This proportionality across thousands of components implies that
there is a strong constraint in phenotypic evolution. In particular, the expression of different
components cannot evolve independently, but rather change together, for the most part,
along a one-dimensional path provided by eq.(5). Phenotypic change in adaptive evolution
under a fixed environmental condition is highly constrained; thus, we here quantitatively
formulate the general restriction or feasibility of the direction of phenotype changes in future
11

evolution.
Our result also implies that the changes in the concentrations of most components that
are induced by the environmental change become relaxed through the evolutionary process.
This suggests a phenomenon of strong homeostasis, that is, a tendency to restore to the
original, adapted, intra-cellular states, via genetic change. In some sense, this homoeostasis
is similar to the Le Chatelier principle in thermodynamics, in that changes introduced by
external perturbations are relaxed by subsequent temporal evolution.
There could be a huge variety of genetic changes that yield the phenotypic changes required for adaptation. Indeed, in our simulations, there were a variety of network structures
that could achieve phenotypic adaptation. When the simulation was run again with a different seed of random numbers for mutations, the resulting network (i.e., genotypes) was different in each run, but the change in concentrations (phenotypes) followed the proportionality
given by eq.(5), independently of the specific genetic changes occurring during evolution.
Furthermore, in bacterial evolution experiments, the results from different strains tended
to follow the same proportionality law described by eq.(5). It is interesting to note that
such correlated change in expression levels by genetic changes is also suggested in several
experiments [6, 7]. It will be important to further confirm the relationship eq.(5) in more
laboratory evolution experiments, and to also unveil the underlying genotype-phenotype
map that achieves the common, restricted change in expression levels observed in the experimental data.
We have also found proportionality in the fluctuations in expression levels across components. As expected from Fisher’s fundamental theorem of natural selection [23], the higher
the genetic variance, the higher the evolutionary rate. Hence, the proportionality between
Vip (i) ∝ Vg (i) suggests that a higher isogenic variance of a given expression level due to
noise would be accompanied by a higher rate in the change in the expression level due to
evolution. Hence, our results suggest that the direction of evolutionary change in phenotypic
space is likely to be predetermined by the isogenic variance of expression level due to noise.
According to our theoretical framework, the responses and fluctuations in expression
levels are represented by the macroscopic growth rate and its fluctuation. Therefore, the
relationship between the response and fluctuations, analogous to thermodynamics, is represented by the landscape of the growth rate as a function of phenotype (expression level)
and the environment, in contrast to the established fitness landscape represented in genetic
space proposed by Sewall Wright [24]. We hope that the present study will provide a basis
for the development of a future macroscopic theory for phenotypic evolution.
12

IV.

METHODS: MODEL SIMULATIONS

The cellular state can be represented by a set of numbers (N1 , N2 , · · · , NK ), where Ni is
the number of molecules of the chemical species i with i ranging from i = 1 to K. For the
internal chemical reaction dynamics, we chose a catalytic network among these k chemical
species, where each reaction from some chemical i to some other chemical j is assumed to
be catalyzed by a third chemical ℓ, i.e., (i + ℓ → j + ℓ). A catalytic network is chosen
randomly such that the probability that any two chemicals, i and j, are connected is given
by the connection rate ρ. Some resources (nutrients) are supplied from the environment
by transportation through the cell membrane with the aid of some other chemicals that
are named ‘transporters’. The concentrations of nutrient chemicals in the environment are
kept constant, and they have no catalytic activity in order to prevent the occurrence of
catalytic reactions in the environment. Through the catalytic reactions, these nutrients are
transformed into other chemicals, including the transporters. Here, we assume that all of
the K chemical species are necessary for cell division. Thus, cell division is assumed to occur
when the minimum number of species exceeds a threshold M, i.e., minK
i=1 Ni ≥ M (in all
analyses M is set to unity). Chosen randomly, the parent cell’s molecules are evenly split
among the two daughter cells. In our numerical simulations, we randomly picked up a pair
of molecules in a cell and transformed them according to the reaction network. In the same
way, transportation through the membrane was also computed by randomly choosing from
molecules within the cell and from nutrients in the environment. The parameters were set
as K = 1000 and ρ = 0.01.
We studied the evolution of the replication dynamics by generating slightly modified
networks and selecting those that grew faster. First, n parent cells were generated, and
the connecting paths of catalytic networks were chosen randomly with connection rate ρ.
From each of the n parent cells, L mutant cells were generated by randomly replacing mρK 2
reaction paths, where ρK 2 is the total number of reactions and m is the mutation rate per
reaction per generation. Then, reaction dynamics were simulated for each of the nL cells
to determine the rate of growth of each cell; that is, the inverse of the time required for
division. Within the cell population, n cells with faster growth rates were selected to be the
parent cells of the next generation, from which nL mutant cells were again generated in the
same manner. Throughout the simulation, the parameters were set as n = 1000 and L = 5.
In the simulations shown in Fig. 1, the mutation rate m was set to 1 × 10−3 .
The environmental change is given by changing the nutrient concentration ratio in the en-

13

vironment. In the evolutionary simulation shown in Fig. 1, there are two nutrient chemicals,
each associated with one transporter chemical. Before adding the new environmental condition (generation≤0), the concentrations of these two nutrients in the environment (c1 , c2 )
were set to (0.5, 0.5), while after the environmental change (generation>0), they were set
to (0.9, 0.1). In the result shown in Fig. S1, to add a variety of environmental changes, we
randomly selected a nutrient chemical and a transporter chemical for this nutrient among K
total chemical species. Then, the concentrations of the new nutrient cN ew and the original
nutrients were set to (c1 , c2 , cN ew ) = (0.45, 0.45, 0.1). We iterated the random addition of a
nutrient 104 times to obtain the average environmental response Renv (i).

[1] Ishii N, et al. (2007) Multiple high-throughput analysis monitor the response of E. coli to
perturbations. Science 316(5824):593-597
[2] Kishimoto T, et al. (2010) Transition from positive to neutral in mutation fixation along with
continuing rising fitness in thermal adaptive evolution. PLoS Genet 6(10):e1001164
[3] Barrick JE, et al. (2009). Genome evolution and adaptation in a long-term experiment with
Escherichia coli. Nature 461:1243-1247
[4] Suzuki S, Horinouchi T, Furusawa C. Prediction of antibiotic resistance by gene expression
profiles. Nature Communications 5:5792
[5] Kaneko K, Furusawa C., Yomo T (2015) Universal relationship in gene expression changes for
cells in steady-growth state. Phys. Rev. X, in press
[6] Carroll, S. M., and Marx, C. J. (2013). Evolution after introduction of a novel metabolic
pathway consistently leads to restoration of wild-type physiology. PLoS genetics 9(4):e1003427.
[7] Ying BW, Seno S, Kaneko F, Matsuda H, Yomo T (2013). Multilevel comparative analysis of
the contributions of genome reduction and heat shock to the Escherichia coli transcriptome.
BMC Genomics 14(1): 25.
[8] Elowitz MB, Levine AJ, Siggia ED, Swain PS (2002). Stochastic gene expression in a single
cell. Science 297(5584):1183.
[9] Furusawa C, et al. (2005) Ubiquity of log-normal distributions in intra-cellular reaction dynamics. Biophysics 1:25-31
[10] Einstein A., 1926, Investigation on the Theory of of Brownian Movement, (Collection of papers
ed. by R. Furth), Dover, (reprinted, 1956).
[11] Kubo R., Toda M., Hashitsume N. 1985, Statistical Physics II: (English translation; Springer).

14

[12] Sato K, Ito Y, Tomo T, Kaneko K (2003) On the relation between fluctuation and response
in biological systems. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100(24):14086-90
[13] Kaneko K, Furusawa C (2006) An evolutionary relationship between genetic variation and
phenotypic fluctuation. Jour. Theor. Biol. 240(1):78-86
[14] Kaneko K (2007) Evolution of robustness to noise and mutation in gene expression dynamics.
PLoS One 2(5):e434
[15] Kaneko, K. (2012). Phenotypic plasticity and robustness: evolutionary stability theory, gene
expression dynamics model, and laboratory experiments. In Evolutionary Systems Biology
(pp. 249-278). Springer New York.
[16] Furusawa C, Kaneko K (2003) Zipf’s law in gene expression. Phys. Rev. Lett. 90:088102
[17] Furusawa C, Kaneko K (2012) Adaptation to optimal cell growth through self-organized criticality. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108(20):208103.
[18] Waddington CH (2014). The strategy of the genes., Routledge.
[19] Horinouchi T, et al. (2010) Transcriptome analysis of parallel-evolved Escherichia coli strains
under ethanol stress. BMC Genomics 11:579
[20] Horinouchi T, et al. (2014) Phenotypic convergence in bacterial adaptive evolution to ethanol
stress. BioRxiv doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/011577
[21] Stearns SC, Kaiser M, Kawecki TJ (1995) The differential genetic and environmental canalization of fitness components in Drosophila melanogaster. Jour. Evol. Biol. 8:539
[22] Lehner B, Kaneko K (2011) Fluctuation and response in biology. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 68:10051010
[23] Fisher RA (1930) The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection., Clarendon Press, Oxford
[24] Wright, S. The roles of mutation, inbreeding, crossbreeding, and selection in evolution. Proc.
6th Int. Cong. Genet. 1:356-366 (1932).

Acknowledgements
General: The authors would like to thank T. Yomo for stimulating discussions and
constructive comments.
Funding: This work was supported in part by the platform for Dynamic Approaches to the
Living Systems from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology
(MEXT), Japan. This work was also supported in part by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific

15

Research on Innovative Areas [25128715 and 26119719 to C.F.] from MEXT, Japan.
Author contribution: C.F. and K.K. designed the study. C.F. performed the simulations
and data analysis. K.K. performed the theoretical analysis. C.F. and K.K. wrote the
manuscript.
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Figure Captions

Figure 1
Growth rate (fitness) increase over generations from generation −3000 to 0. At generation
0, the nutrient concentrations in the environment were changed. As a result, the growth
rate drastically decreased at generation 0, and later recovered by the evolutionary dynamics
(see Methods for details).
Figure 2
Response by environmental change versus response by evolution. Relationship between the
environmental response δXiEnv and genetic response δXiGen (m). (a), (b), and (c) show the
plots for m = 5, 10, and 50, respectively. The black solid lines are y = x for reference.
Figure 3
The relationship between growth recovery rate δµGen (m)/δµEnv and the proportion coefficient r(m). The proportion coefficient r(m) was obtained by using the least-squares method
for the relationship of δXiEnv and δXiGen (m) for m = 1 ∼ 200. The black solid line is y = x
for reference.
Figure 4
The relationship between Vip (i) and Vg (i). The variances were computed by using the
network and environment at generation 0 (before the environmental change) shown in Fig.
S1 with various mutation rates. Vip (i) and Vg (i) were calculated based on the simulation
results of randomly generated 105 networks. The solid line is y = x for reference.
16

Figure 5
Proportionality relationships among genetic/non-genetic fluctuations and responses hold
over all components. The arrows indicate the proportional relationships.
Figure 6
Response by environmental change versus response by evolution in E. coli adaption to
ethanol stress. (a) Relationship between environmental response δXiEnv and genetic response δXiGen (n) for n = 2496 as a representative example. δXiEnv and δXiGen (n) were
calculated by the log-transformed expression ratio between before and 24 hours after and
n hours after exposure to ethanol stress. The blue line is obtained by least-squares fitting,
while the black line is y = x for reference. (b) Relationship between growth recovery rate
δµGen (n)/δµEnv and the proportion coefficient r(n). The proportion coefficient r(n) was
obtained by using the least-squares method for the relationship of δXiEnv and δXiGen (n)
for n = 384, 744, 1224, 1824, and 2496 hours. The growth recovery rate δµGen (n)/δµEnv
was calculated based on the experimental measurements (see [20] for details). Among the 6
independent culture lines in [20], the results of 5 culture lines without genome duplication
are plotted. The black line is y = x for reference.

17

Figures
300

growth rate

250
200
150
100
50
0
-3000

-2000

-1000

generation
Figure 1:

18

0

1000

(a)
3

δX iGen(5)

2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

1

2

3

1

2

3

δX iEnv

(b)
3

δX iGen(10)

2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-3

-2

-1

0

δX i

(c)

Env

3

δX iGen(50)

2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-3

-2

-1

0

δX i

Figure 2:

19

Env

proportion coefficient r

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Gen

0.8

1

Env

δµ /δµ
Figure 3:
0

10

vg

10-1

m=3 x 10-4
-3
m=1 x 10
m=3 x 10-3
m=1 x 10-2

10-2

10

-3

0.05

0.1

0.2

vip
Figure 4:

20

Phenotypic change

Phenotypic change

by random mutations

by adaptive evolution

Phenotypic variance

Phenotypic response

by noise in isogenic

to environmental change

population

Figure 5:

21

2
1.5

δX iGen(n)

1
0.5

y=0.56x

0
-0.5
-1
-1.5

y=x

-2
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5

0

proportion coefficient r

δXi

0.5

1

1.5

Env

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.5

0.6

0.7
Gen

0.8
Env

δµ /δµ

Figure 6:

22

0.9

2

(a)
12

R env (x10-3)

10
8
6
4
2
0
0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

Vip

(b)
12

R env (x10-3)

10
8
6
4
2
0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

Vg (x10-3)

Figure 7:

Supplementary Figure 1. The relationships of Renv to (a) Vip and (b) Vg .

The variances are computed by using the network and environment at generation
0 (before the environmental change). For the details of environmental changes to
calculate Renv , see Simulation methods.

23

generation 0
generation 1
generation 20

vg

10-2

10-3

0.05

0.1

0.2

vip

Figure 8:

Supplementary Figure 2. The relationship between Vip and Vg after the

environmental change. Vip and Vg before the environmental change (generation 0),
immediately after the environmental change (generation 1), and after the adaptive
evolution (generation 20) are plotted. After the environmental change, both Vip and
Vg increase , and then recover the original levels after 20 generations of the evolution.
The solid line is y = x for reference.

24

vg(µ )/vip(µ )

100

-1

10

-2

10

10-2

10-1
vg(j)/vip(j)

100

Figure 9: Supplementary Figure 3. The relationship between the ratio of Vg (j)/Vip (j)
and Vg (µ)/Vi p(µ).

The variance ratio Vg (j)/Vip (j) is calculated by the least square

method for all components. The data points are obtained with m = 10−6 × 2ℓ for
ℓ = 1, 2, · · · , 8.

25

