arXiv:1502.07044v1 [physics.bio-ph] 25 Feb 2015

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

2

Mapping the energy and diffusion landscapes of
membrane proteins at the cell surface using
high-density single-molecule imaging and Bayesian
inference: application to the multi-scale dynamics
of glycine receptors in the neuronal membrane.
Jean-Baptiste Masson1
Physics of Biological System,
Pasteur Institute, Paris , France,
CNRS UMR 3525, Paris, France.
Patrice Dionne*
Laboratoire Kastler Brossel, CNRS UMR 8552,
Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris , France,
Centre de recherche Universit Laval Robert-Giffard, Quebec, Canada.
Charlotte Salvatico*
Biologie Cellulaire de la Synapse,
Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale U1024,
Institut de Biologie de l’Ecole Normale Superieure (IBENS),
75005 Paris, France.
Marianne Renner
Biologie Cellulaire de la Synapse,
Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale U1024,
Institut de Biologie de l’Ecole Normale Superieure (IBENS),
75005 Paris, France.
Christian G. Specht
Biologie Cellulaire de la Synapse,
Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale U1024,
Institut de Biologie de l’Ecole Normale Superieure (IBENS),
75005 Paris, France.

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

3

Antoine Triller 2
Biologie Cellulaire de la Synapse,
Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale U1024,
Institut de Biologie de l’Ecole Normale Superieure (IBENS),
75005 Paris, France.
Maxime Dahan 3
Laboratoire Physico-Chimie,
Institut Curie, CNRS UMR 168, Universit Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6
Paris France

1

Corresponding author. email: jbmasson@pasteur.fr. Address: Institut Pasteur,
Physics of Biological Systems, 28 rue du Dr Roux, CNRS, UMR 3525 75724, Paris
Cedex 15, France. Tel.: +33 (0)1 40 61 39 23. ∗ These authors contributed equally
2
Corresponding author, email: triller@biologie.ens.fr, Address: Ecole Normale
Superieure, Biologie Cellulaire de la Synapse Institut National de la Sante et de
la Recherche Medicale U1024 Institut de Biologie de l’Ecole Normale Superieure
(IBENS), 45 rue d’Ulm, Tel.: +33 (0)1 44 32 35 47.
3
Corresponding author, email: maxime.dahan@curie.fr, Laboratoire PhysicoChimie, Institut Curie, CNRS UMR 168, 26 Rue d’Ulm, 75005, Paris France,
Tel.: +33 (0)1 56 24 67 54.

Abstract
Protein mobility is conventionally analyzed in terms of an effective diffusion. Yet, this description often fails to properly distinguish and evaluate
the physical parameters (such as the membrane friction) and the biochemical interactions governing the motion. Here, we present a method combining
high-density single-molecule imaging and statistical inference to separately
map the diffusion and energy landscapes of membrane proteins across the
cell surface at ∼ 100 nm resolution (with acquisition of a few minutes).
When applying these analytical tools to glycine neurotransmitter receptors
(GlyRs) at inhibitory synapses, we find that gephyrin scaffolds act as shallow
energy traps (∼3 kB T ) for GlyRs, with a depth modulated by the biochemical properties of the receptor-gephyrin interaction loop. In turn, the inferred
maps can be used to simulate the dynamics of proteins in the membrane,
from the level of individual receptors to that of the population, and thereby,
to model the stochastic fluctuations of physiological parameters (such as the
number of receptors at synapses). Overall, our approach provides a powerful
and comprehensive framework with which to analyze biochemical interactions in living cells and to decipher the multi-scale dynamics of biomolecules
in complex cellular environments.
Key words: Single Molecule, Neurons, Statistical Physics

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

2

Introduction
Determining the parameters that regulate the mobility of proteins in cells is
key for many cellular functions. The motion of proteins depends on a variety
of factors, including the local viscosity, their intermittent binding to other
proteins, the molecular crowding and the dimensionality of the accessible
space (1). Since all these factors are difficult or impossible to reconstitute
in vitro using purified constituents, there is a compelling need for analytical
tools that bypass in vitro assays and directly access the properties of macromolecular assemblies and the kinetics of their interactions in their native
cellular environment.
Thanks to single-molecule (SM) imaging tools, it is now possible to
record trajectories of individual proteins in a variety of cellular systems.
An important challenge is to extract relevant biochemical and biophysical
information from these trajectories. This is commonly done by computing
the mean square displacement (MSD) along the trajectories and estimating
the effective diffusion coefficient of the molecule. By associating the diffusional states to the functional states of the biomolecules, one can identify
molecular behaviors (1) and evaluate the transition kinetics between them
(2). Although this approach has often proved useful, it is conceptually inappropriate in many biological situations. Measuring a diffusion coefficient
places emphasis on the friction encountered by the protein and assumes that
the movement is characterized by a MSD scaling linearly with time. Yet,
the primary factor controlling the motion of a protein is often not the friction but, rather, its interactions with molecular or macromolecular partners
leading to transient stabilization or transport. In this case, the relevant information is not the diffusion coefficient but the binding energies between
the protein of interest and its interacting partners. Furthermore, regulatory
processes are often mediated by changes in these binding energies, which
should ideally be evaluated with in situ measurements.
Methods that go beyond the computation of the MSD generally aim to
identify deviations from Brownian movement within single molecule trajectories, due for instance to trapping or transport (3–5). However these methods essentially remain ad hoc tools and do not constitute a comprehensive
framework to describe the parameters underlying the motion. Furthermore,
biological media are often spatially inhomogeneous and this heterogeneity
is poorly conveyed by measuring a few, sparse trajectories. A conceptually different approach using Bayesian inference methods has been recently
proposed to analyze the motion of molecules (7, 8). It assumes that the
membrane environment is characterized by two spatially-varying quantities:

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

3

(i) the diffusivity D (r) = kB T /γ (r) (where γ (r) is the local viscosity), (ii)
the potential energy V (r) that reflects the biochemical interactions of the
molecule. In this framework, the protein is a random walker with a motion
governed by the Langevin equation (6):
dr
D (r) ∇V (r) p
=−
+ 2D (r)ξ (t)
dt
kB T

(1)

(where ξ (t) is a rapidly varying Gaussian noise with zero mean). From
a general standpoint, a knowledge of D (r) and V (r), which are proteinspecific, can not only reveal how fast the protein moves in the membrane
but also identify areas where it can be stabilized (energy traps) or from
which it is excluded (energy barriers). However, in the few cases where
D (r) and V (r) have been experimentally determined (9, 11), the analysis
has been limited to movements confined in local regions (< 1 µm2 ), falling
short of providing a complete description of the heterogeneous diffusivity
and energy landscapes in the cell membrane.
Here, we introduce a novel and generic approach, combining high density
single molecule imaging and computational tools, that enables the mapping
of the environment of membrane receptors across the entire cell surface and
at ∼ 100 nm resolution. This approach allows the mapping of the membrane
over regions of several hundred µm2 in a few minutes of data acquisition.
Furthermore, the inferred maps are used to numerically generate massive
number of trajectories. These simulated trajectories, whose characteristics
match those of the experimental ones, enable a complete analysis of the
dynamics in the complex membrane environment by means of various statistical estimators. To illustrate the relevance and benefits of our approach,
we applied it to the neuronal membrane, a cellular system in which the
spatial organization is critical for the detection and processing of external
information. In past years, tracking experiments have underlined the role
of membrane dynamics in ensuring rapid exchange of receptors (e.g. glutamate, glycine or GABA receptors) between extrasynaptic and synaptic
localizations (12). Therefore, the number of receptors at synapses depends
on the motion of receptors at the cell surface and their stabilization at synaptic loci, the latter being regulated by the number of scaffolding molecules
and the affinity of the receptor-scaffold interactions (13). A quantitative
analysis of the protein mobilities and of their regulatory mechanisms is thus
paramount for characterizing and modeling the variability of the synaptic
response and the plasticity of the nervous system (involved in higher brain
functions such as learning and memory or during pathological processes).

4

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

Results and discussion
Mapping the diffusion and energy landscapes with Bayesian inference. Our approach for the large-scale mapping of D (r) and V (r) builds
on Bayesian statistical tools recently developed to analyze the motion of
individual particles (7, 8). The principle of the method is as follows (see details in the Supplementary materials). We first acquire high-density singlemolecule data (14, 15), with a number of individual translocations on the
order of 1000 − 10000 /µm2 . Next, the surface of the cell is meshed with
sub-domains Si,j (labeled with the index (i, j) along the x and y axis) with
a size proportional by a factor δ ∼ 2-3 to the average step size of a translocation, such that consecutive positions of the molecules are either in the
same or in adjacent domains (Fig. 1a). From the information contained
in the massive number of individual translocations, we determine Di,j and
∇Vi,j in each sub-domain (i, j) using Bayesian inference techniques adapted
from (7). In brief, we compute the global posterior distribution P of the parameters {Di,j }(i,j) and {∇Vi,j }(i,j) given the observed trajectories {Tk }(k) .
Since all the sub-domains are independent, P is the product of the posterior
distributions inside each of them:





Y 
P {∇Vi,j }(i,j) , {Di,j }(i,j)|{Tk }(k) = 
P ∇Vi,j , Di,j |{Tk }(k)  × P (∇V, D) (2)
(i,j)



Y
Y Y

∝

(i,j)  k µ:rk
µ ∈Si,j

2

exp −

∆t/kB T)
(rkµ+1 −rkµ−Di,j ∇Vi,j

2

σ
4 Di,j + ∆t
∆t


4π Di,j +

σ2
∆t



∆t

!

2
Di,j





 (3)
×
2
(Di,j ∆t + σ 2 ) 


where µ designates the index for which the points rkµ of the kth trajectory
are in Si,j , σ is the experimental localization accuracy (∼30 nm), ∆t the
acquisition time and P (∇V, D) the prior information on the potential and
the diffusivities. In the second line of equation (2) we display the prior
we commonly used, Jefferey’s prior, that is discussed in the supplementary
MAP , ∇V MAP ) of the local diffusivity and
Materials. The estimators (Di,j
i,j
force are the Maximum a Posteriori (MAP) of the posterior distribution P
(16, 17). Finally, we solve the inverse problem to determine in each subdomain the potential field Vi,j associated to the force. The estimation of Vi,j

5

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

a

dr
D(r) V (r)
=
+ 2D(r) (t)
dt
k BT

j
Di,j

i

Δ

b

Vi,j

D
Us

c
wt

β -TM

interaction transmembrane extracellular
domain
pHluorin
loop

βS403D-TM
β−-TM

d

anti-GFP antibody
coupled to a red
fluorescent dye

Figure 1: General scheme of the assay. a) Principle of the Bayesian inference method. Left: High-density single-molecule data (red dots) are
recorded at the cell surface. Right: In a mesh domain, multiple translocations (top) are used to infer the local diffusivity and force (gradient of
the potential) that underlie the motion (bottom). b) GlyRs (blue) diffuse
in the membrane and are in dynamic equilibrium between synaptic and extrasynaptic domains in the neuronal membrane. At synapses, GlyRs are
stabilized by their interactions with gephyrin clusters (orange), which can
be modeled as trapping potential (with depth US ). c) Expression constructs
of transmembrane (TM) proteins with an extracellular pHluorin tag and an
intracellular interaction loop derived from the GlyR β-subunit. d) Principle
of high-density single-molecule uPaint imaging (15).

6

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

is performed by minimizing ξ ({Vi,j }), defined as:
X
X

M AP 2
∇Vi,j − ∇Vi,j
+β (δ)
(∇Vi,j )2
ξ ({Vi,j }| (i, j) ∈ {N (i, j)} =
6 0) =
(i,j)

(i,j)

(4)
with N (i, j) the number of neighboring occupied mesh domains, β (δ) a constant (optimized on numerically generated trajectories) depending on δ (see
MAP , ∇V }
Supplementary Information). Eventually, the set of quantities {Di,j
i,j (i,j)
constitute the diffusivity and potential energy maps.
Glycine receptors and their interactions with scaffolding proteins.
We applied our inference-based mapping method to investigate the dynamics of GlyRs in the neuronal membrane as well as their stabilization at
inhibitory synapses (18). This stabilization is achieved through the binding
of the receptors to the scaffold protein gephyrin (Fig. 1b) via an intracellular
loop (the β-loop) present in the two β-subunits of the pentameric GlyR complex. The high affinity component of the β-loop-gephyrin interaction is in
the nanomolar range (KD ∼ 20 nM), as determined by isothermal titration
calorimetry (19). To characterize the GlyR-gephyrin interaction in living
neurons, we used recombinant membrane proteins consisting of a transmembrane domain (TM), a C-terminal pHluorin tag (a pH-sensitive GFP
mutant that is quenched in intracellular acidic vesicular compartments),
that were fused N-terminally to the intracellular GlyR β-loop (Fig. 1c).
This β WT -TM-pHluorin construct recapitulates the interactions of the endogenous GlyR complexes with the gephyrin scaffold proteins, with the important benefit that individual elements of the receptor-scaffold interaction
can be manipulated independently (19). It also overcomes the difficulty of
defining the sub-unit composition of oligomeric receptors where transfected
sub-units compete with endogenous ones. As a control, we used β − -TMpHluorin, a construct with a mutated β-loop that does not interact with
gephyrin.
High-density single-molecule imaging of TM proteins. We acquired
a high-density of individual trajectories using uPaint, a single-molecule technique in which cells are imaged at an oblique illumination in a buffer containing dye-labeled primary antibodies (15). As antibodies (in our case,
anti-GFP antibodies coupled to Atto647N dyes) continuously bind to their
membrane targets, they can be tracked until they either dissociate or photobleach (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Videos 1 and 2). Hence, the entire field
of view is constantly replenished with new fluorescent labels and a large
number of individual trajectories covering a field of view of ∼ 500-1000

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

7

µm2 can be recorded. Experiments were performed on cultured rat hippocampal neurons co-transfected with mRFP-tagged gephyrin and with the
pHluorin-tagged transmembrane constructs (Fig. 1c). In typical measurements, movies were recorded for ∼5-15 minutes with an acquisition time ∆t
= 50 ms (Supplementary Videos 1 and 2), yielding up to hundreds of thousands of individual translocations per field of view, with an average of 30
points per mesh domain (size ∼100x100 nm2 ). On this time scale, the cells
and synaptic sites remained relatively stable, meaning that the diffusivity
and energy landscapes could be considered constant.
Diffusion and energy maps of TM proteins. Figures 2a-f show examples of the diffusivity and energy maps for the two constructs β WT -TMpHluorin and β − -TM-pHluorin. In both cases, the diffusion map exhibits
fluctuations at short scale (∼1 µm or less), with local peaks and valleys and
a characteristic diffusivity in the range of 0.05-0.2 µm2 .s−1 (Fig. 2b and 2e).
More striking differences were observed between the energy landscapes. For
β WT -TM, the landscape is characterized by the existence of small regions
(< 0.5 µm2 ) corresponding to local energy minima (Fig. 2c). Importantly,
gephyrin clusters coincide with energy minima, consistent with the stabilization of the transmembrane proteins at synaptic sites. Yet, we also observed
that some other minima did not colocalize with gephyrin clusters, suggesting that β WT -TM-pHluorin might interact with other partners outside of
synapses (such as the cytoskeleton or lipid domains). It is possible that
these extrasynaptic interactions are still mediated by gephyrin (present in
number too small to be detected), since gephyrin is known to associate with
GlyRs both inside and outside of synapses (20). In contrast, the energy
map for β − -TM (Fig. 2f) shows variations at a longer length-scale, without
correlation to gephyrin clusters.
To more quantitatively compare the heterogeneous properties of the neuronal membrane for β WT -TM and β − -TM, we computed two quantities (averaged over 7 cells in each case): (i) the distribution of diffusion coefficients
in the maps (Fig. 2g), and (ii) the rugosity of the energy landscape, defined
as the standard deviation of the potential in circular region of defined radius
averaged over the complete surface of the cell over circular region of the fluctuations of the potential averaged over circular regions of increasing radius
(Fig. 2h and Supplementary Information). These parameters revealed that
the interacting β-loop led to a lower average diffusivity (0.06 µm2 .s−1 and
0.13 µm2 .s−1 for β WT -TM and β − -TM, respectively) and a larger rugosity of
the potential. This is consistent with the notion that moving TM proteins,

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

8

Figure 2: Diffusion and energy maps in live neurons. a) Fluorescence images of cultured neurons expressing mRFP-gephyrin and β WT -TM-pHluorin.
Scale bar: 10 µm. b-c) Diffusion and energy maps. d-f) Equivalent set of
images and maps for β − -TM-pHluorin. g) Distribution of diffusion coefficients for the membrane constructs β WT -TM (black), β S403D -TM (blue)
and β − -TM (red). The vertical bars on the x-axis indicate the mean values
of the respective distributions. Insert: distribution in a lin-log scale. h)
Rugosity of the membrane potential as a function of the region radius.

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

9

when bound to intracellular scaffolding proteins, encounter more obstacles
that increase the viscosity of their environment. Also they are more likely
to interact with membrane or sub-membrane structures that contribute to
the energy landscapes.
Synaptic scaffolds as crowded energy traps. Given the pronounced
differences between the energy landscapes of the β WT -TM and β − -TM constructs, we examined the behavior of β WT -TM at gephyrin clusters in closer
details. An example of the energy profile of β WT -TM proteins at a synaptic
cluster (identified by the presence of mRFP-gephyrin fluorescence) is shown
in Fig 3a. The profile reinforces the view that clusters of scaffolding proteins
act as energy traps for membrane receptors (11, 12, 18). The average trap
depth was 3.6 ± 0.4 kB T (± S.E.M., n = 69 clusters), a relatively shallow potential from which receptors can escape rapidly. Yet, about 15% of
clusters had stabilization energies greater than 6 kB T , corresponding to a
much more stable anchoring of receptors (Fig. 3b). This reflects the heterogeneity of the synaptic domains in the neuronal membrane and underlines
the need for measurements at the single synapse level. Of note, the binding
energies between β WT -TM and gephyrin seem to be significantly lower than
the stabilization energy of AMPA receptors at synaptic sites, for which 25
% of the wells had a depth larger than 8 KB T (11). The method used in
(11), also based on a combination of high-density single molecule imaging
and statistical inference, evaluates the diffusion and drift by computing the
maximal likelihood estimation in a mesh square as described in (7). The
confining potentials were subsequently evaluated by L2 minimization of a
parabolic shaped potential from the force (drift) fields. In (11) the authors
do not discuss the role of known biases with confining potentials (see (8–10))
or the effect of the positioning noise, and do not provide information on the
posterior distribution of the parameters. It is thus delicate to precisely compare their experimental results with ours. Yet, given that the diffusivity of
AMPARs at excitatory synapses appears to be higher than the diffusivity of
GlyRs at inhibitory synapses (gephyrin clusters), higher confining potentials
may be necessary to stabilize the AMPARs. In addition, we noticed that
the average diffusivity of β WT -TM (∼0.01 µm2 s−1 ) inside gephyrin clusters
was reduced by a factor ∼6 compared to extrasynaptic regions (Fig. 3c),
probably due to the combined effect of membrane crowding within synaptic
sites and the binding to scaffolding elements. In comparison, the diffusivity
of β − -TM proteins inside gephyrin clusters, which we expect to be predominantly influenced by molecular crowding (21), was 0.07 µm2 .s−1 (Fig. 3c),
only a factor ∼2 lower than in extrasynaptic domains. In other words, the

10

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

Potential energy

a

4
3

1
17.6

17.4

x [μm]

c

1
5

mean energy

c.d.f

0.75
0.5

0.25

4
3
2
1
0 wt
β -TM βS403D-TM

0

17.2

0

2

4

6

8

10 12

Trapping energy [kBT]

14

Diffusivity [μm2.s-1]

b

[kBT]

2

33.1

33.3

33.5

0

y [μm]

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
βwt-TM βS403D-TM β -TM

Figure 3: Analysis of the synaptic gephyrin scaffold. a) Example of a
gephyrin cluster (indicated by a box) acting as a local trap in the energy
landscape. Scale bar: 5 µm b) Cumulative distribution function (c.d.f) of
trapping energy for the constructs β WT -TM (black) and β S403D -TM (blue).
Insert: mean values of the distribution. Error bars indicate the S.E.M. c)
Mean diffusivity for β WT -TM (black), β S403D -TM (blue) and β − -TM (red).
Error bars indicate the S.E.M.

synaptic scaffold stabilizes the receptor by simultaneously diminishing the
diffusivity of the receptor and by acting as a trapping potential.
Modulation of the β-loop gephyrin binding affinity. Since the computation of the energy landscape allows the unambiguous distinction between
interacting membrane constructs and those lacking interaction domains, we
tested the sensitivity of our approach with the phosphomimetic construct
β S403D -TM, a mutated β-loop known to have a lower gephyrin binding affinity in vitro (KD ∼ 0.9 µM (19)) (Fig. 1c). As a result, β S403D -TM displayed
increased membrane diffusion and reduced synaptic accumulation compared
to β WT -TM. The phosphorylation of amino acid residue S403 of the GlyRβ
subunit by protein kinase C thus contributes to the regulation of GlyR levels
at inhibitory synapses (19). The diffusion and energy landscapes of β S403D -

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

11

TM (computed over 6 different cells) yielded a diffusivity (average value 0.11
µm2 .s−1 ) and an energetic rugosity precisely intermediate between those of
the wild-type and of the binding-deficient constructs (Fig. 2g-h). Compared to β WT -TM, the average trap depth of β S403D -TM at synaptic sites
was reduced to 2.4 ± 0.4 kB T (n = 58 clusters), with less than 5% of the
traps above 6 kB T (Fig. 3b). Inside clusters, the average diffusivity (0.015
µm2 .s−1 ) was slightly higher than for the wild-type (Fig. 3c).
Importantly, the binding energy reported here corresponds to TM proteins moving in a two-dimensional membrane and interacting with macromolecular gephyrin scaffolds that are believed to be two-dimensional as well
(22, 23). This is in contrast with measurement of the equilibrium constant KD by isothermal calorimetry, which reports on the individual interaction between the β-loop and the scaffolding protein in an isotropic, threedimensional measurement of the β-loop-scaffold interaction. Obtaining the
stabilization energy thus constitutes a first and important step to bridge the
gap between in vitro and in situ biochemical measurements. When further
complemented with data on the ultra-structure and stoichiometry of synaptic scaffolds (that are now accessible with single molecule imaging techniques
(23, 24)), we expect our approach to enable a true determination of the twodimensional affinity of the membrane proteins for the synaptic scaffolds (25).
Connecting the landscapes and the global mobility of proteins. An
important question for the dynamics of proteins is how the variability of
their diffusion and energy landscapes at short scale (∼ 100 nm) affects their
long-distance mobility and, thereby, the kinetics of many intermolecular reactions. Reaching a multi-scale description of the motion in the membrane
has long been a challenge in single-molecule experiments. High-density sampling is usually achieved with poorly stable probes, yielding numerous but
short trajectories (14, 15). In contrast, long trajectories obtained with more
stable markers such as quantum dots (26) only provide a sparse sampling
of the cell surface. Furthermore, the nature of the motion, such as subdiffusion, may prevent efficient space sampling with single long trajectories.
Here, we adopted a different strategy and used the inferred maps as phenomenological templates to simulate the motion of proteins. Practically, we
used the Gillespie scheme (27) to generate individual trajectories lasting up
to 500s (see Methods and Supplementary Information).
From a large number of simulated trajectories, we could compute ensembleaveraged quantities. We first evaluated the propagator Π(d, t), namely the
probability density function of moving a distance d in a time t, which is
the fundamental estimator characterizing the random motion in a complex

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

12

Figure 4: Analysis of simulated trajectories in the inferred maps. Unless
otherwise mentioned, the results correspond to the constructs β WT -TM
(black), β S403D -TM (blue) and β − -TM (red). a) Ensemble-averaged propagator Π(d, t), defined as the probability density function (pdf) to move by a
given distance in t=10 s. b) Propagator Π(d, t) for the construct β WT -TM,
computed at different times t. The plain lines are adjustments with the gaussian curves exp(−d2 /2χ2 (t))/2πχ2 (t). c) Curves χ(t). Inset: Propagators
for the construct β WT -TM as a function of the rescaled variable ρ = d/χ(t).
d) Mean-squared displacement (MSD) as a function of time. The straight
lines indicate the sub-diffusive behavior at short time-scales. e) Time-course
of the number of receptors at a single synapse. Inset: distribution of the
minimum (in red) and maximum (in blue) number of receptors computed
over traces of 300 s for all the gephyrin clusters. f) Autocorrelation functions (in grey) for the time traces of number of receptors at gephyrin clusters
(computed over 300 s). The red line indicates the average autocorrelation
function.

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

13

environment (28). Although the difference in the average trapping energy
at gephyrin clusters was only ∼1 kB T between β WT -TM and β S403D -TM, it
led to significant changes in the mobility, reducing the probability of moving
over long distances with increasing strength of the β-loop-gephyrin interaction (Fig. 4a). To more carefully examine the nature of the movement of
β WT -TM, we plotted Π(d, t) at different times t. The curves could be approximated by gaussian curves exp(−d2 /2χ2 (t)) with χ(t) ∝ tα and α = 0.33,
less than 0.5 the value expected for a standard Brownian motion (Fig. 4b-c).
In fact, these results are consistent with a subdiffusive movement resulting
from a fractional brownian motion due to heteregoneities in the diffusion
and energy landscapes (28). Similar results were obtained for β S403D -TM
and β − -TM, with α increasing to 0.39 and 0.41, respectively (Fig. 4c). The
subdiffusive nature of the motion could be further illustrated by computing
the ensemble-averaged MSD for the three transmembrane constructs (Fig.
4d). On the time scales 0.05-5 s, all the MSDs increased sublinearly, with an
anomalous exponent α equal to 0.75, 0.82 and 0.89 for β WT -TM, β S403D -TM
and β − -TM, respectively. The MSD anomalous exponents are slightly larger
than 2α, likely due to boundary effects associated to the size and geometry
of the neurons.
Finally, we examined the implications of the local properties of the mobility of individual GlyRs on their global distribution in the membrane and on
the receptor occupancy at synapses. To do so, we simulated the membrane
dynamics of a population of receptors, using surface densities derived from
prior experimental reports (Supplementary information). We computed in
particular the time course of the number of receptors at individual synaptic
clusters, which we expect to fluctuate due to the exit and entry fluxes of
receptors (Fig. 4e and Supplementary Information). The exit kinetics at
a given synapse is determined by the shape and amplitude of the trapping
potential combined with the reduced diffusivity in the cluster. In contrast,
the entry kinetics depends on the motion of all the receptors over the entire
cell surface and need to be computed using the diffusion and energy maps.
The number of receptors varied significantly over times, as illustrated by the
distribution of their minimal and maximal numbers at individual synapses
(Fig. 4e). Furthermore, the time scale of these fluctuations, analyzed by
computing the autocorrelation function, is comprised between ∼ 1 s and a
few tens of seconds, showing a large heterogeneity among gephyrin clusters
(Fig. 4f). These observations may account for the dynamic range of receptor
numbers at synapses and for the variability of synaptic transmission (31).
The receptor fluctuations, that are equivalent to a noise, may also favor the
transition from one steady state to another during synaptic plasticity (32).

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

14

Conclusion
The motion of proteins in the plasma membrane is influenced by both a
viscous landscape, γ (r), and an interaction potential, V (r). We have introduced a method to map the interaction energy and diffusion landscapes
in the cellular membrane with ∼ 100 nm resolution over surfaces of several
hundred µm2 . The possibility of simulating trajectories in the inferred maps
offers many possibilities to address the multiscale dynamics of membrane
proteins. In particular, it bridges the gap between the information obtained
from numerous, dense but short - trajectories acquired using uPaint or
sptPALM techniques, and that from the much longer, but usually sparse,
trajectories extracted through the tracking of proteins labeled with photostable fluorophores (Qdots, nanoparticles). These trajectories can be used to
accurately evaluate various statistical estimators, thus enabling the analysis
of the dynamics of biomolecules in complex media. We anticipate that our
method will be instrumental to identify the factors governing the mobility
of specific molecules (such as friction, molecular interactions and geometry
of the cell) and thereby to model and analyze reaction-diffusion processes
in biological media. As illustrated in the case of GlyR-gephyrin binding, it
also paves the way to in situ biochemical measurements, which is key for a
quantitative analysis of the regulation of molecular interactions in a cellular
environment. Our approach should also be helpful to describe the molecular noise that results from variability of protein concentrations across the
cell surface and may play an important role in information processing at
the single cell level (31). Beyond the case of receptor-scaffold interactions,
our analytical tools can be applied to other biological questions, such as the
stability of macromolecular assemblies in the cytoplasm or the nucleus, or
to the sequence-dependent movement of proteins along DNA (33).

Materials and methods
Antibody coupling. Rat anti-GFP monoclonal antibody (Roche) was labeled with Atto-647 dye using standard conjugation methods. In brief, 40
µL of antibodies at 0.4 mg/ml in PBS were mixed with 4 µL of 1 M sodium
bicarbonate buffer at pH 8.5. This solution was incubated with 10-fold
molar excess of Atto-647-NHS-ester (Sigma) diluted at 1 mg/mL in anhydrous DMSO. After 1 h of incubation at room temperature, the solution was
filtered with a Microspin G50 column (GE Healthcare) to remove unconjugated dye. The overall coupling efficiency of the dye, estimated by UV-Vis

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

15

absorption, was about 12%. The labeled antibodies were washed with PBS
and concentrated using three rounds of centrifugation with a vivaspin500
10 kDa cut-off PES membrane filter (GE Healthcare). The concentrated
antibody solution was stored at 4 C and used for up to one week.
Cell culture and plasmid transfection. Hippocampal neurons from
Sprague Dawley rats at embryonic day 18 were cultured at a density of 6
x 104 cells/cm2 on 18 mm coverslips precoated with 80 mg/ml poly-D,Lornithine (Sigma) and 5% fetal calf serum (Invitrogen) as described previously (19). Cultures were maintained in serum-free Neurobasal medium
supplemented with 1x B27 and 2 mM glutamine (Invitrogen). Cells were
transfected after 6 to 8 days in vitro using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen),
and imaged 1 to 2 days after transfection. All coverslips were co-transfected
with mRFP-tagged gephyrin and pHluorin-tagged TM constructs, using 0.4
µg of each plasmid per coverslip. The expression constructs β WT -TMpHluorin, β S403D -TM-pHluorin and β − -TM-pHluorin are all described in
(19). In brief, β S403D corresponds to the mutation of serine S403 of the
GlyRβ subunit that mimics the phosphorylation of the residue by protein
kinase C. β − -TM corresponds to the double mutation F398A and I400A of
the wild-type GlyR β-loop that abolishes binding to gephyrin.
Cell labeling. Prior to imaging, we prepared a stock solution of diluted antibodies using casein (Vector laboratories) as a blocking reagent. We added
2 µl of Atto-647 conjugated anti-GFP antibodies and 10 µl of 10 mg/ml
casein to 40 µl of PBS, resulting in an antibody solution of 0.1-0.2 µM. We
also prepared a stock of Tetraspeck fluorescent microbeads (Invitrogen) by
mixing 1 µl of 0.1 µM microbeads with 400 µl of imaging solution. These
multi-color fluorescent beads were used as a reference to align the different
imaging channels and to correct for x/y drifts of the stage and the coverslip.
The coverslip was mounted in an imaging chamber and incubated with 20
µl of warmed microbead solution for 10 seconds. After rinsing, the chamber
was filled with 600 µl of warmed imaging solution (MEMair: phenol redfree MEM, glucose 33 mM, HEPES 20 mM, glutamine 2 mM, Na-pyruvate
1 mM, and B27 1x) and placed on the microscope. To avoid saturating the
cell membrane with fluorescent antibodies, we first selected a transfected
neuron and added the fluorescent antibodies at a final concentration of 0.30.6 nM directly before the start of the acquisition.
Imaging. Measurements were performed on an inverted epi-fluorescence
microscope (Olympus IX70) equipped with a 100x 1.45NA oil objective and

16

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

a back-illuminated electron-multiplying CCD camera (Quantem, Roper).
We imaged the neurons at 37 C in MEMair recording medium using a
heated stage. For each neuron, we first recorded images of the pHluorin
signal of the TM constructs and of mRFP-gephyrin fluorescence, using a
UV lamp (Uvico, Rapp Optoelectronic) and standard sets of filters for GFP
(excitation 475AF40, dichroic 515DRLP and emission 535AF45) and RFP
(excitation 580DF30, dichroic 600DRLP and emission 620DF30). Next we
acquired a uPaint movie of the transmembrane proteins labeled with Atto647-coupled anti-GFP antibodies (20 000 images at 20 frames/s). Atto-647
dyes were excited with a 640 nm laser and their fluorescence was collected
through using a 650DRLP dichroic and a 690DF40 emission filter. The laser
was tightly focused on the back focal plane of the objective. The angle of
incidence of the beam on the coverslip, controlled by laterally moving the
focused spot, was just under the limit of total internal reflection, such that
the laser beam in the sample was almost parallel to the glass surface. This
angle was slightly adjusted in each experiment to maximize the signal/noise
ratio of the single fluorescent spots diffusing in the membrane.
Data analysis. Tracking analysis of the movies was carried out using an
adapted version of the multiple target tracking algorithm (34). In brief,
fluorescence spots corresponding to the point-spread function of single emitting fluorophores were fitted with a two-dimensional Gaussian. The centre
of the fit yielded the position of single molecules with localization accuracy
∼ 30 nm. Trajectories were then computed from individual detections with
a nearest-neighbor algorithm.
Simulations in the landscapes. The maps of the diffusion and energy
landscapes, D (r) and V (r), can be used to simulate the behavior of the
molecules at different time and space scales. In each mesh sub-domain (i, j) a
diffusivity Di,j is associated with a potential energy value Vi,j . The dynamics
of the molecules are described by the Fokker-Planck equation:


∇V (r) P (r, t|r0 , t)
∂P (r, t|r0 , t)
= −∇. −
− ∇ (D (r) P (r, t|r0 , t))
∂t
γ (r)
(5)
where P (r, t|r0 , t) is the conditional transition probability from (r0 , t0 ) to
(r, t). Fokker-Planck equations can always be approximated by Master equations:
X
X
dP(i,j) (t)
=
W(i,j),(i′ ,j ′ ) P(i′ ,j ′ ) −
W(i′ ,j ′ ),(i,j) P(i,j) (6)
dt
′ ′
′ ′
(i ,j )∈N (i,j)

(i ,j )∈N (i,j)

17

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes
with in our case
W(i,j),(i′ ,j ′ )

x
∆xF(i,j),(i
′ ,j ′ )
D (i′ , j ′ )
exp
−
=
2
′
′
∆x
2γ (i , j ) D(i′ ,j ′ )

!

(7)

if the transition is in the x direction and a similar formula in the y direction
and with W(i,j),(i′ ,j ′ ) the transition rate from the (i′ , j ′ ) site to the (i, j),
x
∆x ((∆y)) the mesh size in the x (y) direction, and F(i,j),(i
′ ,j ′ ) the potential gradient acting on the random walker in the x direction when moving
from (i′ , j ′ ) to (i, j). The motion of the molecule following equation 6 was
simulated using the Gillespie scheme (27). When the molecule was at the
site (i, j), the transitions rates, rewritten aν to match Gillespie formalism,ν
takingPvalues from 1 to 4, were evaluated on all neighboring sites. We define
a0 = ν aν . The time, τ , to move from the site (i, j) to a neighboring site
is extracted from an exponential probability density function of rate a0 , so
that τ = a10 log r11 with r1 a random number in [0, 1]. The destination
Pk−1
Pk
site, k, is chosen to satisfy :
ν=0 aν ≤ r2 a0 ≤
ν=0 aν with r2 a random
number in [0, 1]. Limits of the neuronal cells and unvisited sites are defined
as inaccessible sites. Note that the trajectory generation process leads to
trajectories with non-constant time steps. In order to evaluate the different
estimators, trajectories were regularized to obtain the molecule position at
regular time lags by imposing that as long as each τ was not reached the
molecule did not move.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Paul de Koninck for his support and discussion. We also
thank Diego Krapf for his critical reading of the paper and multiple suggestions. This work was funded by CNRS, Inserm, C’Nano Ile de France, the
program ”Prise de Risque” from CNRS, Agence Nationale pour la Recherche
PiriBio, the grant Synaptune from the Agence Nationale pour la Recherche,
the program ANR-10-IDEX-0001-02 PSL and the state program Investissements d’avenir managed by Agence Nationale de la Recherche (Grant ANR10-BINF-05 Pherotaxis).

References
1. Saxton, M. J. & K. Jacobson. (1997) Single-particle tracking: applications to membrane dynamics. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 26, 373399.

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

18

2. Persson, F. et al. (2013). Extracting intracellular diffusive states and
transition rates from single-molecule tracking data. Nat Methods 10, 2659.
3. Simson, R., E.D. Sheets & K. Jacobson. Detection of temporary lateral
confinement of membrane proteins using single-particle tracking analysis.
Biophys. J. 69, 989-993 (1995).
4. Huet, S. et al. Analysis of transient behavior in complex trajectories:
application to secretory vesicle dynamics. Biophys. J. 91, 3542-3559 (2006).
5. Bouzigues, C. & M. Dahan. Transient directed motions of GABA(A)
receptors in growth cones detected by a speed correlation index. Biophys.
J. 92, 654-660 (2007).
6. Risken, H. (1997) The Fokker-Planck Equation: Methods of Solutions and
Applications. (Springer)
7. Masson, J. B. et al. . (2009) Inferring maps of forces inside cell membrane
microdomains. Phys Rev Lett 102, 048103 .
8. Turkcan, S., A. Alexandrou & J.-B Masson. (2012) Bayesian inference
scheme to extract diffusivity and potential fields from confined singlemolecule trajectories. Biophys J 102, 2288-2298.
9. Turkcan, S. et al. (2013) Probing membrane protein interactions with
their lipid raft environment using single-molecule tracking and Bayesian
inference analysis. Plos One 8, e53073.
10. Turkcan, S., A. Aelxadrou & J.-B Masson (2010) Quantifying
biomolecule diffusivity using an optimal Bayesian method. Biophys J.
98,596-605.
11. Hoze, N. et al. (2012) Heterogeneity of AMPA receptor trafficking and
molecular interactions revealed by superresolution analysis of live cell
imaging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109, 17052-7.
12. Triller, A. & D. Choquet (2008) New concepts in synaptic biology derived from single-molecule imaging. Neuron 59, 359-374 .
13. Renner, M., L. Cognet, B. Lounis, A . Triller & D. Choquet. (2009) The
excitatory postsynaptic density is a size exclusion diffusion environment.
Neuropharmacology 56, 30-36.

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

19

14. Manley, S. et al. (2008) High-density mapping of single-molecule trajectories with photoactivated localization microscopy. Nat Methods 5, 155157.
15. Giannone, G. et al. (2010) Dynamic superresolution imaging of endogenous proteins on living cells at ultra-high density. Biophys J 99, 1303-1310.
16. Mac Kay, D. J. C (2003) Information Theory, Inference, and Learning
Algorithms. (Cambridge University Press)
17. von Toussaint, U. (2011) Bayesian inference in physics. Reviews of Modern Physics 83, 943-999.
18. Dahan, M. et al (2003) Diffusion dynamics of glycine receptors revealed
by single-quantum dot tracking. Science 302, 442-445.
19. Specht, C. G. et al. (2011) Regulation of glycine receptor diffusion properties and gephyrin interactions by protein kinase C. EMBO J 30, 38423853.
20. Ehrensperger, M. V.,C. Hanus, C. Vannier, A. Triller & M. Dahan (2007)
Multiple association states between glycine receptors and gephyrin identified by SPT analysis. Biophys J 92, 3706-3718.
21. Renner, M., D. Choquet & A. Triller. (2009) Control of the postsynaptic
membrane viscosity. J Neurosci 29, 2926-2937.
22. Fritschy, J. M., R. J. Harvey & G. Schwarz. (2008) Gephyrin where do
we stand, where do we go?. Trends Neurosci 31, 257-264c.
23. Specht, C.G. et al. (2013) Quantitative nanoscopy of inhibitory
synapses: counting gephyrin molecules and receptor binding sites. Neuron, 79(2), 308-321
24. Lord, S. J., H. L. Lee & W. E. Moerner. (2010) Single-molecule spectroscopy and imaging of biomolecules in living cells. Anal Chem 82, 21922203.
25. Wu, Y., J. Vendome, L. Shapiro, A. Ben-Shaul & B. Honig. (2011)
Transforming binding affinities from three dimensions to two with application to cadherin clustering. Nature 475, 510-513.
26. Pinaud, F., S. Clarke, A. Sittner, & M. Dahan (2010) Probing cellular
events, one quantum dot at a time. Nat Methods 7, 275-85.

Mapping energy and diffusion landscapes

20

27. Gillespie, D. (1977) Exact Stochastic Simulation of Coupled Chemical
Reactions. Journal of Physical Chemistry 81, 2340-2361.
28. Metzler R. & J. Klafter (2004). The restaurant at the end of the random
walk: recent developments in fractional dynamics descriptions of anomalous dynamical processes, J. Phys. A 37, R161.
29. Benichou, O., C. Chevalier, J. Klafter, B. Meyer & R. Voituriez (2010)
Geometry-controlled kinetics. Nat Chem 2, 472-477.
30. Condamin, S., O. Benichou, V. Tejedor, R. Voituriez & J. Klafter. (2007)
First-passage times in complex scale-invariant media. Nature 450, 77-80.
31. Ribrault, C., K. Sekimoto & A. Triller. (2011) From the stochasticity
of molecular processes to the variability of synaptic transmission. Nat Rev
Neurosci 12, 375-387.
32. Sekimoto, K. & A. Triller (2009) Compatibility between itinerant synaptic receptors and stable postsynaptic structure. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin
Soft Matter Phys 79, 031905.
33. Leith J.S. et al. (2012) Sequence-dependent sliding kinetics of p53. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 109, 16552-7.
34. Serge, A., N. Bertaux, H. Rigneault & D. Marguet (2008) Dynamic
multiple-target tracing to probe spatiotemporal cartography of cell membranes. Nat Methods 5, 687-694.

