Photostimulation activates restorable fragmentation of single mitochondrion by
initiating oxide flashes
Running title: Photostimulated mitochondrial dynamics
Yintao Wang1, Hao He1,2*, Shaoyang Wang1, Yaohui Liu3, Minglie Hu1, Youjia Cao3,
Chingyue Wang1*
1

Ultrafast Laser Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Information Technology

(Ministry of Education), College of Precision Instrument and Optoelectronics Engineering,
Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P.R. China.
2

Med-X Research Institute and School of Biomedical Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China

3

Key Laboratory of microbial functional genomics of Ministry of Education,
College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300072, P.R. China.
*Corresponding author: haohe@sjtu.edu.cn
*Email: chywang@tju.edu.cn

Mitochondrial research is important to ageing, apoptosis, and mitochondrial diseases. In
previous works, mitochondria are usually stimulated indirectly by proapoptotic drugs to
study mitochondrial development, which is in lack of controllability, or spatial and temporal
resolution. These chemicals or even gene techniques regulating mitochondrial dynamics may
also activate other inter- or intra-cellular processes simultaneously. Here we demonstrate a
photostimulation method on single-mitochondrion level by tightly-focused femtosecond laser
that can precisely activate restorable fragmentation of mitochondria which soon recover
their original tubular structure after tens of seconds. In this process, series of mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species (mROS) flashes are observed and found very critical to
mitochondrial fragmentation. Meanwhile, transient openings of mitochondrial permeability
transition pores (mPTP), suggested by oscillations of mitochondrial membrane potential,
contribute to the scavenging of redundant mROS and recovery of fragmented mitochondria.
Those results demonstrate photostimulation as an active, precise and controllable method
for the study of mitochondrial oxidative and morphological dynamics or related fields.

Keywords: mitochondrial morphology/mitochondrial permeability transition pores/oxide
flashes/photostimulation

Introduction
Mitochondrial dynamics have long been deemed as a significant tache in cell life for regulating
series of vital processes such as respiration, aging and apoptosis (Ferri & Kroemer, 2011; Sahin &
DePinho, 2012; Beal, 2005). Moreover, mitochondrial lesion is recognized to be involved in series
of neurodegenerative diseases (Lin & Beal, 2006; Calvo & Mootha, 2010), particularly,
Parkinson’s disease (Zima & Blatter, 2006; Henchcliffe & Beal, 2008). In previous works, to study
the mechanisms of mitochondrial pathology and response to stress (McFarland et al, 2010;
Richard & van der Bliek, 2012; Yan et al, 2013), mitochondria are usually stimulated by
non-specific chemicals or even proapoptotic drugs (Abou-Sleiman et al, 2006; Tufi et al, 2014).
For example, superoxide flashes can be generated in mitochondria in the early stage of
stress-induced apoptosis (Ma et al, 2011), and gene deficiency of PINK1 causes mitochondrial
accumulation of calcium, excessive reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and opening of
mitochondrial permeability transition pores (mPTP), and finally death of neurons with Ca2+
treatment (Gandhi et al, 2009). It should be noted that such biochemical methods are in lack of
spatial and temporal resolution, and controllability at single-mitochondrion level (Karaman et al,
2008). In this regard, it is challenging to study mitochondrial dynamics with precise and
controllable stimulation in a live cell and to bring breakthroughs on researches of mitochondria
(Galluzzi et al, 2012).
In recent years, laser technology has provided biological research with precise optical
disruption techniques including optical transfection (Tirlapur et al, 2002), cell-cell fusion (He et al,
2008), and neuroaxotomy (Yanik et al, 2004). The ultrahigh peak power and ultrashort pulse width
of femtosecond laser make it possible to disrupt targeted organelle without providing significant

damage to the whole cell (Vogel et al, 2005). This inspired us of developing a precise and
controllable optical method to stimulate mitochondria. Different from laser-induced disruption of
cell structures (Shimada et al, 2005), we found that tightly-focused femtosecond laser (Ti:Sapphire
mode-lock laser, 810 nm, 75 fs, 80 MHz) could offer controllable photostimulation to initiate
restorable fragmentation of single mitochondrion by activating mitochondrial ROS (mROS)
flashes and transient mPTP openings with interesting mechanism. We propose that this method
can be used for the in-depth research on mitochondrial oxide flash (Wang et al, 2008), mito-fission
(Richard & van der Bliek, 2012), or other topics of related areas (such as ageing, oxidative related
diseases and neuroscience).

Results
Photostimulation can induce restorable fragmentation of single mitochondrion
HeLa cells were used as the proof-of-principle demonstration in this study. In experiments, the
laser beam was expanded by a pair of lenses for the collimation and matching to the objective
back aperture. This can be also used to control the focus position in the vertical direction by tuning
the distance between the two lenses. The laser focus was less than 1.5 μm in diameter to ensure
that only one single mitochondrion gets photostimulation at one exposure (Watanabe et al, 2004).
Targeted mitochondria in cells were selected randomly and then moved to the position of laser
focus by tuning the microscope specimen stage. In experiments, photostimulation was performed
at 6 mW (at cell) for 100 ms, the same power level of multiphoton microscopy, which was
traditionally thought to have little damage or perturbation to cells (Zipfel et al, 2003). Interestingly,
immediately after the laser stimulation, morphology of stimulated mitochondria changed (n=59,

Fig 1A): most fragmented (n=56, Figure E1A) while the rest swelled (n=3). However, the
neighboring mitochondria were not influenced (Figure E1A). It took only around 10 s for the
stimulated mitochondria to develop significant fragmentation after photostimulation (Fig 1B,
n=25), much faster than the fragmenting process induced by biochemical methods (Lin & Beal,
2006; Gomes et al, 2011). More interestingly, the fragmentation of the stimulated mitochondria
was restorable. It took only around 40 s for fragmented mitochondria to recover its tubular
structure (Fig 1B, n=21), suggesting this photostimulation as a homeostatic perturbation to
mitochondria. Swelled mitochondria were not restorable. Therefore we took swelling as more
severe damage in our following studies.
To assay the structural non-connectivity of fragmented mitochondria, mitochondrial
matrix–targeted photoactivable green fluorescent proteins (mitoPAGFP) was transfected to cells
before experiments (Patterson et al, 2002). Half of the targeted mitochondrion was at first scanned
by 405-nm laser for PAGFP activation (white box in Fig 1C) while rest part remained dark. If the
mitochondrion was fragmented, the activated mitoPAGFP could not diffuse from the activated
region to the dark region (as the “Frag” labeled mitochondrion in Fig 1C and Figure E2).
Otherwise the bright mitoPAGFP (in white box) could diffuse rapidly to its dark part (as the
“Control” labeled mitochondrion in Fig 1C). In this way, photostimulated fragmentation of
mitochondria was confirmed. After recovery, the activated mitoPAGFP could then diffuse out.
The recovered mitochondria could suffer more times of photostimulation (n=16, Fig 1D). In
this way, a single mitochondrion could be stimulated for multi-times and research on
mitochondrial stimulation could be thus more maneuverable (Figure E3). The photostimulated
mitochondrion was stimulated for the second time after a short rest, and again could it fragment

and recover (Fig 1D). The second fragmentation and recovery durations were very similar to those
in the first time (Fig 1E) suggesting stimulated mitochondria could recover to homeostasis after
photostimulation.
Since heat could diffuse rapidly to a wide extent resulting in a poor spatial resolution, we
suspected that multi-photon excitation might contribute to the major part of photostimulation
rather than photo-thermal effect in this method. To test this hypothesis, mitochondrial responses to
different photostimulation durations (0.1 s, 0.3 s, and 1 s, at 5 mW) were studied. The result
showed only restorable fragmentation for all stimulation durations (Fig 1F), suggesting that
photostimulation of mitochondria was independent of heating energy and duration. As a positive
control, mitochondria (n=10) were irradiated by a continuous-wave laser (808 nm, 10 mW) with
greater thermal effect for 3 s, but all mitochondria showed no response (n=10). In contrast, it was
found that the peak power and wavelength of femtosecond laser determined responses of the
stimulated mitochondria. As shown in Fig 1F, the stimulated mitochondria showed restorable
fragmentation at 6 mW, irrevocable fragmentation at 18 mW (fragmented mitochondria could not
recover), and was thoroughly disrupted at 30 mW (all for 0.1 s). To further verify this point,
another homemade Yb-doped fiber femtosecond laser (50 MHz, 140-330 fs) at 1040 nm was used
to stimulate mitochondria with tunable pulse width and peak power (Zhang et al, 2010). Very
different from the results by 800-nm laser (Fig 1G)，the fiber laser could not stimulate any
mitochondrial response at 6 mW. When the pulse width of the 1040-nm laser was tuned from 330
fs (Fig 1G, 12 mW L) to 140 fs (Fig 1G, 12 mW S), the photostimulation effect was significantly
enhanced. It should be noted that at 12 mW 140 fs (peak photon density~ 1011 W/cm2) or 24 mW
330 fs (peak photon density~ 7.5×1010 W/cm2), the 1040-nm fiber laser could stimulate

comparable but still less prominent mitochondrial responses than 810 nm fs-laser at 6 mW (peak
photon density~ 5×1010 W/cm2). These results which strongly depended on peak power (photon
density) and wavelength suggested that multiphoton excitation contributed as the major part to
photostimulating process. When the Ti:Sapphire laser power was increased to 60 mW, the plasma
effect of multiphoton excitation would be very significant to damage the cell (Figure E4).
Photostimulated mROS oxide flashes and MMP oscillations are critical to mitochondrial
restorable fragmentation
In experiments, it was observed that mROS was generated immediately after
photostimulation: at first merely in the laser focal spot, soon in the whole mitochondrion, and
finally scavenged (Fig 2A and Figure E5). This burst of mROS resembled the “superoxide flash”
which was thought as spontaneous mitochondrial behavior in previous report (Wang et al, 2008).
But in our work, mROS flash could be only excited actively by photostimulation. Considering the
damage effect of ROS, we suspected that the laser-activated mROS “flash” played a critical role in
the mitochondrial morphological response to photostimulation. To test this hypothesis, antioxidant
N-Acetyl Cystein (NAC, 5 mM) was used to scavenge (or attenuate) mROS (Carrière, 2009; Roy
et al, 2008). It was found that NAC could effectively prevent mitochondrial fragmentation from
photostimulation (indicated by significantly lower percentage of fragmented and swelled
mitochondria, Fig 2B). As control, if cells were treated with high oxidative stress (tert-Butyl
hydroperoxide, i.e. TBHP, 20 μM), the effectiveness of photostimulation was then significantly
enhanced (Fig 2B).
Once mROS flash was initiated, the stimulated mitochondrion might generate mROS flashes
repeatedly, to which a series of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) oscillations

corresponded exactly (Fig 2C, n=20 independent experiments, and 4 selected most significant
flash events in Fig 2C were shown in Figure E6). Such fast MMP oscillations probably suggested
the transient openings of mPTP, which were related with mROS flashes and might contribute to
scavenging of mROS and mitochondrial recovery.
We then studied photostimulated MMP oscillations in different redox environments. The ratio
of mitochondria with multi-time MMP oscillations (statistics in 100 s after photostimulation)
decreased (Fig 2D) in high oxidative-stress environment (TBHP, 20 μM). If the cellular or
mitochondrial

ROS

scavenging

ability

was

enhanced

(by

anti-oxidants

NAC

or

mitochondria-targeted antioxidant Mito-TEMPO, 5 mM and 5 μM respectively), the ratio of
mitochondria with multi-time MMP oscillations then increased (Fig 2D). The reason might be that,
with high oxidative stress, the stimulated mitochondria suffered more damage by ROS to induce
long-time mPTP opening and probably depolarization of MMP (similar to the initial processes of
apoptosis); with anti-oxidant there would be less mROS generation and mitochondria damage, the
photostimulation was then more homeostatic with less damage, and the stimulated mitochondria
could easily activate fast transient mPTP openings to recover and protect MMP from
depolarization. To further support this point, we measured the MMP level 100 s after
photostimulation. It could be found that the MMP recovery ratio of mitochondria with anti-oxidant
was much higher than it with oxidative stress (Fig 2E).
mPTP opening plays a key role in mitochondrial recovery
We further investigated the role of mPTP in the recovery process of photostimulated
mitochondria. At first, mPTP opening was assayed by calcein whose fluorescence would be
quenched by Co2+ diffusing from cytosol into mitochondria if mPTP were permanently open. As

shown in Fig 3A, during the restorable fragmentation stimulated at 6 mW, there was no
fluorescence quenching indicating no permanent (or long-time) mPTP opening. As control, calcein
fluorescence quenching could be observed after intense laser stimulation at 20 mW which induced
permanent (or long-time) mPTP opening and unrecoverable fragmentation (or swelling). When
mPTP was inhibited by cyclosporin A (CsA, 10 μM), in Fig 3B, it could be found that
photostimulation (at 3 or 6 mW) with CsA could induce much higher percentage of fragmented
and swelled mitochondria than in the control group (without CsA). More specifically, with CsA,
the fragmentation and recovery of photostimulated mitochondria (Fig 3C and Figure E7) were
significantly slower than in normal condition (Fig 1B). Therefore, in this study， transient mPTP
openings contributed to mitochondrial recovery. It should be noted that there was no ROS or Ca2+
activation in cytosol. In this study, mROS were directly generated inside the stimulated
mitochondria, which was very different from previous studies where the mROS were stimulated
by oxidative or Ca2+ stress in cytosol and extracellular stress in buffer. Hence it could be reasoned
the transient mPTP openings here then played a role that contribute to scavenging mROS inside
the stimulated mitochondrion for mitochondrial recovery. This was different from previous studies,
where the mPTP opening would induce oxidative or Ca2+ stress invading from cytosol into
mitochondria and then mitochondrial stimulation (Ma et al, 2011; Wang et al, 2008). In this regard,
there should be an accumulation of mROS in the stimulated mitochondrion after mPTP inhibition
even though the stimulation was ultra-weak. To assay this process, mitochondria were then
stimulated at only 0.5 mW for a long duration with the presence of CsA. It can be found in Fig 3D
that mROS could be slowly accumulated to the same level as the one treated at 3 mW for 0.2 s.
Therefore, this ultra-weak (0.5 mW) photostimulation could also induce mitochondrial restorable

fragmentation when mPTP was inhibited (Fig 3E). But without CsA, such ultra-weak
(long-duration) photostimulation could not activate any mitochondrial response even if increasing
the power to 1 mW and stimulation duration to more than 60 s, probably because mPTP could now
work for mROS release or scavenging. Hence our results suggested that transient mPTP opening
contributed to the protection of mitochondria from photostimulation for their recovery by
scavenging mROS.
Molecular translocation from or to stimulated mitochondria
We further showed that mPTP were the key translocation regulator of proapoptotic protein
Bax or cytochrome c (Cyto C) in the stimulated mitochondria. As shown in Fig 4A and B, when
the laser power was at 6 mW, no translocation of Bax or Cyto C was found. But if the power was
increased to around 20 mW, concentration of Bax to the stimulated mitochondria and Cyto C
release from them could be observed. Thus the photostimulation in this study (6 mW) would not
induce any destructive effect to the mitochondria. When the mPTP were permanently opened by
intense stimulation at high laser power (20 mW), the molecular translocation only happened
locally around those stimulated mitochondria. And their morphological change would not recover
(Fig 1F). After 6 hours, all stimulated cells with translocation of those proapoptotic molecules did
not go to apoptosis. Hence the localized proapoptotic signals would not influence the cell fate.
According to the results above, we summarized photostimulation process as the proposed
mechanism in Fig 4C.

Discussion
Our experimental results suggested photostimulated mROS were essential to mitochondrial
fragmentation and mPTP played a key role in mitochondrial recovery. Different from previously
observed spontaneous superoxide flashes (Wang et al, 2008), mROS flashes in our study were
stimulated directly and actively, which, however, might provide information to the unclear
mechanism of the spontaneous superoxide flashes. The process of how laser stimulation generated
mROS remained unknown. Some mitochondrial proteins, complex I-IV for instance, may be
damaged or perturbed during the multiphoton excitation of photostimulation, resulting in a fast
mROS generation (Liu et al, 2002; St-Pierre et al, 2002). The damaged mitochondria could not
maintain normal respiration processes and hence induce series of mROS flashes. Nevertheless, the
photostimulation was somehow homeostatic, and the stimulated mitochondria could still repair
themselves to recover normal by scavenging mROS. In this process, the transient mPTP openings
played a different role with previous studies as the mechanisms of stimulation to mitochondria
were different. The precise photostimulation brought little perturbation to the surroundings of the
targeted mitochondrion (Figure E8), and ROS was merely generated inside it. Therefore, transient
mPTP openings then worked for mROS scavenging, whereas in previous studies ROS and Ca2+ in
cytosol were the main damaging stress to mitochondria and mPTP openings would induce influx
of ROS and Ca2+ into mitochondria.
In conclusion, we show here that single mitochondrion can be precisely stimulated by
tightly-focused femtosecond-laser irradiation through multiphoton excitation. Most stimulated
mitochondria develop to restorable fragmentation and few to swelling. Fragmented mitochondria
can recover to homeostasis in a short duration, and can endure multi-time photostimulation after

their recovery. The photostimulated mitochondrion can generate series of mROS flashes, which
play an important role in mitochondrial morphological change. Transient mPTP openings may
contribute to the scavenging process of mROS and thus are very essential to mitochondrial repair
(recovery) process. If the photostimulation were too intense, the mitochondria will be greatly
damaged and mPTP will be permanently opened to induce localized translocation of proapoptotic
proteins such as Bax and CytoC. Based on all these results, we propose that this noninvasive,
controllable and precise optical method may serve as a promising stimulation technique for the
research of mitochondria in the study of cell biology and mitochondrial pathology in neuroscience
or even ageing, oxidative stress-related diseases.

Materials and Methods
Optical setup and photostimulation
The whole system was set on a confocal microscopy (Olympus FV1000/IX81) coupled with
a homemade Ti:Sapphire femtosecond laser and a Yb-doped fiber laser. The Ti:Sapphire
femtosecond laser was pumped by a green laser diode Millennia V (Spectra-Physics) and had an
output power at 400 mW. Both femtosecond laser beams were at first collimated and expended to
match the back aperture of objective (~8 mm), then reflected by a beam splitter (reflection=70%)
and focused by the objective (water-immersed, 60X, near-infrared coating, N.A.=1.2). A CCD was
put under the beam splitter for monitoring the laser focus. In this way, a diffraction-limit laser
focus could be achieved. The laser power was controlled by an attenuator and stimulation duration
by a mechanical shutter (resolution: 10 ms). The laser focus was hence fixed in the center of field
of vision. In the vertical direction, the laser focus was adjusted at the same plane of confocal

scanning by tuning the distance of the two lenses for beam collimation to adjust the divergence
angle of the collimated laser beam slightly, which could then be focused to different vertical
position. This setup was different from two-photon microscope, where the femtosecond laser was
also controlled by the galvanometer sharing the same light path with the CW excitation lasers. In
our setup, the femtosecond laser beam was not scanned and thus fixed to a single point to get a
high spatial resolution.
In experiments, the laser was at first blocked by the mechanical shutter. Once the targeted
mitochondrion was selected, it was then moved to the position of laser focus by adjusting the stage
of the microscope. The femtosecond lasers and fluorescence and excitation lasers were split by a
dichroic mirror (reflection<750 nm; transmission> 750 nm). Therefore, during photostimulation,
confocal scanning could be still performed and all information could be recorded.
Fluorescent confocal microscopy
TMRM, DihydroRh123, and Mitochondrial Transition Pore Assay Kit (Calcein and CoCl2)
were used for MMP, mROS, and mPTP labeling. The staining procedures were followed by the
protocols provided by the supplier. When using the mPTP kit, cells were at first loaded with
calcein AM and CoCl2. Then after incubation, cells were washed three times and CoCl2 was added
to cell buffer to maintain high Co2+ concentration in cytosol. The fluorescence from cytosolic
calcein was immediately quenched by CoCl2, while the fluorescence from the mitochondrial
calcein was maintained (since CoCl2 could not diffuse into mitochondria). But once mPTP open,
CoCl2 could then pass through mPTP into mitochondria and quench the fluorescence of calcein
there. Hence the decline of calcein fluorescence value inside mitochondria indicates the opening
of mPTP.

For confocal scanning, all green dyes were excited by a 473-nm laser and the red ones by a
543-nm laser. To minimize photobleaching, the power of 473-nm laser was working at around 0.8
mW, and the 543-nm laser at 0.1 mW at output (laser powers at specimen can be estimated by
multiplying the coupling efficiency at around 20% of the system). Mostly, photos were taken at
512×512 pixels and each frame took around 1.1 s to scan. The fluorescence of NADH (emission:
420-450 nm) was excited directly by a laser at 351 nm as the autofluorescence of NADH.

Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Heping Cheng (Peking University), Dr. Siukai Kong (the Chinese University of
HongKong), Dr. A. Nakagawa (Tohoku University), Dr. Ratnesh Lal (University of California San
Diego), and Dr. Sailing He (Zhejiang University) for effective discussions and their valuable
suggestions. This work was supported by grants from National Natural Science Foundation of
China (NSFC) 61108080 to HH and 81171556 to YC. YW and HH contributed equally to this

work.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
Abou-Sleiman PM, Muqit MM, Wood NW (2006) Expanding insights of mitochondrial
dysfunction in Parkinson's disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 7: 207-219
Beal MF (2005) Mitochondria take center stage in aging and neurodegeneration. Ann Neurol 58:
495-505
Calvo SE, Mootha VK (2010) The Mitochondrial Proteome and Human Disease. Ann Rev
Genomics Hum Genet 11: 25-44
Carrière A (2009) Preconditioning by mitochondrial reactive oxygen species improves the
proangiogenic potential of adipose-derived cells-based therapy. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
29: 1093-1099
Ferri K, Kroemer G (2011) Organelle-specific initiation of cell death pathways. Nat Cell Biol

3:

E255-E263
Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Kroemer G (2012) Mitochondria: master regulators of danger signalling. Nat

Rev Mol Cell Biol 13: 780-788
Gandhi S, Wood-Kaczmar A, Yao Z, Plun-Favreau H, Deas E, Klupsch K, Downward J, Latchman
DS, Tabrizi SJ, Wood NW, Duchen MR, Abramov AY (2009) PINK1-associated Parkinson's
disease is caused by neuronal vulnerability to calcium-induced cell death. Mol Cell 33:
627-638
Gomes LC, Di Benedetto G, Scorrano L (2011) During autophagy mitochondria elongate, are
spared from degradation and sustain cell viability. Nat Cell Biol 13: 589-598
He H, Chan KT, Kong SK, Lee R (2008) All-optical human cell fusion by a fiber femtosecond
laser. Appl Phys Lett 93: 163901
Henchcliffe C, Beal MF (2008) Mitochondrial biology and oxidative stress in Parkinson disease
pathogenesis. Nat Clin Pract Neurol 4: 600-609
Karaman MW, Herrgard S, Treiber DK, Gallant P, Atteridge CE, Campbell BT, Chan KW, Ciceri P,
Davis MI, Edeen PT, Faraoni R, Floyd M, Hunt JP, Lockhart DJ, Milanov ZV, Morrison MJ,
Pallares G, Patel HK, Pritchard S, Wodicka LM, Zarrinkar PP (2008) A quantitative analysis of
kinase inhibitor selectivity. Nat Biotechnol 26: 127-132
Lin MT, Beal MF (2006) Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in neurodegenerative
diseases. Nature 443: 787-795
Liu Y, Fiskum G, Schubert D (2002) Generation of reactive oxygen species by the mitochondrial
electron transport chain. J Neurochem 80: 780-787
Ma Q, Fang H, Shang W, Liu L, Ye T, Wang X, Zheng M, Chen Q, Cheng H (2011) Superoxide
Flashes Early Mitochondrial Signals For Oxidative Stress-Induced Apoptosis. J Biol Chem 286:
27573-27581

McFarland R, Taylor RW, Turnbull DM (2010) A neurological perspective on mitochondrial
disease. Lancet Neurol 9: 829-840
Patterson GH, Lippincott-Schwartz J (2002) A photoactivatable GFP for selective photolabeling of
proteins and cells. Science 297: 1873-1877
Richard Y, van der Bliek A (2012) Mitochondrial fission, fusion, and stress. Science 337:
1062-1065
Roy A, Ganguly A, BoseDasgupta S, Das BB, Pal C, Jaisankar P, Majumder HK (2008)
Mitochondria-Dependent Reactive Oxygen Species-Mediated Programmed Cell Death
Induced by 3,3’-Diindolylmethane through Inhibition of F0F1-ATP Synthase in Unicellular
Protozoan Parasite Leishmania donovani. Mol Pharmacol 74: 1292-1307
Sahin E, DePinho RA (2012) Axis of ageing: telomeres, p53 and mitochondria. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol 13: 397-404
Shimada T, Watanabe W, Matsunaga S, Higashi T, Ishii H, Fukui K, Isobe K, Itoh K (2005)
Intracellular disruption of mitochondria in a living HeLa cell with a 76-MHz femtosecond
laser oscillator. Opt Express 13: 9869-9880
St-Pierre J, Buckingham J, Roebuck S, Brand D (2002) Topology of superoxide production from
different sites in the mitochondrial electron transport chain. J Biol Chem 277: 44784-44790
Tirlapur UK, König K (2002) Targeted transfection by femtosecond laser. Nature 418: 290-291
Tufi R, Gandhi S, de Castro IP, Lehmann S, Angelova PR, Dinsdale D, Deas E, Plun-Favreau H,
Nicotera P, Abramov AY, Willis AE, Mallucci GR, Loh SHY, Martins LM (2014) Enhancing
nucleotide metabolism protects against mitochondrial dysfunction and neurodegeneration in a
PINK1 model of Parkinson’s disease. Nat Cell Biol 16: 157-166

Vogel A, Noack J, Hüttman G, Paltauf G (2005) Mechanisms of femtosecond laser nanosurgery of
cells and tissues. Appl Phys B 81: 1015-1047
Wang W, Fang H, Groom L, Cheng A, Zhang W, Liu J, Wang X, Li K, Han P, Zheng M, Yin J,
Wang W, Mattson MP, Kao JPY, Lakatta EG, Sheu S, Ouyang K, Chen J, Dirksen RT, Cheng H
(2008) Superoxide flashes in single mitochondria. Cell 134: 279-290
Watanabe W, Arakawa N, Matsunaga S, Higashi T, Fukui K, Isobe K, Itoh K (2004) Femtosecond
laser disruption of subcellular organelles in a living cell. Opt Express 12: 4203-4213
Yanik MF, Cinar H, Cinar HN, Chisholm AD, Jin Y, Ben-Yakar A (2004) Neurosurgery:
Functional regeneration after laser axotomy. Nature 432: 822-822
Yan MH, Wang X, Zhu X (2013) Mitochondrial defects and oxidative stress in Alzheimer disease
and Parkinson disease. Free Radic Biol Med 62: 90-101
Zhang YY, Zhang C, Hu ML, Song YJ, Wang SJ, Chai L, Wang CY (2010) High-energy
subpicosecond pulse generation from a mode-locked Yb-doped large-mode-area photonic
crystal fiber laser with fiber facet output. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 22: 350-352
Zima AV, Blatter LA (2006) Redox regulation of cardiac calcium channels and transporters.
Cardiovasc Res 71: 310-321
Zipfel W, Williams R, Webb W (2003) Nonlinear magic: multiphoton microscopy in the
biosciences. Nat Biotechnol 21: 1369-1377

Figure Legends
Figure 1 - Precise and controllable photostimulation to targeted mitochondria.

A Mitochondria were selected randomly and stimulated by femtosecond laser at the 5th second at 6 mW for 0.1 s. Soon

most of the stimulated mitochondria showed fragmentation (the first panel) and then recovered. Others swelled (the second panel)

without recovery. Surrounding mitochondria were rarely influenced and all cells showed good integrity and viability after 6 hours.

Inserts: magnified figure of stimulated mitochondria. Orange arrow: the position of laser focus.

B

Time statistics of 25 photostimulated mitochondria developing from restorable fragmentation to recovery. Twenty-one

fragmented mitochondria recovered within 100 s after photostimulation while it took around 100 s, 200 s and 300 s respectively

for the other four.

C Fragmentation of stimulated mitochondria was verified by mitochondrial matrix-targeted PAGFP. White box: the

photo-activated region scanned by 405-nm laser. Orange arrow: photostimulation. White arrows: “Frag” indicated the

photostimulated mitochondrion which PAGFP could not diffuse along and “Control” indicated the mitochondrion without

photostimulation in which PAGFP could diffuse. Inserts: magnified figure of the control mitochondrion.

D Duo-time stimulation to a single mitochondrion (orange arrow). After the first irradiation at 2.2 s, it can be found that

the mitochondrion fragmented at 4.4 s and recovered at 24.4 s. After a short rest, the same mitochondrion was then irradiated

again at 64 s and the maximum fragmentation was observed at 117 s and then recovered at 166 s.

E

Time statistics of mitochondrial fragmentation and recovery duration after first and second photostimulation.

F

Long-time photostimulation only induced fragmentation without severe damage (first panel, n=5 mitochondria for

each duration). But high-power photostimulation significantly damaged or even disrupted mitochondria (second panel, n=11

mitochondria for each power. Orange arrow: the position of laser focus.

G Photostimulation to mitochondria depended on laser wavelength and peak power. At 1040 nm, the fiber laser could

initiate no mitochondrial response at 6 mW even though the thermal effect was 20-time higher than at 810 nm. At 12 mW, the

fragmented and swelled mitochondria stimulated at 140 fs (12 mW S, n=11) took significantly higher percentage than at 330 fs

(12 mW L, n=11). At 24 mW (330 fs, n=11), proportions of fragmented and swelled mitochondria were comparable to (but still

less than) those at 810 nm, 6 mW. Bar: 10 μm.

Figure 2 - Laser-induced mROS flashes played a key role in mitochondrial response.

A Photostimulated mROS was generated around the laser focus (orange arrow, 8.8 s), and soon spread to the whole

mitochondrion (12.1 s), then finally scavenged (42 s).

B

Responses of the photostimulated mitochondria were sensitive to oxidative stress. Mitochondrial restorable

fragmentation induced by photostimulation (orange arrow) was greatly inhibited by NAC (5 mM) scavenging ROS (n=11). In

contrast, more mitochondria showed swelling and fragmentation in the presence of TBHP (n=25). As control, most mitochondria

showed restorable fragmentation after photostimulation (n=59).

C

Photostimulation induced MMP oscillations (labeled by TMRM, red) and mROS flashes (labeled by

DihydroRhodamine123, green). Box: the stimulated mitochondrion. Right: MMP oscillation and mROS flashes in the stimulated

mitochondrion (Box). Each oscillation of MMP corresponds exactly with a flash of mROS, which probably indicates a transient

mPTP opening. Orange arrow: photostimulation. Arrows with numbers: selected four significant events of mROS flashes.

D

The ratio of photostimulated mitochondria with different MMP oscillation times (in 100 s) was related with

mitochondrial oxidative environment. More mitochondria showed multi-time transient MMP oscillations under the presence of

NAC (5 mM) or Mito-TEMPO (5 μM) while fewer MMP oscillations could be found in mitochondria treated with TBHP (20

μM). (e) The MMP recovery ratio with anti-oxidants was much higher than the TBHP-treated group 100 s after photostimulation.

Depolarized: depolarized mitochondria. Bar: 10 μm.

Figure 3 - mPTP played a key role in mitochondrial recovery.

A Different types of mPTP opening varied with different photostimulation power. The opening of mPTP was monitored

by calcein, whose fluorescence would be quenched by Co 2+ that could not diffuse into mitochondria unless mPTP were long-time

opened. No permanent (long-time) mPTP opening could be observed when the laser power was at 6 mW. At 20 mW, the

photostimulation could damage mitochondria significantly to induce permanent mPTP opening and the calcein fluorescence was

then quenched. Left: mitochondria before and after photostimulation. Right: calcein fluorescence of the stimulated mitochondria.

Orange arrow: the position of laser focus. Bar: 10 μm.

B

Higher percentage of fragmented or swelled mitochondria were stimulated with the presence of CsA.

C

If mPTPs were inhibited by CsA, duration for mitochondrial recovery was significantly elongated.

D With the presence of CsA, ultra-weak photostimulated (0.5 mW for 30 s) mitochondrion witnessed a slow mROS

accumulation which was comparable to the level stimulated at 3 mW for 0.2 s (without CsA). Without CsA, no mROS increase

could be found at 0.5 mW for any duration.

E Restorable fragmentation could be initiated by such ultra-weak stimulation at 0.5 mW for 30 s with the presence of

CsA (n=15). Without CsA, no response could be found even at 1 mW. Orange arrow: the position of laser focus. Bar: 10 μm.

Figure 4 - Molecular translocation in photostimulated mitochondria.

A Bax would not translocate at 6 mW (left, n=5) but would concentrate to the stimulated mitochondria at 20 mW (right,

n=5). IF: immunofluorescence microscopy, which was performed 20 minutes after photostimulation (orange arrow). MMP would

not be depolarized significantly at 6-mW stimulation. Orange arrow: the position of laser focus. Bar: 10 μm.

B Similarly, release of Cyto C from the stimulated mitochondrion would only take place after 20-mW photostimulation

(orange arrow, n=5). Orange arrow: the position of laser focus. Bar: 10 μm.

C Proposed mechanism of mitochondrial response to photostimulation. At 6 mW, photostimulated mROS generation

induced restorable fragmentation and transient mPTP opening, which could release mROS for recovery and might repeat several

times automatically resulting in MMP oscillations and mROS flashes. At 20 mW, such intense photostimulation generated great

damage to the mitochondrion and thus induced permanent opening of mPTP, which activated release of Cyto C from the targeted

mitochondrion and translocation of Bax to it. Dashed arrows: diffusion of molecules.

