	  

1	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
SOME	  COMPLICATIONS	  OF	  THE	  ELEMENTARY	  FORMS	  OF	  COMPETITION	  IN	  A	  
SOURCE/SINK	  AND	  METACOMMUNITY	  CONTEXT:	  THE	  ROLE	  OF	  INTRANSTIVE	  
LOOPS	  
	  
John	  Vandermeer	  
Department	  of	  Ecology	  and	  Evolutionary	  Biology	  
University	  of	  Michigan	  
Ann	  Arbor	  MI	  48109	  
jvander@umich.edu	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

	  

2	  

	  
	  

Dynamic	  interspecific	  interactions	  of	  many	  forms	  (e.g.,	  parasitism,	  

competition,	  mutualism)	  are	  thought	  to	  contribute	  to	  fundamental	  structures	  of	  
ecological	  communities.	  	  Of	  the	  various	  types	  of	  interactions,	  the	  process	  of	  
ecological	  competition	  has	  loomed	  large	  in	  the	  literature	  attempting	  to	  give	  
theoretical	  structure	  to	  community	  ecology	  (e.g.,	  Elton,	  1946;	  Bray	  and	  Curtis	  1957;	  
Connell,	  1961;	  Vandermeer,	  1969;	  Pianka	  ,	  1973;	  Cody,	  1974;	  Wiens,	  1977;	  Tilman,	  
1981;	  Lawton	  and	  Strong,	  1981;	  Schoener	  1982;	  Roughgarden,	  1983;	  Ricklefs,	  1987;	  
Simberloff	  and	  Dayan,	  1991;	  Welborn	  et	  al.,	  1996;	  Chesson,	  2000;	  McCann,	  2000;	  
Webb,	  2000;	  Chase	  et	  al.,	  2002;	  Bever,	  2003;	  Amarasekare,	  2003;	  Silvertown,	  2004;	  
Hubbell,	  2005;	  Wiens	  and	  Graham,	  2005;	  McGill	  et	  al.,	  2006;	  Mayfield	  and	  Levine,	  
2010). Summarizing	  the	  most	  salient	  features	  of	  competition	  as	  a	  “phenomenon,”	  
regardless	  of	  what	  might	  be	  its	  mechanism,	  has	  usually	  been	  aided	  by	  the	  Lotka	  
Volterra	  competition	  equations,	  in	  which	  the	  competitive	  process	  is	  thought	  of	  as	  a	  
linear	  term	  added	  to	  the	  elementary	  logistic	  form	  of	  population	  growth,	  usually	  
presented	  in	  its	  biologically	  sensible	  form,	  
	  
$ K i − xi − ∑ α ij x j '
dxi
j≠i
) ,	   	  
= ri xi &
&
)
dt
Ki
%
(

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

1	  

	  
where	  xi	  is	  the	  biomass	  or	  population	  density	  of	  species	  i,	  ri	  is	  the	  intrinsic	  growth	  
rate	  of	  species	  i,	  Ki	  is	  the	  carrying	  capacity	  of	  species	  i	  and	  aij	  is	  the	  competitive	  
effect	  of	  species	  j	  on	  species	  i	  (normally	  thought	  to	  be	  the	  ratio	  of	  interspecific	  to	  
intraspecific	  competition).	  From	  this	  there	  emerge	  four	  qualitatively	  distinct	  
outcomes	  of	  two-­‐species	  competition	  (coexistence,	  species	  1	  wins,	  species	  2	  wins,	  or	  
indeterminate,	  with	  one	  or	  the	  other	  winning,	  depending	  on	  founding	  conditions).	  	  
Extrapolating	  the	  2D	  form	  of	  these	  simple	  equations	  into	  a	  community	  
(multispecies)	  formulation	  seems	  straightforward	  –	  simply	  keep	  adding	  the	  linear	  
terms	  and	  consider	  the	  multispecies	  community	  as	  that	  linear	  combination	  of	  
competition	  effects,	  whence	  equation	  1	  is	  the	  evident	  result	  (e.g.,	  Levins,	  1968;	  

	  

3	  

Vandermeer,	  1969;	  Goh,	  1977;	  Fan,	  et	  al.,	  1999;	  Kokkoris	  et	  al.,	  1999;	  May,	  2001;	  Jin	  
et	  al.,	  2004;	  Takeuchi,	  1996).	  	  
	  

The	  original	  two-­‐species	  form	  led	  to	  an	  idea	  that	  sometimes	  was	  regarded	  as	  

a	  kind	  of	  basic	  principle	  of	  community	  ecology,	  when	  two	  species	  compete	  only	  
weakly,	  they	  may	  coexist	  in	  the	  environment,	  but	  if	  they	  compete	  too	  strongly	  one	  
or	  the	  other	  must	  win	  and	  exclude	  the	  other,	  known	  as	  Gause’s	  principle	  (the	  
competitive	  exclusion	  principle).	  	  Extrapolating	  this	  principle	  to	  larger	  communities,	  
many	  authors	  have	  effectively	  suggested	  that	  the	  principle	  could	  be	  applied	  in	  a	  
larger	  context	  (e.g.,	  Levins,	  1968;	  Levin,	  1970;	  Darlington,	  1972;	  Silvertown,	  2004).	  	  
For	  example,	  in	  one	  forum	  of	  professional	  ecologists	  (the	  1944	  meetings	  of	  the	  
British	  Ecological	  Society)	  some	  of	  the	  world’s	  most	  highly	  respected	  ecologists	  
formally	  debated	  whether	  Gause’s	  principle	  should	  be	  taken	  as	  a	  foundational	  
principle	  for	  all	  of	  ecology	  (Gilbert	  et	  al.,	  1952).	  Others	  have	  suggested	  less	  
ambitious	  agendas	  for	  generalization.	  One	  ingenious	  framework	  is	  Yodzis’	  triple	  
classification	  of	  founder-­‐controlled,	  dominance-­‐controlled,	  and	  niche-­‐controlled	  
communities	  (Yodzis,	  1978;	  1989).	  	  Founder-­‐controlled	  refers	  to	  the	  indeterminate	  
case,	  in	  which	  the	  ultimate	  winner	  in	  competition	  depends	  on	  initial	  conditions,	  
where	  the	  “founding”	  species	  will	  likely	  win	  the	  competitive	  struggle.	  Dominance-­‐
controlled	  refers	  to	  those	  cases	  in	  which	  one	  species	  dominates	  the	  other,	  in	  a	  pair-­‐
wise	  comparison.	  The	  dominance-­‐controlled	  category	  includes	  two	  distinct	  forms,	  a	  
“stable”	  form	  and	  an	  “unstable”	  form.	  The	  “niche-­‐controlled”	  category	  accounts	  for	  
those	  communities	  characterized	  by	  weak	  competition	  (effectively	  likening	  
competition	  to	  niche	  overlap,	  a	  common	  shorthand	  in	  theoretical	  ecology,	  where	  
small	  niche	  overlap	  suggests	  weak	  competition).	  This	  “periodic	  table”	  of	  competitive	  
effects	  can	  be	  conveniently	  summarized	  by	  phase	  diagrams	  with	  zero	  growth	  
isoclines	  (Figure	  1).	  	   	  

	  

	  	  

	  

4	  

	  
	  
	  
Figure	  1.	  	  	  Elementary	  forms	  of	  the	  classical	  Lotka-­‐Volterrra	  Equations,	  with	  
classificatory	  schemes	  according	  to	  Yodzis.	  
	  
	  
	  

In	  more	  recent	  literature	  the	  idea	  of	  a	  metacommunity	  has	  become	  popular	  

(Wilson,	  1992;	  Holt,	  1993;	  Hubbell,	  2001;	  Mouquet	  and	  Loreau,	  2003;	  Leibold	  et	  al.,	  
2004;	  Holyoak,	  2005;	  Chase,	  2005;	  Urban	  et	  al.,	  2008),	  to	  some	  extent	  an	  outgrowth	  
of	  the	  idea	  of	  collections	  of	  source/sink	  populations,	  frequently	  referred	  to	  as	  
island/mainland	  or	  source/sink	  communities	  (Holt,	  1993;	  Mouquet	  and	  Loreau,	  
2002;	  Rex	  et	  al.,	  2005).	  	  MacArthur	  and	  Wilson’s	  island/mainland	  framework	  is	  
especially	  relevant	  in	  that	  it	  represented	  a	  change	  in	  focus	  for	  population	  and	  
community	  studies	  in	  general,	  as	  eloquently	  summarized	  by	  Hubbell	  (2001).	  	  Much	  
in	  the	  same	  way	  that	  a	  source/sink	  population	  becomes	  a	  metapopulation	  when	  the	  
source	  is	  eliminated	  (or	  is	  too	  far	  from	  the	  collection	  of	  sinks)	  (see	  fig	  2a),	  we	  can	  
imagine	  an	  island/mainland	  community	  becoming	  a	  metacommunity	  when	  the	  
mainland	  is	  too	  far	  removed	  (see	  fig	  2b).	  	  

	  

	  

5	  
Figure	  2.	  	  Conceptualization	  of	  mainland/island	  community	  and	  
metacommunity	  as	  points	  along	  a	  gradient.	  Large	  area	  symbolizes	  mainland	  
and	  small	  areas	  islands,	  or	  subpopulations.	  
	  
Here	  I	  conceive	  of	  an	  island/mainland	  community	  in	  the	  same	  framework	  as	  

MacArthur	  and	  Wilson’s	  original	  offering,	  in	  which	  ecological	  dynamics	  occur	  
locally,	  with	  species	  interactions	  of	  various	  forms	  determining	  which	  species	  will	  
survive	  and	  which	  will	  perish,	  while	  the	  more	  regional	  process	  of	  migration	  
continually	  feeds	  these	  local	  communities.	  	  Thus	  we	  conceive	  of	  a	  general	  species	  
pool	  on	  the	  mainland,	  feeding	  species	  to	  the	  isolated	  communities	  on	  the	  islands.	  	  It	  
is	  likely	  that	  these	  far	  removed	  islands	  also	  feed	  one	  another	  with	  migrants	  in	  the	  
same	  way	  that	  those	  migrants	  come	  from	  the	  mainland.	  	  Islands	  far	  enough	  away	  
from	  the	  mainland,	  if	  migration	  is	  allowed	  between	  them	  but	  restricted	  from	  the	  far	  
off	  mainland,	  become	  collectively	  a	  metacommunity.	  Eschewing	  some	  recent	  
complexities,	  I	  thus	  consider	  a	  metacommunity	  as	  structured	  in	  the	  original	  sense	  of	  
Wilson	  (1992).	  	  Ecological	  dynamics	  (here	  restricted	  to	  competition)	  occur	  at	  a	  local	  
level,	  but	  local	  patches	  communicate	  with	  one	  another	  through	  dispersal.	  	  	  
In	  the	  case	  of	  a	  true	  island/mainland	  community,	  the	  dynamics	  of	  a	  single	  
local	  patch	  (island)	  are	  continually	  repopulated	  by	  migrations	  from	  the	  mainland,	  
and,	  most	  importantly,	  from	  among	  one	  another.	  	  Thus	  the	  species	  pool	  is	  the	  
collection	  of	  species	  that	  exist	  in	  perpetuity	  on	  the	  mainland,	  and	  each	  island	  can	  be	  
expected	  to	  house	  a	  subset	  of	  those	  species.	  	  In	  the	  case	  of	  a	  metacommunity	  (i.e.,	  no	  
mainland),	  if	  we	  presume	  that	  the	  metacommuity	  is	  globally	  stable,	  which	  is	  to	  say,	  
all	  species	  at	  the	  regional	  level	  persist	  in	  perpetuity,	  the	  dynamics	  of	  the	  
metacommunity	  can	  be	  studied	  at	  the	  level	  of	  a	  single	  local	  patch,	  and	  a	  species	  pool	  
(the	  species	  existing	  in	  the	  metacommunity	  as	  a	  whole).	  	  The	  question	  then	  
becomes,	  how	  does	  the	  Yodzis	  classification	  inform	  the	  dynamic	  processes	  expected	  
to	  operate	  in	  a	  metacommunity	  or	  mainland/island	  context.	  	  
	  

In	  what	  follows	  I	  first	  discuss	  the	  relevance	  of	  adding	  the	  stable	  versus	  

unstable	  categories	  to	  dominance-­‐controlled	  communities,	  and	  second	  discuss	  the	  
expected	  outcome	  at	  a	  local	  level	  of	  a	  community	  composed	  of	  dominance	  

	  

6	  

controlled	  species	  pairs	  in	  the	  overall	  species	  pool	  (either	  the	  overall	  
metacommunity	  pool	  or	  the	  mainland	  pool),	  explicitly	  examining	  the	  role	  of	  
intransitive	  loops	  in	  community	  structure.	  	  In	  the	  case	  of	  a	  metacommunity,	  I	  
assume	  a	  stable	  situation,	  in	  the	  sense	  that	  the	  overall	  species	  list	  for	  the	  union	  of	  all	  
sub	  communities	  is	  constant.	  	  That	  is,	  there	  may	  be	  dramatic	  changes	  in	  number	  and	  
composition	  of	  species	  in	  any	  given	  subcommunity,	  but	  the	  collection	  as	  a	  whole	  
retains	  all	  species.	  	  The	  collection	  as	  a	  whole,	  then,	  can	  simply	  be	  thought	  of	  as	  a	  
species	  pool,	  much	  as	  a	  source	  in	  a	  source/sink	  population	  or	  the	  “mainland”	  in	  
MacArthur	  and	  Wilson’s	  island	  biogeography.	  	  What	  can	  be	  said	  about	  the	  structure	  
of	  a	  local	  community?	  	  It	  seems	  an	  obvious	  question	  since	  most	  observations	  from	  
the	  real	  world	  are	  effectively	  made	  at	  this	  level.	  	  It	  is	  broadly	  assumed	  that	  this	  local	  
structure	  will	  be	  due	  to	  something	  like	  an	  immigration	  rate	  (from	  the	  species	  pool)	  
minus	  an	  extinction	  rate.	  	  It	  is	  the	  extinction	  process	  that	  I	  seek	  to	  explore	  here,	  
using	  classical	  ecological	  models	  and	  assuming	  that	  competitive	  outcome	  drives	  that	  
local	  extinction.	  
	  
Stability	  in	  dominance-­‐controlled	  communities:	  That	  there	  are	  two	  forms	  of	  
dominance	  is	  not	  at	  all	  surprising,	  since	  it	  is	  standard	  knowledge	  that	  if	  the	  carrying	  
capacities	  are	  equal,	  the	  determinate	  of	  the	  community	  matrix	  (the	  matrix	  of	  alphas)	  
dictates	  the	  stability	  of	  any	  point	  that	  exists	  in	  the	  positive	  quadrant.	  	  That	  is,	  if	  	  
DetA	  =	  1-­‐αijαji	  >	  0,	  the	  system	  is	  stable	  (a	  node),	  otherwise	  it	  is	  unstable	  (a	  saddle	  
point).	  	  However,	  with	  dominance	  as	  defined	  in	  figure	  1,	  the	  stability	  question,	  while	  
mathematically	  the	  same,	  is	  somewhat	  more	  complicated.	  In	  this	  case,	  species	  1	  may	  
be	  destined	  to	  win	  if	  either	  DetA	  >	  0	  or	  DetA	  <	  0,	  which	  is	  to	  say	  the	  dominant	  
species	  (the	  one	  that	  wins)	  will	  win	  no	  matter	  what	  the	  stability,	  as	  defined	  by	  the	  
competition	  coefficients.	  	  For	  the	  qualitative	  generalizations	  traditionally	  thought	  
important	  from	  the	  LV	  equations,	  this	  does	  not	  matter	  (i.e.,	  for	  the	  four	  distinct	  
outcomes	  of	  competition).	  	  But	  there	  are	  several	  formulations	  for	  which	  it	  does	  
matter,	  depending	  on	  the	  question	  posed.	  

	  
	  

7	  
For	  example,	  we	  might	  ask	  what	  will	  be	  the	  consequence	  in	  a	  two-­‐species	  

dynamic	  system	  if	  equations	  1	  apply	  and	  we	  slowly	  increase	  the	  value	  of	  one	  of	  the	  
carrying	  capacities	  in	  the	  dominance-­‐controlled	  situation.	  	  If	  the	  system	  is	  stable	  we	  
have	  a	  gradual	  change	  in	  the	  equilibrium	  value	  of	  the	  species	  for	  which	  the	  carrying	  
capacity	  is	  being	  changed.	  	  However,	  if	  the	  system	  is	  unstable,	  we	  have	  a	  
catastrophic	  change	  at	  the	  critical	  point,	  K2	  =	  K1/a12,	  before	  which	  the	  system	  is	  
completely	  dominated	  by	  x1	  and	  after	  which	  it	  has	  three	  equilibria,	  two	  stable	  and	  
one	  unstable.	  	  Then	  there	  is	  another	  critical	  point	  at,	  K1=K2/a21	  after	  which	  the	  
system	  is	  completely	  dominated	  by	  x1.	  Catastrophic	  shifts	  occur	  at	  both	  of	  those	  
critical	  points	  and	  there	  is	  a	  hysteretic	  zone	  between	  the	  two.	  This	  general	  result	  is	  
illustrated	  in	  figure	  3.	  	  

	  

	  

	  

Figure	  3.	  Response	  curves	  to	  changes	  in	  the	  carrying	  capacity	  of	  species	  1.	  	  a.	  the	  
unstable	  dominance	  controlled	  situation,	  where	  5	  distinct	  	  values	  of	  K1	  are	  indicated	  
along	  with	  the	  isocline	  and	  equilibrium	  points	  (open	  =	  unstable;	  black	  =	  stable,	  grey	  
either	  unstable	  or	  stable	  depending	  on	  which	  isocline.	  b.	  the	  equilibrium	  values	  as	  a	  
function	  of	  the	  carrying	  capacity	  of	  species	  1,	  illustrating	  the	  catastrophic	  transition	  
from	  x2	  domination	  to	  x1	  domination.	  	  c.	  	  the	  stable	  dominance	  controlled	  situation,	  
where	  5	  distinct	  values	  of	  K1	  are	  indicated	  along	  with	  the	  isocline	  and	  equilibrium	  
points.	  d.	  the	  equilibrium	  values	  as	  a	  function	  of	  carrying	  capacity	  of	  species	  1,	  
illustrating	  a	  simple	  monotonic	  response.	  
	  
	  

	  

8	  

Persistence	  in	  dominance-­‐controlled	  metacommuities:	  	  When	  communities	  are	  
fractionated	  such	  that	  the	  competitive	  process	  occurs	  locally	  but	  is	  fed	  by	  regional	  
migrations	  (i.e.,	  either	  a	  mainland/island	  community	  or	  a	  metacommnity),	  the	  long	  
term	  expectations	  are	  not	  necessarily	  what	  is	  suggested	  by	  a	  direct	  neighborhood	  
stability	  analysis.	  	  While	  the	  expectations	  from	  a	  panmictic	  community	  are	  obvious	  
(e.g.,	  survival	  of	  only	  one	  species	  when	  all	  competition	  coefficients	  are	  large	  or	  
persistence	  of	  many	  species	  when	  all	  competition	  coefficients	  are	  all	  small,	  i.e.,	  a	  
niche-­‐controlled	  community,),	  the	  case	  of	  dominance-­‐control	  in	  a	  metacommunity	  
may	  lead	  to	  other	  complications.	  	  In	  particular,	  intransitive	  loops	  may	  arise	  in	  which	  
case	  the	  pairwise	  stability	  question	  is	  key	  to	  understanding	  permanence	  of	  the	  
species	  in	  the	  loop.	  	  	  
	  

Assume	  that	  the	  community	  structure	  is	  such	  that	  all	  species	  in	  the	  species	  

pool	  sort	  out	  such	  that	  every	  pair	  of	  species	  is	  dominance-­‐controlled	  (a	  simple	  
example	  would	  be	  a	  collection	  of	  species	  in	  a	  strict	  dominance	  hierarchy).	  At	  one	  
extreme	  we	  assume	  that	  the	  apportionment	  of	  competition	  coefficients	  in	  the	  
overall	  species	  pool	  is	  random,	  yet	  the	  structure	  is	  organized	  in	  such	  a	  way	  that	  
every	  species	  pair	  is	  dominance-­‐controlled.	  Then,	  for	  a	  random	  sampling	  of	  species	  
triplets	  there	  will	  be	  many	  cases	  (precisely	  25%)	  in	  which	  an	  intransitive	  loop	  will	  
result.	  It	  is	  elementary	  to	  demonstrate	  that	  an	  intransitive	  loop	  will	  exist	  if	  all	  of	  the	  
following	  three	  conditions	  are	  true:	  
	  

K2
K
< K1 < 3
α 21
α 31 	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

2a

K3
K
< K2 < 1
α 32
α12 	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

2b

	  

	  
2c

K1
K
< K3 < 2
α13
α 23 	  
	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

9	  

or	  if	  an	  equivalent	  set	  of	  relations	  with	  all	  inequalities	  reversed	  is	  true.	  	  Stability	  
conditions	  for	  each	  pair	  of	  species	  derives	  directly	  from	  the	  elementary	  LV	  
equations,	  namely,	  the	  2D	  system	  will	  be	  stable	  if	  	  
	  
αijαji	  <	  1,	  	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

3	  

	  
otherwise	  unstable	  (in	  the	  sense	  of	  figure	  1).	  	  Thus,	  equations	  2	  determine	  the	  
existence	  of	  an	  intransive	  loop	  and	  equation	  3	  establishes	  the	  stability	  of	  each	  of	  the	  
species	  pairs	  involved	  in	  the	  intransitive	  loop.	  Combining	  various	  combinations	  of	  
dominance-­‐controlled	  pairs	  comprising	  a	  three-­‐species	  subpopulation,	  generates	  
some	  perhaps	  surprising	  results.	  	  
	  

Consider	  first	  a	  three	  species	  intransitive	  loop	  of	  dominance-­‐controlled	  

species	  pairs,	  where	  each	  of	  those	  pairs	  is	  unstable	  	  (i.e.	  condition	  3	  is	  violated).	  	  
This	  situation	  leads	  to	  a	  heteroclinic	  cycle	  focused	  on	  the	  three	  equilibrium	  points	  
{K1,	  0,	  0},	  ({0,	  K2,	  0},	  and	  {0,	  0,	  K3}	  (Vandermeer,	  2011;	  Shi,	  et	  al.,	  2010	  ),	  effectively	  
resulting	  in	  a	  single	  surviving	  species	  (since	  the	  heteroclinic	  cycle	  gets	  ever	  closer	  to	  
each	  of	  the	  successive	  points,	  leading	  eventually	  to	  the	  stochastic	  local	  extinction	  of	  
one	  of	  the	  species,	  leaving	  the	  dominance	  structure	  to	  eliminate	  the	  remaining	  two	  
species).	  	  	  
	  

	  

The	  ecological	  significance	  of	  a	  heteroclinic	  cycle	  has	  been	  discussed	  

repeatedly	  (May	  and	  Leonard,	  1975;	  Vandermeer,	  2011;	  Schreiber	  and	  Killingback,	  
2013;	  Hofbauer	  and	  Sigmund,	  1998;	  Huisman	  and	  Weissing,	  2001).	  	  Basically,	  three	  
points	  are	  approached	  repeatedly	  in	  an	  oscillatory	  sequence	  of	  species	  1	  dominant	  
followed	  by	  species	  2	  dominant	  followed	  by	  species	  3	  dominant,	  mathematically	  
approaching	  the	  three	  points	  in	  the	  limit.	  Yet	  there	  is	  some,	  even	  if	  very	  small,	  
population	  density	  where	  the	  population	  in	  question	  must	  be	  judged	  extinct,	  thus	  
leading	  to	  the	  elimination	  of	  two	  of	  the	  three	  species.	  Thus,	  the	  heteroclinic	  cycle	  is	  
ecologically	  equivalent	  to	  Yodzis’	  founder-­‐controlled	  community,	  even	  though	  the	  
three	  component	  parts	  are	  strictly	  dominance	  controlled!	  	  That	  is,	  the	  species	  with	  

	  

10	  

the	  initial	  advantage,	  most	  abundant	  at	  the	  “founding”	  of	  the	  community,	  will	  
generally	  dominate	  the	  other	  two	  species	  	  
	  

The	  alternative	  extreme,	  when	  each	  pair	  of	  species	  in	  the	  intransitive	  loop	  is	  

Lotka-­‐Volterra	  stable	  (LVS),	  but	  dominance-­‐controlled	  (i.e.,	  one	  species	  will	  win	  in	  
head	  to	  head	  competition,	  as	  in	  figure	  1b),	  a	  single	  focal	  point	  may	  be	  established	  
with	  all	  species	  persistent	  (as	  discussed	  below,	  this	  result	  is	  not	  inevitable).	  	  This	  
result	  is	  somewhat	  surprising	  since	  all	  three	  species	  pairs	  are	  themselves	  non-­‐
persistent	  (i.e.,	  one	  of	  the	  species	  will	  dominate	  the	  other,	  in	  head-­‐to-­‐head	  pairwise	  
competition),	  yet	  when	  placed	  together,	  they	  may	  form	  a	  stable	  oscillatory	  triad	  
(Vandermeer,	  2011).	  	  However,	  the	  formal	  stability	  of	  the	  equilibrium	  point	  is	  not	  
simply	  the	  reverse	  of	  equation	  3.	  	  In	  particular,	  if	  we	  allow	  for	  the	  system	  to	  be	  
symmetrical,	  the	  qualitative	  distinction	  between	  stable	  and	  unstable	  can	  be	  
precisely	  stipulated.	  	  Normalizing	  to	  Ki	  =	  1	  for	  all	  i,	  the	  equilibrium	  form	  of	  equation	  
1	  (for	  three	  species)	  can	  be	  written	  as,	  

1 α12 α13
0
0 = α 21 1 α 23
0
α 31 α 23 1

x1
x2 .	  
x3

	  
Application	  of	  equations	  2	  we	  see	  that	  a21,	  	  a32,	  	  a13	  >	  1.0,	  and	  a31,	  	  a12,	  	  a23	  <	  1,	  
stipulate	  an	  intransitive	  loop.	  	  Consider	  the	  special	  case	  in	  which	  A	  =	  a21	  =	  a32	  =	  	  a13	  
and	  B	  =	  a31,	  =	  a12	  =	  	  a23	  ,	  such	  that	  the	  detached	  coefficient	  matrix	  becomes,	  	  

1

α 21

α12 α13
1

α 31 α 32

α 23
1

1 B A
= A 1 B
B A 1

	  
.	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

4

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

5	  

It	  has	  been	  established	  that,	  
	  
A	  +	  B	  >	  2	  
	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

11	  

stipulates	  that	  the	  equilibrium	  point	  is	  unstable,	  while	  the	  reverse	  inequality	  
stipulates	  stability	  (perfect	  equality	  indicates	  a	  Hopf	  bifurcation)	  (Roeger,	  2004;	  Chi	  
et	  al.,	  1998).	  	  The	  subset	  of	  conditions	  implied	  by	  equation	  3	  become	  
	  
AB	  <	  1	  	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

6	  

	  
Equations	  5	  and	  6,	  although	  formally	  applying	  to	  only	  the	  symmetrical	  case	  (i.e.,	  A	  =	  
a21	  =	  a32	  =	  	  a13	  and	  B	  =	  a31,	  =	  a12	  =	  	  a23	  ),	  give	  insight	  into	  the	  expected	  structure	  on	  
islands	  in	  a	  mainland	  island	  framework	  or	  in	  subcommunities	  in	  a	  metacommunity,	  
as	  illustrated	  in	  figure	  4.	  
	  

	  

	  

	  

Figure	  4.	  	  Generalized	  structure	  of	  stability	  of	  the	  symmetrical	  system,	  A	  versus	  B	  (see	  
equation	  4),	  illustrating	  the	  role	  of	  the	  stability	  of	  the	  constituent	  2D	  subsystems	  
comprising	  the	  community.	  Stable	  or	  unstable	  dominant	  refer	  to	  the	  situation	  of	  each	  
species	  pair	  forming	  the	  triplet.	  Thus	  if	  the	  triplet	  consists	  of	  species	  A,	  B	  and	  C,	  the	  
pairs	  A,B;	  A,C;	  and	  B,C	  are	  all	  characterized	  by	  dominance	  in	  the	  Yodzis	  sense,	  
although	  that	  dominance	  can	  be	  either	  stable	  or	  unstable	  (see	  figure	  1).	  
	  
	  
	  

While	  the	  conditions	  of	  stability	  are	  evident	  in	  the	  symmetrical	  case,	  relaxing	  

the	  symmetrical	  assumption	  suggests	  the	  basic	  pattern	  of	  the	  symmetrical	  case	  is	  
only	  quantitatively	  distorted.	  	  Generally,	  if	  any	  one	  of	  the	  pairs	  involved	  in	  the	  

	  

12	  

intransitive	  loop	  is	  stable,	  the	  intransitive	  loop	  leads	  to	  a	  focal	  point	  attractor	  of	  the	  
three	  species	  system,	  albeit	  dramatically	  skewed	  towards	  one	  of	  the	  species.	  	  There	  
is	  a	  qualitative	  distinction	  that	  appears	  between	  intransitive	  loops	  constructed	  of	  
three	  stable	  pairs	  and	  those	  that	  include	  only	  one	  or	  two	  stable	  pairs	  (although	  the	  
formal	  result	  of	  a	  stable	  focus	  is	  consistent).	  	  In	  figure	  5	  we	  illustrate	  the	  three	  
qualitatively	  distinct	  outcomes.	  	  
	  

These	  results	  seem	  to	  challenge	  the	  Yozis	  categorizations.	  If	  it	  is	  true	  that	  a	  

three	  species	  combination	  for	  which	  all	  two-­‐species	  subsets	  are	  dominance	  
controlled	  can	  form	  either	  a	  stable	  oscillatory	  equilibrium	  or	  a	  heteroclinic	  cycle,	  the	  
actual	  behavior	  of	  the	  three-­‐dimensional	  system	  will	  be	  either	  founder	  controlled	  
(when	  there	  is	  a	  heteroclinic	  cycle)	  or	  niche	  controlled	  (when	  there	  is	  a	  stable	  focal	  
point).	  	  So	  even	  if	  the	  underlying	  species	  pool	  consists	  of	  species	  which,	  when	  
systematically	  paired	  with	  all	  other	  species	  in	  the	  pool,	  always	  results	  in	  a	  
dominance	  controlled	  two-­‐species	  structure,	  if	  the	  resulting	  subcommunity	  forms	  
an	  intransitive	  loop	  (which	  is	  expected	  by	  chance	  in	  25%	  of	  random	  samples),	  that	  
subcommunity	  must	  be	  categorized	  as	  either	  founder	  controlled	  or	  niche	  controlled	  
within	  the	  Yodzis	  framework.	  
	  

	  	  
Figure	  4.	  	  The	  three	  qualitatively	  distinct	  outcomes	  of	  a	  three	  species	  intransitive	  loop,	  
formed	  by	  three	  pairs	  of	  species,	  each	  of	  which	  is	  dominance-­‐controlled.	  	  a.	  when	  all	  
two-­‐species	  subsystems	  are	  unstable,	  the	  result	  is	  a	  heteroclinic	  cycle..	  b.	  when	  all	  two-­‐
species	  subsystems	  are	  stable,	  the	  result	  is	  a	  symmetrical	  focal	  point.	  c.	  when	  one	  or	  
two	  of	  the	  three	  two-­‐species	  subsystems	  are	  stable,	  the	  result	  is	  an	  asymmetrical	  focal	  
point.	  
	  

	  

13	  

	  
Adding	  species	  to	  an	  intransitive	  loop:	  Presuming	  that	  the	  first	  three	  species	  
arriving	  in	  the	  subcommunity	  form	  an	  intransitive	  loop,	  and	  presuming	  that	  the	  
loop	  is	  of	  the	  stable	  variety,	  it	  is	  most	  natural	  to	  ask	  what	  might	  happen	  when	  a	  
fourth	  species	  is	  added	  to	  the	  system.	  Presuming	  the	  basic	  symmetrical	  form	  of	  
equation	  4,	  and	  keeping	  the	  symmetry	  when	  adding	  the	  fourth	  species	  (i.e.,	  it	  must	  
form	  a	  dominance	  controlled	  pairwise	  relationship	  with	  all	  of	  the	  three	  species	  in	  
the	  intransitive	  loop),	  the	  fourth	  species	  can	  be	  added	  in	  four	  qualitatively	  distinct	  
forms	  (figure	  5).	  	  	  

	  

	  

	  

Figure	  5.	  	  Various	  forms	  of	  adding	  a	  fourth	  species	  to	  a	  basic	  intransitive	  loop.	  Large	  
arrow	  indicates	  direction	  of	  competitive	  dominance.	  a.	  species	  D	  dominates	  all	  three	  of	  
the	  intransitive	  loop	  members.	  b.	  species	  D	  is	  dominated	  by	  all	  intransitive	  loop	  
members.	  c.	  species	  D	  dominated	  by	  one	  but	  dominating	  two	  others	  of	  the	  intransitive	  
loop	  members.	  	  d.	  species	  D	  dominated	  by	  two	  of	  the	  intransitive	  loop	  members	  but	  
dominating	  the	  other.	  
	  
	  

If	  the	  fourth	  species	  dominates	  all	  three	  species	  in	  the	  base	  intransitive	  loop	  

(fig	  4a),	  that	  species	  will	  eliminate	  all	  of	  the	  species	  in	  the	  loop.	  	  If	  it	  is	  dominated	  by	  
all	  three	  species	  (fig	  4b),	  it	  will	  be	  unable	  to	  invade	  the	  community	  and	  will	  go	  
locally	  extinct.	  	  However,	  if	  it	  dominates	  two	  of	  the	  species	  in	  the	  original	  loop	  but	  is	  
dominated	  by	  one	  of	  them,	  a	  new	  three-­‐species	  intransitive	  loop	  emerges	  (B,	  C,	  D),	  
with	  one	  of	  the	  species	  (A)	  of	  the	  original	  loop	  having	  been	  eliminated	  from	  the	  
community.	  	  In	  this	  case	  there	  are	  alternative	  solutions	  (B,C,D;	  or	  A,B,D),	  depending	  
on	  initiation	  conditions.	  Finally,	  if	  the	  fourth	  species	  is	  dominated	  by	  two	  of	  the	  
species	  in	  the	  original	  loop	  but	  dominates	  one	  of	  them	  (fig	  4d),	  either	  D	  or	  B	  is	  
initially	  eliminated	  (depending	  on	  initiation	  conditions).	  If	  D	  is	  initially	  eliminated	  ,	  
the	  original	  intransitive	  loop	  remains.	  	  If	  B	  is	  initially	  eliminated,	  D	  is	  subsequently	  
eliminated	  followed	  by	  A,	  leaving	  a	  monoculture	  of	  C.	  	  In	  sum,	  in	  none	  of	  the	  cases	  in	  

	  

14	  

figure	  5	  will	  the	  fourth	  species	  be	  incorporated	  into	  the	  system	  to	  form	  a	  four	  
species	  permanent	  community.	  
	  

It	  is	  perhaps	  not	  evident	  why	  a	  fourth	  species	  cannot	  enter	  the	  system,	  since	  

the	  equilibrium	  values	  of	  all	  three	  species	  in	  the	  intransitive	  loop	  are	  lower	  than	  
their	  carrying	  capacities	  (assuming	  the	  equilibrium	  form	  of	  the	  loop),	  thus	  reducing	  
some	  of	  the	  competitive	  pressure	  on	  the	  fourth	  species.	  Indeed,	  it	  is	  the	  case	  that	  if	  
the	  competitive	  pressure	  on	  the	  fourth	  species	  is	  reduced	  (but	  still	  retaining	  the	  
basic	  dominance	  control	  between	  it	  and	  the	  other	  three	  species),	  it	  is	  still	  the	  case	  
that	  the	  fourth	  species	  cannot	  enter	  into	  the	  community	  permanently.	  Assuming	  
equation	  4,	  if	  we	  allow	  the	  extreme	  situation	  of	  B=0,	  we	  can	  compute	  the	  
equilibrium	  values	  of	  x1,	  x2	  and	  x3,	  as:	  
	  

	  

xi =

1+ A 2 − A
	  
1+ A 3

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

7	  

Consider	  the	  ODE	  for	  species	  4	  as,	  
" K − x − α 41 x1 − α 42 x2 − α 43 x3 %
dx4
= x4 $ 4 4
' .	  
dt
K4
#
&

If	  we	  presume	  that	  the	  dynamics	  of	  the	  intransitive	  loop	  are	  relatively	  fast,	  we	  can	  
presume	  that	  the	  fourth	  species	  enters	  near	  to	  the	  three-­‐species	  equilibrium.	  
Substitute	  A	  for	  aij,	  and	  equation	  7	  for	  the	  equilibria,	  we	  can	  write	  the	  equilibrium	  of	  
the	  fourth	  species	  as,	  
x4* = K 4 − 3

A + A3 − A 2
1+ A 3

	  

whence	  it	  is	  evident	  that	  x4	  will	  be	  positive	  if,	  
	  
K 4 > 3A

1+ A 2 − A
1+ A 3

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

8	  

	  
Thus,	  if	  equation	  8	  is	  true,	  all	  four	  species	  can	  coexist.	  However,	  it	  is	  evident	  that	  if	  
equation	  8	  is	  true,	  the	  assumption	  that	  all	  pairs	  are	  dominance	  controlled	  is	  
violated.	  	  Indeed,	  it	  is	  not	  possible	  to	  add	  a	  fourth	  species	  to	  a	  basic	  three	  species	  

	  

15	  

intransitive	  loop	  to	  form	  a	  stable	  community	  of	  four	  species	  (under	  the	  assumption	  
of	  dominance	  controlled	  pairs).	  
	  

There	  is	  a	  simple	  graphical	  technique	  for	  adjudicating	  whether	  the	  system	  

will	  be	  permanent	  (or	  have	  a	  simple	  heteroclinic	  cycle)	  or	  decompose,	  using	  the	  
graphical	  representation	  of	  figure	  5.	  With	  reference	  to	  figure	  6,	  note	  that	  in	  6a	  the	  
simple	  intransitive	  triplet	  is	  represented.	  Trivially,	  each	  species	  “effects”	  a	  
competitive	  effect	  on	  just	  one	  other	  species	  (the	  large	  arrowheads)	  and	  must	  
“respond”	  to	  the	  competitive	  pressure	  of	  just	  one	  other	  	  species.	  Thus	  the	  
competitive	  effect	  and	  competitive	  response	  are	  “balanced.”	  	  Contrarily,	  in	  figure	  6b,	  
this	  balance	  is	  lost.	  	  Species	  C	  and	  B	  must	  respond	  to	  the	  effects	  from	  two	  other	  
species	  whereas	  species	  A	  and	  D	  must	  respond	  to	  only	  one	  other	  species,	  yet	  exert	  
an	  effect	  on	  two	  other	  species.	  A	  qualitative	  glance	  at	  figure	  6b	  reveals	  what	  can	  be	  
expected	  dynamically:	  B	  receives	  pressure	  from	  both	  C	  and	  D	  and	  is	  likely	  to	  go	  
extinct	  first,	  releasing	  A	  from	  any	  competitive	  pressure	  at	  all,	  whence	  C	  goes	  extinct	  
from	  pressure	  from	  both	  D	  and	  A,	  and,	  finally,	  A	  beats	  D,	  resulting	  in	  a	  monoculture	  
of	  A.	  	  Furthermore,	  there	  is	  no	  way	  of	  arranging	  the	  competitive	  effects	  such	  that	  all	  
four	  species	  will	  persist,	  as	  already	  discussed	  in	  conjunction	  with	  figure	  5.	  	  Adding	  a	  
fifth	  species,	  however,	  recaptures	  the	  possibility	  of	  balancing	  effect	  and	  response	  
competition	  (for	  each	  species,	  the	  number	  of	  large	  arrowheads	  pointing	  to	  it	  is	  equal	  
to	  the	  number	  of	  small	  arrowheads	  pointing	  to	  it	  –	  fig	  6c).	  	  When	  such	  a	  balance	  
between	  effect	  and	  response	  competition	  occurs,	  the	  system	  as	  a	  whole	  will	  persist,	  
anchored	  by	  one	  or	  more	  intransitive	  loops.	  Since	  the	  basic	  intransitivities	  are	  
responsible	  for	  the	  persistence,	  it	  makes	  sense	  to	  talk	  about	  this	  type	  of	  structure	  as	  
an	  “intransitive	  structure,”	  whence	  we	  conclude	  that	  persistence	  of	  a	  subcommunity	  
of	  more	  than	  three	  species	  is	  possible	  only	  if	  the	  subcommunity	  comprises	  an	  
intransitive	  structure	  (again,	  presuming	  the	  complete	  dominance	  control	  of	  all	  
species	  pairs	  in	  the	  general	  species	  pool).	  

	  

16	  

	  

	  

	  
Figure	  6.	  	  Intransitive	  and	  transitive	  structures.	  a.	  the	  simple	  triplet	  where	  the	  
implied	  balance	  between	  effect	  (large	  arrowheads)	  and	  response	  (small	  arrowheads)	  
is	  balanced	  (one	  effect	  species	  and	  one	  response	  species	  per	  competitor).	  b.	  one	  
example	  of	  adding	  a	  fourth	  species	  to	  the	  basic	  intransitive	  triplet	  (from	  figure	  5c).	  
Note	  that	  balancing	  effect	  and	  response	  is	  not	  possible	  in	  this	  (or	  any	  other	  even)	  case	  
since	  an	  odd	  number	  of	  competitors	  are	  involved	  with	  each	  species.	  	  Thus,	  here,	  species	  
C	  and	  B	  each	  have	  two	  effect	  competitors	  acting	  on	  them	  (species	  D	  and	  C	  in	  the	  case	  
of	  species	  B,	  and	  species	  A	  and	  D	  in	  the	  case	  of	  species	  C),	  while	  species	  A	  and	  D	  have	  
only	  one	  effect	  competitor	  but	  two	  species	  to	  which	  they	  must	  respond.	  	  c.	  An	  example	  
of	  a	  five	  species	  intransitive	  structure	  in	  which	  each	  species	  contends	  with	  two	  effect	  
species	  and	  two	  response	  species,	  thus	  having	  a	  perfect	  balance	  between	  effect	  and	  
response.	  
	  
	  
It	  is	  important	  to	  recall	  that	  such	  intransitive	  structures	  (e.g.,	  fig	  6c)	  can	  be	  
either	  stable,	  whence	  the	  system	  will	  persist	  in	  perpetuity,	  or	  unstable	  in	  which	  case	  
some	  form	  of	  hetroclinic	  cycle	  will	  emerge,	  eventually	  resulting	  in	  a	  single	  species	  
dominating	  the	  system	  (which	  of	  those	  species	  will	  be	  largely	  stochastic).	  From	  the	  
point	  of	  view	  of	  the	  Yodzis	  categorization,	  an	  intransitive	  structure	  will	  behave	  
either	  as	  if	  it	  were	  a	  niche	  controlled	  community	  (if	  it	  is	  a	  stable	  intransitive	  
structure)	  or	  a	  dominance	  controlled	  community	  (if	  it	  is	  an	  unstable	  intransitive	  
structure).	  	  This	  general	  result	  is	  surprising	  when	  recalling	  that	  the	  underlying	  
structure	  is	  assumed	  to	  be	  completely	  dominance	  controlled	  (when	  evaluating	  each	  
pair	  of	  species	  separately).	   	  
	  

	  

	  

Dynamic	  modification	  of	  the	  species	  pool	  in	  a	  metacommunity:	  Initially	  we	  
assumed	  that	  the	  overall	  species	  pool	  is	  unchanging,	  a	  reasonable	  assumption	  in	  a	  
mainland/island	  comparison.	  	  However,	  in	  light	  of	  local	  dynamics,	  in	  any	  realistic	  
scenario,	  those	  local	  dynamics	  may	  have	  an	  effect	  on	  the	  composition	  of	  the	  species	  
pool	  in	  a	  metacommunity,	  perhaps	  not	  violating	  the	  assumption	  of	  a	  constant	  
species	  list,	  but	  perhaps	  violating	  the	  assumption	  of	  a	  constant	  relative	  abundance	  

	  

17	  

of	  each	  of	  the	  of	  species,	  which	  will	  obviously	  affect	  the	  probability	  of	  occupying	  a	  
particular	  subhabitat	  at	  any	  point	  in	  time.	  This	  effect	  is	  obviously	  constrained	  by	  the	  
issue	  of	  intransitivity.	  
	  

The	  issue	  is	  qualitatively	  obvious.	  If	  small	  propagule	  populations	  continually	  

occupy	  subhabitats	  (as,	  for	  example,	  in	  the	  immigration	  rate	  of	  island	  biogeography)	  
the	  dynamics	  of	  the	  system	  will	  be	  transient	  for	  a	  significant	  part	  of	  the	  time.	  	  
Transient	  dynamics	  can	  be	  very	  complicated	  (Hastings,	  2001;	  2004;	  Simonsen et al.,
2008), although	  in	  simple	  two	  dimensional	  models	  they	  appear	  intuitively	  obvious	  
(e.g.,	  the	  classic	  LV	  competition	  equations).	  	  By	  definition,	  in	  a	  metacommunity	  
where	  the	  time	  to	  equilibrium	  (which	  frequently	  includes	  local	  extinction)	  is	  not	  too	  
different	  from	  the	  time	  to	  next	  immigration,	  transient	  dynamics	  are	  likely	  to	  be	  
important.	  The	  nature	  of	  those	  dynamics,	  given	  the	  framework	  of	  a	  dominance	  
controlled	  metacommunity,	  is	  qualitatively	  predictable.	  Transient	  dynamics	  for	  any	  
dynamical	  system	  involve	  first,	  an	  approach	  to	  the	  stable	  manifold	  and	  second,	  
dynamics	  near	  that	  manifold	  toward	  the	  stable	  equilibrium	  state	  (Grebogi,	  et	  al.,	  
1983;	  1986;	  Hastings,	  2004).	  In	  either	  the	  two	  or	  three	  dimensional	  transitive	  case,	  
the	  dynamics	  are	  relatively	  simple,	  with	  an	  initial	  direct	  approach	  to	  the	  stable	  
manifold	  and	  then	  a	  direct	  approach	  to	  the	  equilibrium	  point	  on	  that	  manifold.	  	  The	  
final	  equilibrium	  state,	  which	  includes	  extinction	  of	  one	  or	  two	  species,	  is	  
approached	  relatively	  rapidly.	  	  However,	  in	  the	  intransitive	  3-­‐D	  case	  the	  situation	  is	  
different.	  If	  stable,	  of	  course,	  the	  transient	  dynamics	  are	  oscillatory	  but	  converge	  on	  
a	  stable	  state	  of	  all	  intransitive	  species	  persistent,	  as	  discussed	  above.	  	  If	  unstable,	  
on	  the	  contrary,	  the	  transients	  are	  extremely	  important	  with	  an	  initial	  approach	  to	  
the	  stable	  manifold	  followed	  by	  a	  heteroclinic	  cycle	  which	  could	  be	  very	  long.	  	  
Extinction	  is	  thus	  delayed.	  The	  consequences	  for	  the	  structure	  of	  the	  overall	  species	  
pool	  are	  dramatic	  in	  that	  those	  species	  that	  could	  be	  involved	  in	  intransitive	  loops	  
will	  tend	  to	  become	  more	  common	  in	  the	  community	  and	  species	  not	  typically	  
involved	  in	  any	  intransitive	  loops	  will	  tend	  towards	  extinction.	  	  	  
	  

More	  explicitly,	  suppose	  in	  any	  given	  subhabitat	  species	  arrive	  at	  a	  rate	  m,	  

where	  m	  is	  a	  small	  number	  of	  individuals	  over	  some	  critical	  time	  period,	  τ.	  	  The	  first	  

	  

18	  

species	  to	  arrive	  (species	  A)	  will	  be	  unencumbered	  by	  competition	  and	  rapidly	  
approach	  its	  carrying	  capacity.	  	  If	  we	  presume	  that	  something	  less	  than	  100%	  
attainment	  of	  K	  occurs	  within	  τ,	  a	  second	  species	  (species	  B)	  can	  be	  expected	  to	  
arrive	  before	  the	  first	  species	  has	  theoretically	  attained	  its	  full	  K.	  	  By	  the	  assumption	  
of	  dominance	  control,	  either	  species	  A	  or	  B	  will	  tend,	  first	  to	  the	  stable	  manifold	  and	  
second	  to	  its	  K	  while	  the	  other	  species	  will	  tend	  toward	  0.	  Again	  assuming	  less	  than	  
100%	  attainment	  of	  these	  equilibrium	  values	  occurs	  within	  τ,	  the	  third	  species	  
(species	  C)	  will	  arrive	  before	  those	  equilibrium	  values	  occur.	  If	  the	  triplet,	  ABC,	  is	  
transitive,	  the	  general	  approach	  to	  K,0,0	  (or	  0,0,K	  or	  0,K,0)	  will	  proceed	  unabated.	  
However,	  if	  ABC	  is	  intransitive,	  first	  the	  system	  will	  approach	  the	  stable	  manifold,	  
and	  then	  to	  either	  a	  focal	  point	  equilibrium	  where	  all	  three	  species	  are	  significantly	  
greater	  than	  zero	  or	  a	  heteroclinic	  cycle	  wherein	  each	  of	  the	  carrying	  capacities	  is	  
sequentially	  approached.	  	  In	  either	  case,	  the	  loss	  of	  all	  individuals	  of	  two	  of	  the	  three	  
species	  expected	  in	  the	  transitive	  case	  is	  reversed	  and	  within	  some	  time	  frame	  all	  
three	  species	  will	  contribute	  individuals	  to	  the	  species	  pool.	  	  The	  basic	  idea	  is	  
illustrated	  in	  figure	  7.	  	  The	  relationship	  between	  time	  to	  colonization	  (τ)	  and	  time	  to	  
extinction	  is	  a	  complicated	  one	  and	  beyond	  the	  intended	  scope	  of	  this	  article.	  	  

	  

	  

19	  

	  

Figure	  7.	  Time	  series	  for	  exemplary	  subhabitat	  for	  transitive	  (a	  and	  b)	  versus	  
intransitive	  (c)	  triplet,	  for	  unstable	  dominance-­‐controlled	  pairs.	  	  Vertical	  dashed	  line	  
indicates	  time	  of	  migration.	  Note	  the	  dramatic	  difference	  in	  time	  to	  extinction	  for	  
transitive	  versus	  intransitive.	  The	  stable	  dominance-­‐controlled	  situation	  is	  similar,	  but	  
more	  exaggerated	  since	  time	  to	  extinction	  for	  the	  intransitive	  case	  is	  infinite	  by	  
definition.	  
	  
	  
As	  mentioned	  previously,	  if	  the	  intransitive	  loop	  is	  stable,	  the	  dynamics	  are	  
obvious.	  	  An	  illustration	  is	  presented	  in	  figure	  8.	  In	  this	  example,	  the	  transitive	  chain	  
(species	  A,	  B,	  C,	  D)	  is	  augmented	  at	  its	  lowest	  level	  by	  an	  intransitive	  loop	  (C,D,E).	  	  In	  
the	  end	  the	  overall	  structure	  indicates	  species	  C	  will	  dominate	  numerically	  (it	  
sometimes	  will	  dominate	  because	  it	  is	  the	  best	  competitor	  in	  the	  transitive	  chain,	  

	  

20	  

and	  sometimes	  will	  co-­‐dominate	  with	  the	  other	  two	  members	  of	  the	  intransitive	  
loop).	  	  Over	  the	  long	  run	  the	  subdominant	  species	  in	  the	  transitive	  chain	  (A	  and	  B)	  
will	  exist	  in	  the	  system	  as	  fugitive	  species,	  each	  forming	  a	  separate	  metapopulation	  
if	  their	  migration	  rate	  is	  greater	  than	  the	  extinction	  due	  to	  competition	  from	  the	  
other	  species	  (which	  is	  true	  in	  this	  artificial	  example).	  	  	  

	  
Figure	  8.	  	  Illustration	  of	  intransitive	  loop	  long-­‐term	  dominance.	  	  a.	  structure	  of	  the	  
species	  pool	  in	  this	  example,	  where	  arrowhead	  indicates	  “beats”	  in	  competition	  (i.e.	  B	  
beats	  A;	  	  E	  beats	  D).	  Note,	  E,	  C,	  D	  form	  an	  intransitive	  triplet	  whereas	  all	  other	  triplets	  
are	  hierarchies.	  	  b.	  time	  series	  with	  0.2	  fraction	  of	  K	  introduced	  at	  20	  time	  unit	  
intervals	  (modeling	  regular	  migration	  from	  the	  species	  pool).	  Once	  all	  three	  species	  of	  
the	  intransitive	  loop	  (C,D,E)	  have	  migrated	  (at	  about	  time	  =	  300),	  those	  species	  
together	  resist	  the	  invasion	  of	  A	  and	  B,	  reducing	  the	  later	  two	  species	  to	  the	  status	  of	  
fugitive	  species.	  Background	  transparent	  trajectories	  are	  simulations	  of	  the	  
intransitive	  loop	  alone,	  with	  no	  immigration	  from	  the	  species	  pool.	  
	  
	  

The	  consequences	  of	  this	  transitive/intransitive	  dynamics	  at	  the	  local	  level	  

suggests	  that	  those	  individuals	  involved	  in	  intransitive	  triplets	  in	  the	  species	  pool	  
generally,	  will	  leave	  more	  individuals	  in	  that	  species	  pool	  over	  time,	  compared	  to	  
those	  species	  involved	  in	  only	  transitive	  triplets	  in	  the	  species	  pool.	  	  Species	  that	  are	  
dominant	  in	  a	  transitive	  chain	  as	  well	  as	  members	  of	  an	  intransitive	  loop	  will	  

	  

21	  

become	  especially	  abundant	  in	  the	  species	  pool,	  while	  the	  subdominant	  species	  in	  
the	  transitive	  chain	  will	  reach	  the	  level	  of	  fugitive	  species,	  as	  noted	  above.	  
	  
Discussion:	  It	  is	  perhaps	  surprising	  that	  a	  three-­‐species	  subcommunity	  sampled	  
from	  a	  species	  pool	  composed	  of	  nothing	  but	  dominance	  controlled	  species	  pairs	  
can	  result	  in	  a	  stable	  three	  species	  situation,	  as	  argued	  above.	  Yet	  a	  perusal	  of	  the	  
literature	  finds	  that	  intransitive	  networks	  may	  not	  be	  all	  that	  uncommon	  amongst	  
competitors	  (e.g.,	  Buss,	  1980;	  Lankau	  et	  al.,	  2011;	  Kerr	  et	  al.,	  2002;	  Kirkup	  et	  al.,	  
2004)	  even	  though	  active	  searching	  for	  such	  arrangements	  has	  not	  been	  common.	  	  
Especially	  among	  plant	  communities	  where	  transitive	  networks	  are	  generally	  
thought	  to	  be	  common	  (Keddy	  and	  Shipley,	  1989),	  there	  seems	  to	  be	  an	  assumption	  
that	  such	  transitivities	  imply	  that	  competition	  is	  simply	  strong	  (which	  implies	  
dominance	  or	  founder	  control)	  and	  locally	  we	  expect	  competitive	  exclusion	  almost	  
always.	  	  This	  bias	  is	  perhaps	  partly	  a	  function	  of	  the	  nature	  of	  the	  organisms	  under	  
study,	  where	  most	  species	  are	  of	  similar	  stature	  and	  niche	  requirements.	  
	  

The	  results	  in	  the	  present	  study	  apply	  to	  the	  “frictionless”	  theoretical	  system	  

of	  multiple	  species	  in	  competition	  with	  one	  another.	  Connections	  to	  the	  natural	  
world	  are	  obviously	  tentative.	  Indeed,	  I	  know	  of	  no	  study	  that	  attempts	  to	  
specifically	  link	  the	  ideas	  herein	  to	  metacommunities.	  Nevertheless,	  there	  are	  
countless	  studies	  suggesting	  that	  the	  question	  of	  both	  dominance	  control	  and	  
intransitive	  loops	  are	  generally	  important,	  implying	  that	  the	  question	  need	  not	  
remain	  obscure	  in	  the	  future.	  
	  

In	  particular,	  Keddy	  and	  	  Shipley	  (1989)	  review	  a	  number	  of	  studies	  in	  plant	  

ecology	  both	  from	  the	  point	  of	  view	  of	  what	  they	  refer	  to	  as	  asymmetry	  
(corresponding	  to	  the	  use	  here	  of	  dominance)	  and	  transitive	  pathways	  (including	  
three	  species	  pathways).	  	  Although	  their	  major	  conclusion	  is	  that	  asymmetry	  is	  
almost	  universal	  among	  similarly	  statured	  plants	  and	  almost	  all	  pathways	  are	  
transitive,	  it	  is	  clear	  from	  their	  analysis	  that	  intransitivities	  also	  exist,	  even	  if	  not	  
common.	  The	  use	  of	  DeWitt	  replacement	  series	  in	  this	  particular	  study	  has	  been	  
criticized,	  suggesting	  that	  the	  paucity	  of	  intransitivities	  may	  in	  fact	  be	  spurious	  
(Herben	  and	  Krahulec,	  1990).	  

	  
	  

22	  
The	  expectation	  that	  25%	  of	  randomly	  sampled	  triplets	  will	  be	  intransitive,	  

as	  noted	  above,	  is	  derived	  from	  the	  assumption	  that	  the	  competition	  coefficients	  in	  
the	  species	  pool	  are	  all	  selected	  at	  random.	  The	  natural	  question	  that	  arises	  is	  
whether	  the	  species	  pool	  in	  general	  can	  be	  thought	  of	  as	  allocating	  competition	  at	  
random.	  It	  is	  not	  common	  that	  experimental	  procedures	  are	  adequate	  for	  any	  given	  
community	  to	  assess	  the	  competition	  coefficients	  with	  regard	  to	  intransitivity	  
(Herben	  and	  Krahulec,	  1990).	  One	  example	  is	  the	  competition	  experiments	  with	  
seven	  species	  of	  prairie	  plants	  by	  Goldberg	  and	  Landa	  (1991),	  in	  which	  target	  plants	  
were	  subjected	  to	  competitive	  effects	  from	  a	  variable	  number	  of	  competitors,	  
although	  even	  in	  this	  case	  it	  is	  presumed	  that	  response	  to	  competition	  is	  constant	  
with	  respect	  to	  the	  initial	  biomass	  of	  the	  target	  species.	  	  From	  these	  seven	  species	  
there	  are	  35	  possible	  distinct	  triplets,	  and	  the	  theory	  suggests	  that	  we	  would	  expect	  
nine	  of	  them	  to	  be	  intransitive	  if	  the	  allocation	  of	  competition	  coefficients	  is	  at	  
random.	  	  In	  fact,	  only	  two	  were	  (Trifolium	  repens,	  Chenopodium	  album,	  Phleum	  
pratense;	  Amaranthus	  retroflexus,	  Chenopodium	  album,	  Phleum	  pratense),	  based	  on	  
the	  per	  target	  plant	  results	  (table	  2a	  in	  Goldberg	  and	  Landa,	  1991).	  	  All	  species	  in	  
this	  study	  were	  of	  similar	  stature	  and	  likely	  with	  similar	  basic	  requirements.	  It	  is	  
also	  the	  case	  that	  the	  species	  were	  not	  necessarily	  native	  nor	  clearly	  part	  of	  the	  
same	  natural	  community,	  so	  the	  expectation	  that	  intransitive	  triplets	  would	  increase	  
in	  the	  species	  pool	  over	  time	  may	  not	  apply.	  
	  

	  

Buss	  and	  Jackson	  (1989)	  note	  that	  several	  studies	  of	  corals	  find	  strict	  

transitivity	  (Lang,	  1971,1973),	  but	  then	  report	  on	  a	  system	  of	  seven	  species	  of	  
Jamacian	  cryptic	  reef	  species.	  Of	  the	  possible	  35	  triplets,	  at	  least	  five	  of	  them	  are	  
intransitive,	  well	  below	  the	  expected	  eight	  or	  nine	  from	  the	  random	  expectation,	  but	  
clearly	  a	  deviation	  from	  the	  frequently	  assumed	  transitive	  universality.	  	  	  
	  

Although	  randomly	  assigning	  competition	  coefficients	  to	  species	  will	  

inevitably	  result	  in	  some	  intransitive	  triplets	  (25%	  of	  all	  possible	  triplets),	  the	  
question	  remains	  for	  any	  particular	  triplet	  what	  is	  the	  mechanism	  of	  competition	  
that	  could	  result	  in	  the	  intransitive	  structure.	  	  Indeed	  a	  variety	  of	  well	  known	  
competitive	  mechanisms	  could	  result	  in	  such	  structures.	  	  Consider,	  for	  example,	  the	  
general	  consensus	  regarding	  the	  competitive	  structure	  of	  ant	  communities	  

	  

23	  

(Holdober	  and	  Wilson,	  1990;	  Par	  and	  Gibb,	  2010).	  This	  structure	  is	  commonly	  
thought	  to	  be	  a	  result	  of	  two	  or	  sometimes	  three	  foraging	  strategies,	  the	  
“discoverers”	  (those	  species	  that	  tend	  to	  discover	  a	  resource	  rapidly),	  the	  
“dominators”	  (those	  species	  that	  take	  over	  larger	  resources	  and	  prevent	  other	  
species	  from	  using	  them)	  and	  the	  “insinuators”	  (those	  species	  that	  avoid	  
interactions	  with	  other	  species	  and	  take	  advantage	  of	  resource	  acquisition	  actions	  
not	  immediately	  available	  to	  other	  species).	  	  As	  noted	  elsewhere	  (Perfecto	  ,	  1994;	  
Perfecto	  and	  Vandermeer,	  2013)	  discoverers	  will	  be	  favored	  when	  resources	  are	  
generally	  small	  while	  dominators	  will	  be	  favored	  when	  resources	  are	  generally	  
large.	  	  Thus	  the	  process	  of	  competition	  in	  ants,	  sometimes	  thought	  of	  as	  a	  balance	  
between	  discovery	  and	  dominance,	  can	  also	  be	  thought	  of	  as	  operating	  in	  the	  space	  
of	  two	  dimensions	  (large	  resources	  versus	  small	  resources),	  in	  which	  case	  three	  
species	  with	  the	  three	  distinct	  foraging	  strategies	  could	  easily	  be	  functioning	  in	  an	  
intransitive	  loop	  (Vandermeer	  2011),	  as	  suggested	  elsewhere	  (Perfecto	  and	  
Vandermeer	  2013),	  where	  the	  discoverer	  species	  reduces	  the	  abundance	  of	  the	  
small	  resource	  resulting	  in	  an	  environment	  biased	  with	  large	  resources	  and	  thus	  
favoring	  the	  dominator	  species.	  	  Between	  the	  two	  extremes	  (mainly	  small	  resources	  
versus	  mainly	  large	  resources)	  the	  extirpator	  finds	  temporary	  advantage	  over	  both	  
dominator	  and	  discoverer,	  leading	  to	  potential	  persistence	  of	  the	  three,	  as	  shown	  
diagrammatically	  in	  figure	  9a	  and	  b	  
.	  

	  

	  

24	  

	  
Figure	  9.	  Two	  potential	  mechanisms	  for	  generating	  intransitive	  loops	  in	  the	  context	  of	  
basic	  dominance	  control	  (arrowheads	  here	  represent	  positive	  effects	  and	  closed	  circles	  
represent	  negative	  effects).	  	  a.	  arrangement	  common	  in	  ant	  competition	  where	  three	  
species	  engage	  two	  resource	  types	  with	  different	  foraging	  strategies	  (see	  text).	  	  If	  the	  
environment	  contains	  only	  small	  resources,	  the	  insinuator	  beats	  both	  the	  discoverer	  
and	  the	  dominator	  while	  the	  discoverer	  beats	  the	  dominator.	  	  If	  the	  environment	  
contains	  only	  large	  resources,	  the	  dominator	  beats	  the	  insinuator	  and	  the	  discoverer	  
and	  the	  insinuator	  beat	  the	  discoverer.	  Thus	  with	  either	  all	  large	  resources	  or	  all	  small	  
resources	  the	  three	  species	  are	  completely	  transitive.	  b.	  the	  intransitive	  triplet	  that	  
results	  when	  the	  bold	  numbered	  interactions	  are	  much	  larger	  than	  the	  dotted	  
interactions,	  in	  a.	  	  c.	  possible	  arrangement	  in	  plant	  competition	  where	  response	  
competition	  and	  effect	  competition	  have	  different	  patterns	  of	  dominance	  hierarchy.	  d.	  
the	  intransitive	  triplet	  that	  results	  when	  the	  bold	  numbered	  interactions	  are	  much	  
larger	  than	  the	  dotted	  interactions.	  
	  
	  
	  

There	  are	  other	  potential	  intransitive	  mechanisms	  in	  competition.	  Any	  time	  

there	  are	  two	  niches,	  the	  potential	  for	  distinct	  complementarity	  on	  the	  two	  distinct	  
niche	  axes	  creates	  an	  obvious	  potential	  for	  intransitivity	  (Vandermeer,	  2011).	  	  In	  
the	  context	  of	  plant	  competition,	  the	  well-­‐known	  distinction	  between	  effect	  
competition	  and	  response	  competition	  (Goldberg	  and	  Landa,	  1991)	  creates	  the	  
potential	  for	  an	  intransitive	  triplet	  (fig.	  9c	  and	  d).	  Many	  other	  examples	  could	  be	  
cited.	  
	  

The	  general	  qualitative	  analysis	  of	  systems	  in	  which	  all	  species	  pairs	  are	  

dominance	  controlled,	  suggests	  that	  the	  only	  multiple	  species	  sub-­‐communities	  that	  
can	  persist	  over	  the	  long	  term	  are	  those	  that	  are	  structured	  based	  on	  one	  or	  more	  

	  

25	  

intransitive	  loop,	  a	  condition	  that	  might	  be	  referred	  to	  as	  an	  intransitive	  structure.	  If	  
it	  is	  true,	  as	  some	  have	  suggested	  (Keddy	  and	  Shipley,	  1989;	  Goldberg	  and	  Landa,	  
1991)	  that	  any	  pair	  of	  species	  in	  a	  large	  competitive	  community	  will	  be	  
characterized	  by	  dominance	  in	  competition,	  it	  is	  also	  a	  reasonable	  hypothesis	  to	  
suggest	  that	  any	  large	  competitive	  community	  must	  have	  an	  intransitive	  structure,	  
as	  implicitly	  suggested	  by	  Buss	  and	  Jackson	  (1989)	  and	  theoretically	  advanced	  
elsewhere	  (Vandermeer	  and	  Yitbarek,	  2012).	  	  The	  hypothesis	  of	  intransitive	  
structure	  should	  be	  considered	  as	  an	  alternative	  to	  other	  hypotheses	  of	  coexistence	  
in	  competitive	  communities	  (Hubbell,	  2001;	  Chesson,	  2000;	  Bever,	  2003;	  
Amarasekare, 2003; Chase, 2005).	  
	  

In	  any	  large	  community	  structured	  by	  competition,	  if	  there	  is	  a	  super	  

structure	  that	  implies	  either	  a	  mainland/island	  community	  or	  a	  metacommunity,	  
with	  subcommunities	  repeatedly	  drawn	  from	  the	  species	  pool,	  and	  if	  all	  species	  
pairs	  in	  the	  species	  pool	  are	  dominance	  determined	  (as	  is	  implied	  by	  the	  general	  
idea	  of	  transitivity,	  or	  dominance	  hierarchy,	  to	  start	  with),	  it	  is	  unlikely	  that	  
intransitive	  triplets	  will	  not	  exist	  somewhere	  within	  that	  species	  pool.	  If	  such	  is	  the	  
case,	  the	  repeated	  operation	  of	  invasion	  and	  extinction	  will	  sometimes	  result	  in	  
larger	  local	  communities,	  anchored	  to	  one	  or	  more	  intransitive	  triplets,	  a	  structure	  
referred	  to	  herein	  as	  an	  intranstitive	  structure.	  	  An	  additional	  dynamic	  process	  is	  
likely	  to	  operate	  specifically	  in	  the	  case	  of	  a	  metacommunity,	  in	  which	  the	  overall	  
species	  pool	  may	  be	  modified	  in	  the	  direction	  of	  those	  species	  having	  a	  tendency	  to	  
form	  intransitive	  substructures.	  	  
	  

	  

	  

	  

	  
REFERENCES	  
Amarasekare, P. (2003). Competitive coexistence in spatially structured environments: a
synthesis. Ecology Letters, 6(12), 1109-1122.
Bever, J. D. (2003). Soil community feedback and the coexistence of competitors:
conceptual frameworks and empirical tests. New Phytologist, 157(3), 465-473.

	  

26	  

Bray, J. R., & Curtis, J. T. (1957). An ordination of the upland forest communities of
southern Wisconsin. Ecological monographs, 27(4), 325-349.
Buss, L. W. (1980). Competitive intransitivity and size-frequency distributions of
interacting populations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 77(9), 53555359.
Buss,	  L.	  W.,	  &	  Jackson,	  J.	  B.	  C.	  (1979).	  Competitive	  networks:	  nontransitive	  
competitive	  relationships	  in	  cryptic	  coral	  reef	  environments.	  American	  Naturalist,	  
113,	  223-­‐234.	  
Chase, J. M. (2005). Towards a really unified theory for metacommunities. Functional
Ecology, 19(1), 182-186.
Chase, J. M., Abrams, P. A., Grover, J. P., Diehl, S., Chesson, P., Holt, R. D., ... & Case,
T. J. (2002). The interaction between predation and competition: a review and synthesis.
Ecology Letters, 5(2), 302-315.
Chase, J. M., Amarasekare, P., Cottenie, K., Gonzalez, A., Holt, R. D., Holyoak, M., ... &
Tilman, D. (2005). Competing theories for competitive metacommunities. In Holyoak,
M., Leibold, M. A., & Holt, R. D. (Eds.). (2005). Metacommunities: spatial dynamics
and ecological communities. University of Chicago Press. pgs 335-354.
Chesson, P. (2000). General theory of competitive coexistence in spatially-varying
environments. Theoretical population biology, 58(3), 211-237.
Cody, M. L. (1974). Competition and the structure of bird communities (Vol. 7).
Princeton University Press.
Connell, J. H. (1961). The influence of interspecific competition and other factors on the
distribution of the barnacle Chthamalus stellatus. Ecology, 42(4), 710-723.
Darlington, P. J. (1972). Competition, competitive repulsion, and coexistence.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 69(11), 3151-3155.
Elton, C. (1946). Competition and the structure of ecological communities. The Journal
of Animal Ecology, 54-68.

	  

27	  

Fan, M., Wang, K., & Jiang, D. (1999). Existence and global attractivity of positive
periodic solutions of periodic n-species Lotka–Volterra competition systems with several
deviating arguments. Mathematical Biosciences, 160(1), 47-61.
Gilbert, O., Reynoldson, T. B., & Hobart, J. (1952). Gause's hypothesis: an examination.
Journal of Animal Ecology, 21(2), 310-312.
Goh, B. S. (1977). Global stability in many-species systems. American Naturalist, 135143.
Goldberg, D. E., & Landa, K. (1991). Competitive effect and response: hierarchies and
correlated traits in the early stages of competition. The Journal of Ecology, 1013-1030.
Grebogi, C., Ott, E., & Yorke, J. A. (1983). Crises, sudden changes in chaotic attractors,
and transient chaos. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 7(1), 181-200.
Grebogi, C., Ott, E., & Yorke, J. A. (1986). Critical exponent of chaotic transients in
nonlinear dynamical systems. Physical review letters, 57(11), 1284.
Hastings, A. (2001). Transient dynamics and persistence of ecological systems. Ecology
Letters, 4(3), 215-220.
Hastings, A. (2004). Transients: the key to long-term ecological understanding?. Trends
in Ecology & Evolution, 19(1), 39-45.
Herben, T., & Krahulec, F. (1990). Competitive hierarchies, reversals of rank order and
the de Wit approach: are they compatible?. Oikos, 58: 254-256.
Hofbauer, J., & Sigmund, K. (1998). Evolutionary games and population dynamics.
Cambridge University Press.
Holyoak, M., Leibold, M. A., & Holt, R. D. (Eds.). (2005). Metacommunities: spatial
dynamics and ecological communities. University of Chicago Press.
Hubbell, S. P. (2001). The unified neutral theory of biodiversity and biogeography (MPB32) (Vol. 32). Princeton University Press.
Hubbell, S. P. (2005). Neutral theory in community ecology and the hypothesis of
functional equivalence. Functional ecology, 19(1), 166-172.

	  

28	  

Huisman, J., & Weissing, F. J. (2001). Biological conditions for oscillations and chaos
generated by multispecies competition. Ecology, 82(10), 2682-2695.
Jin, Z., Zhien, M., & Maoan, H. (2004). The existence of periodic solutions of the n species Lotka–Volterra competition systems with impulsive (sic). Chaos, Solitons &
Fractals, 22(1), 181-188.
Keddy, P. A., & Shipley, B. (1989). Competitive hierarchies in herbaceous plant
communities. Oikos, 234-241.
Kerr, B., Riley, M. A., Feldman, M. W., & Bohannan, B. J. (2002). Local dispersal
promotes biodiversity in a real-life game of rock–paper–scissors. Nature, 418(6894),
171-174.
Kirkup, B. C., & Riley, M. A. (2004). Antibiotic-mediated antagonism leads to a
bacterial game of rock–paper–scissors in vivo. Nature, 428(6981), 412-414.
Kokkoris, G. D., Troumbis, A. Y., & Lawton, J. H. (1999). Patterns of species interaction
strength in assembled theoretical competition communities. Ecology Letters, 2(2), 70-74.
Lang, J. C. (1971). Interspecific aggression by scleractinian corals I. The rediscovery of
Scolymia cubensis (Milne-Edwards and Haime). Bull. Mar. Sci. 21:952 – 959.
Lang, J. C. (1973). Inrrspecific aggression by scleractinian corals. II. Why the race is not
only to the swift. Bull. Mar. Sci. 23:260 – 279.
Lankau, R. A., Wheeler, E., Bennett, A. E., & Strauss, S. Y. (2011). Plant–soil feedbacks
contribute to an intransitive competitive network that promotes both genetic and species
diversity. Journal of Ecology, 99(1), 176-185.
Lawton, J. H., & Strong Jr, D. R. (1981). Community patterns and competition in
folivorous insects. American Naturalist, 317-338.
Leibold, M. A., Holyoak, M., Mouquet, N., Amarasekare, P., Chase, J. M., Hoopes, M.
F., ... & Gonzalez, A. (2004). The metacommunity concept: a framework for multi‐scale
community ecology. Ecology letters, 7(7), 601-613.
Levin, S. A. (1970). Community equilibria and stability, and an extension of the
competitive exclusion principle. American Naturalist, 413-423.

	  

29	  

Levins, R. (1968). Evolution in changing environments: some theoretical explorations
(No. 2). Princeton University Press.
May, R. M. (2001). Stability and complexity in model ecosystems (Vol. 6). Princeton
University Press.
May, R. M., & Leonard, W. J. (1975). Nonlinear aspects of competition between three
species. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 29(2), 243-253.
Mayfield, M. M., & Levine, J. M. (2010). Opposing effects of competitive exclusion on
the phylogenetic structure of communities. Ecology letters, 13(9), 1085-1093.
McCann, K. S. (2000). The diversity–stability debate. Nature, 405(6783), 228-233.
McGill, B. J., Enquist, B. J., Weiher, E., & Westoby, M. (2006). Rebuilding community
ecology from functional traits. Trends in ecology & evolution, 21(4), 178-185.
Mouquet, N., & Loreau, M. (2002). Coexistence in metacommunities: the regional
similarity hypothesis. The American Naturalist, 159(4), 420-426.
Mouquet, N., & Loreau, M. (2003). Community patterns in source‐sink
metacommunities. The american naturalist, 162(5), 544-557.
Perfecto, I., and J. Vandermeer. 2013. Ant assemblage on a coffee farm in southern
Mexico: Spatial mosaic versus shifting patchwork. Env. Ent., 42:38-48.
Perfecto, I. (1994) “Foraging behavior as a determinant of asymmetric competitive
interaction between two ant species in a tropical agroecosystem”, Oecologia, vol. 98, no.
2, 184–192
Pianka, E. R. (1973). The structure of lizard communities. Annual review of ecology and
systematics, 53-74.
Rex, M. A., McClain, C. R., Johnson, N. A., Etter, R. J., Allen, J. A., Bouchet, P., &
Warén, A. (2005). A Source‐Sink Hypothesis for Abyssal Biodiversity. The American
Naturalist, 165(2), 163-178.
Ricklefs, R. E. (1987). Community diversity: relative roles of local and regional
processes. Science, 235(4785), 167-171.

	  

30	  

Roughgarden, J. (1983). Competition and theory in community ecology. American
Naturalist, 583-601.
Schoener, T. W. (1982). The controversy over interspecific competition: despite spirited
criticism, competition continues to occupy a major domain in ecological thought.
American Scientist, 586-595.
Schreiber, S. J., & Killingback, T. P. (2013). Spatial heterogeneity promotes coexistence
of rock–paper–scissors metacommunities. Theoretical population biology, 86, 1-11.
Shi, H., Wang, W. X., Yang, R., & Lai, Y. C. (2010). Basins of attraction for species
extinction and coexistence in spatial rock-paper-scissors games. Physical Review E,
81(3), 030901.
Silvertown, J. (2004). Plant coexistence and the niche. Trends in Ecology & Evolution,
19(11), 605-611.
Simberloff, D., & Dayan, T. (1991). The guild concept and the structure of ecological
communities. Annual review of ecology and systematics, 115-143.
Simonsen, I., Buzna, L., Peters, K., Bornholdt, S., & Helbing, D. (2008). Transient
dynamics increasing network vulnerability to cascading failures. Physical review letters,
100(21), 218701.
Takeuchi, Y. (1996). Global dynamical properties of Lotka-Volterra systems. Singapore:
World Scientific.
Tilman, D. (1981). Resource competition and community structure. Monographs in
population biology, 17, 1-296.
Urban, M. C., Leibold, M. A., Amarasekare, P., De Meester, L., Gomulkiewicz, R.,
Hochberg, M. E., ... & Wade, M. J. (2008). The evolutionary ecology of
metacommunities. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 23(6), 311-317.
Vandermeer, J. H. (1969). The competitive structure of communities: an experimental
approach with protozoa. Ecology, 362-371.
Vandermeer, J. (2011). Intransitive loops in ecosystem models: from stable foci to
heteroclinic cycles. Ecological Complexity, 8(1), 92-97.

	  

31	  

Vandermeer,	  J.	  and	  S.	  Yitbarek.	  2012.	  	  Self-­‐organized	  spatial	  pattern	  determines	  
biodiversity	  in	  spatial	  competition.	  J.	  of	  Theor.	  Biol.	  300:48-­‐56.	  	  
Webb, C. O. (2000). Exploring the phylogenetic structure of ecological communities: an
example for rain forest trees. The American Naturalist, 156(2), 145-155.
Weiner, J., & Conte, P. T. (1981). Dispersal and neighborhood effects in an annual plant
competition model. Ecological Modelling, 13(3), 131-147.
Welborn, G. A., Skelly, D. K., & Werner, E. E. (1996). Mechanisms creating community
structure across a freshwater habitat gradient. Annual review of ecology and systematics,
337-363.
Wiens, J. A. (1977). On Competition and Variable Environments: Populations may
experience" ecological crunches" in variable climates, nullifying the assumptions of
competition theory and limiting the usefulness of short-term studies of population
patterns. American Scientist, 590-597.
Wiens, J. J., & Graham, C. H. (2005). Niche conservatism: integrating evolution,
ecology, and conservation biology. Annual review of ecology, evolution, and systematics,
519-539.
Wilson, D. S. (1992). Complex interactions in metacommunities, with implications for
biodiversity and higher levels of selection. Ecology, 1984-2000.
Yodzis, P. (1978). Founder Controlled Communities. In Competition for Space and the
Structure of Ecological Communities (pp. 28-38). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Yodzis, P. 1989. Competition, mortality, and community structure. In Diamond, J., and
T. J. Case (eds) Community Ecology. Harper and Row, NY.
	  

