Translation with frameshifting of ribosome along mRNA transcript
Jingwei Li and Yunxin Zhang∗
Shanghai Key Laboratory for Contemporary Applied Mathematics, Centre for Computational Systems Biology,
School of Mathematical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China.
Shanghai Center for Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai 200433, China.
(Dated: February 10, 2015)
Translation is an important process for prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells to produce necessary
proteins for cell growth. Numerious experiments have been performed to explore the translational

arXiv:1502.02109v1 [physics.bio-ph] 7 Feb 2015

properties. Diverse models have also been developed to determine the biochemical mechanism of
translation. However, to simplify the majority of the existing models, the frameshifting of ribosome
along the mRNA transcript is neglected, which actually occurs in real cells and has been extensively
experimentally studied. The frameshifting of ribosome evidently influences the efficiency and speed
of translation, considering that the peptide chains synthesized by shifted ribosomes will not fold
into functional proteins and will degrade rapidly. In this study, a theoretical model is presented
to describe the translational process based on the model for totally asymmetric simple exclusion
process. In this model, the frameshifting of the ribosome along the mRNA transcript and the
attachment/detachment of the ribosome to/from the main body of mRNA codons during translation
elongation process, are explicitly included. The results show that, with ribosome frameshifing, the
speed of correctly synthesized peptide chains may increase first and then decrease with both the
translation initiation rate α and the ribosome detachment rate ωd . This results indicates that
regulating the translation process to reach maximal synthesized speed of proteins is theoretically
feasible. Traffic-related problems of ribosome motion along the mRNA transcript are also addressed
theoretically. Depending on parameter values, shock wave (or domain wall) may exist for ribosome
probabilities along the mRNA.

I.

INTRODUCTION

In living cells, proteins are synthesized by ribosome through the translation process with the information coded in
the template messenger RNA (mRNA). The mRNA is composed of a sequence of codons, and each codon consists of
three nucleotides. Given the four kinds of nucleotides in mRNAs, a total of 43 = 64 kinds of codons exits. Except
for the stop codon, which is used to finish the translation process, each kind of codon corresponds to a certain kind
of amino acid, although each kind of amino acid may correspond to several kinds of codons [1]. During translation,
an amino acid is transferred by the transfer RNA (tRNA). With the binding of tRNA to mRNA through one of its
end, which has complementary anticodon sequence to that of the mRNA, the amino acid carried by the other end
of tRNA is then chained together into a polypeptide as the mRNA passes through. A schematic description of this
process is found in Fig. 1.

∗ Email:

xyz@fudan.edu.cn

2
Translation is followed by molecular machine ribosome, which includes a three step process, that is, initiation,
elongation, and termination [2]. The 30S subunit of the ribosome contains three tRNA binding sites, which are
denoted by A, P, and E (Fig. 1). In the initial step, the first tRNA and the start codon of mRNA will form a
codon-anticodon duplex in the P site of the 30S subunit, with the Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence on the 5’ end of
the mRNA binding with the 3’ end of the 16S rRNA (an anti-SD sequence in the 30S subunit of a ribosome) [3–7].
Meanwhile, the 50S subunit of ribosome will attach to the mRNA from the other side. During translation, mRNA
will be kept in the channel between these two subunits. During elongation, each binding site of the 30S subunit of
ribosome will be bound by one mRNA codon, while the tRNA anticodon end will bind to the mRNA codon in the A
site. When the ribosome steps forward along the mRNA, the codon from the A site, together with the tRNA attached
to it, will move to the P site. Then, the amino acid carried by the tRNA will be added to the tail of the synthesizing
peptide chain in the P site. Finally, when the complex of mRNA codon and tRNA moves to the E site, the tRNA
will detach from the mRNA codon and the peptide chain (Fig. 1). No tRNA that contains an anticodon that is
complementary to the stop codon exists. In the termination process, the stop codon will be bound by one release
factor, which helps the release of the peptide chain and ribosome from the mRNA, which completes the translation
process.
The translation process described above is only applicable for ideal cases, in which the ribosome always moves
forward codon by codon, and it always reads three nucleic acids from the same codon in each elongation step.
However, in actual cells, the ribosome may shift to one nucleic acid upstream or downstream along the template
mRNA in a low frequency [8]. This phenomenon is called frameshifting. Two mRNA codons are considered to be in
the same frame if and only if the number of nucleic acids between theses codons is divisible by 3. In the following,
the mRNA start codon is called a 0 frame codon (or a codon in 0 frame). Thus, all codons that are in the same frame
with the start codon are also 0 frame codons (or codons in 0 frame). A codon that is one nucleic acid upstream to
a 0 frame codon is called a −1 frame codon (or a codon in −1 frame). Meanwhile, a codon that is one nucleic acid
downstream to a 0 frame codon is called a +1 frame codon (or a codon in +1 frame). Considering that every codon
consists of three nucleic acids, any mRNA codon must belong to one of the three frames, i.e 0, −1, and +1 frames.
If one mRNA codon read by ribosome belongs to the 0 frame (or ±1 frame), then the mRNA is said to be read in
the 0 frame (or ±1 frame). Therefore, each mRNA has three reading frames. With frameshifting of ribosome, the
reading frames of mRNAs are distinct. To obatin intuitive impressions of frameshifting, one schematic diagram of −1
frameshifting is depicted in Fig. 1.
Translation is generally initialized from the start codon, so, in the initiation of translation, mRNA is usually in the
0 frame. During the elongation period, frameshifting may occur at some codons, so the mRNA will change into the
−1 frame or +1 frame. Regardless of the reading frame, translation will continue until the ribosome meets the stop
codon. However, peptide chains produced by ribosome in ±1 reading frames are different from those produced by
correct translations in the 0 reading frame, and these chains are usually nonfunctional, and will degrade rapidly.
Experimental findings have shown that the frequency of frameshifting is only 10−3 to 10−4 per codon. However,
the frequency of −1 frameshifting increases for a slippery sequence with the motif X XXY YYZ [9]. The 3’ secondary
structure and the 5’ internal SD sequence in the mRNA can further increase the −1 frameshift frequency [10, 11].
Numerous studies have been performed to describe the property and mechanism of frameshifting [12–20]. A general
mechanistic and conformational framework for −1 frameshifting is recently presented in [9] to attempt to elucidate

3
the mechanism of frameshifting. Structural insights into +1 frameshifting are discussed in [21], and some possible
mechanisms of frameshifting can also be found in [22].
Biophysically, translation can be roughly regarded as a totally asymmetric simple exclusion process (TASEP) see
[23–26]. TASEP is one statistical physics model to describe the unidirectional hopping process of general particles
along a one-dimensional lattice. In this model, the particle at site i of the main body of lattice hops forward to
site i + 1 provided that site i + 1 is not occupied. The particle at the last site of lattice leaves the lattice into the
environment at a given rate constant, and particles in the environment enter the first site of lattice provided that
this site is unoccupied. If one mRNA with N + 1 codons is considered as a one-dimensional lattice of length N + 1,
then the initiation process of translation corresponds to the entrance of the ribosome into the first lattice site. The
elongation process of translation corresponds to the forward hopping process of ribosome along the main body of
lattice, and finally the termination of translation corresponds to the leaving of ribosome from the last lattice site.
Therefore, to a certain extent, TASEP is a reasonable model to describe the translation process in gene expression.
Different types of TASEP models have been conceptualized in various kinds to describe corresponding biophysical
or biochemical processes. In these models, particles may be allowed to detach from or attach to any site of lattice,
particles may have multiple internal states, there may be different types of particles which hop along the same
track, particles may be allowed to hop to the nonadjacent lattice sites, and particles may hop along multiple parallel
lattices [27–36]. Nevertheless, no theoretical model to date has been presented to study the translational process with
occasional frameshifting of ribosome along mRNA. Frameshifting influences on both the speed of correct translation
(i.e., the product speed of correct peptide chain) and the accuracy of translation. Therefore, to determine the detailed
translational properties, and explore the mechanism to regulate gene expression, a more reasonable model that includes
frameshifting should be presented. In this study the translation process, which includes initiation, elongation and
termination, will also be regarded as one TASEP of particle hopping along a one-dimensional lattice. Contrary to the
usual TASEP, particles (i.e., ribosomes) in the translation elongation period may make one frameshifting stochastically.
The corresponding peptide chains produced by shifted ribosomes will be nonfunctional and degrade quickly. Given
the difference of ribosomes in correct and incorrect translation states, the proposed model is similar to the TASEP
with two particle species. However, the proposed model is different because, during forward hopping, particles may
change from one species to the other. Additionally, due to frameshifting, ribosomes in incorrect translation state do
not stop at the supposed end of lattice. This is because that for ribosomes that translocate in the wrong mRNA
frames (i.e., ±1 frame), the stop codon cannot be recognized as usual. This study was primarily designed to discuss
the translational properties of by the modified TASEP model, which includes the frameshifting of ribosome, especially
the dependence on model parameters of correct translation speed and the ratio of correctly produced peptide chains
in all peptide chains.
This study is organized as follows. The theoretical model will be presented in the next section, and then the
numerical results on the translational properties with ribosome frameshifting will be provided in Section III. Finally,
concluding remarks will be presented in the last section.

4
II.

MODIFIED TASEP WITH RIBOSOME FRAMESHIFTING

In the usual TASEP without ribosome frameshifting and attachment/detachment to/from the main body of mRNA,
the model parameters that influence translation speed are as follows: (i) entrance rate of particles from the environment to the first lattice site, i.e., the rate of ribosome binding to the mRNA start codon. This value depends on
the concentration of free ribosomes, and the sequence of ribosome binding site (RBS); (ii) length of lattice (mRNA),
which is usually denoted by N ; (iii) leaving rate β of particles (ribosomes) from the last lattice site N (the stop
codon) to environment; and (iv) forward hopping rate kE of particles in the main body of lattice, i.e., the elongation
rate of translation. For simplicity, the particles are usually assumed to be able to hop forward along the track, and
their forward hopping rates at any lattice site i are assumed to be the same. In this study, the usual TASEP had
been modified to include frameshifting of ribosome as shown in the schematic depiction in Fig. 2.
Given that the frequency of frameshifting is usually low, this study assumes that throughout the translocation
along mRNA, each ribosome can only frameshift at most once. This assumption implies that only ribosomes in the 0
frame can shift one nucleotide forward to 1 frame or backward to −1 frame. General models without this restriction
can be presented similarly, but those models will complicate the following analysis. Actually, with more possible
frameshitings or additional ribosome frameshiftings in the ±1 frame, the results obtained in this study will not change
essentially. In this study, the codon with one nucleotide upstream or downstream of codon i is denoted by i− or i+.
The rates of frameshifting from codon i to codon i− and codon i+ are denoted by k− and k+ , respectively.
Considering that ribosomes only have one chance of framshifting, the ribosomes in ±1 frame will not shift back
into the 0 frame. Thus, no stop codon will generally exist in the ±1 frame, and ribosomes in the ±1 frame will come
across the stop codon and continue moving forward to the 3’ end of mRNA. This study denotes the number of codons
between the usual stop codon and the 3’ end of mRNA by M , and they are numbered by (N + 1)±, · · · , (N + M )±.
Thus, the length of track for ribosomes translocating in ±1 frame is N + M , which is M codons longer than that for
ribosomes translocating in the 0 frame (Fig. 2). The hopping rate of particles (elongation rate of translation) from
±
codon i± to codon (i + 1)± are denoted by kE
and the probabilities of finding one ribosome at codon i± are denoted

by qi± .
In addition to start and stop codons, this study also allows the attachment/detachment of ribosomes to/from any
mRNA codon with rates denoted by ωa /ωd . Attachment and detachment of ribosomes are also allowed at codon i±
for any 0 ≤ i ≤ N + M with rates denoted by ωa± and ωd± respectively. Therefore, ribosomes at codon i for 1 ≤ i ≤ N
can be divided into two classes, namely, ribosomes with correctly and incorrectly synthesized peptide chains. If a
ribosome reaches codon i from the start codon 0 without frameshifting, then the synthesized peptide chain will be
correct. On the contrary, if a ribosome binds to mRNA at codon j for 1 ≤ j ≤ i, then the synthesized peptide chain
will be incorrect. For 0 ≤ i ≤ N , the probability of finding a ribosome at codon i with one correct or incorrect peptide
chain is denoted by pi or qi . This study assumes that only ribosomes in the 0 frame with a correct peptide chain
can frameshift, and the probability q0 is always equals to zero. Considering that frameshifting of ribosomes with
incorrect peptide chain will not change the correct translation speed essentially. Without loss of generality, except
for the normal initiation and termination, this study assumes the absence of ribosome detachment/attachment at the
start/stop codon.
±
For simplicity, this study assumes that kE = kE
, ωa = ωa± , ωd = ωd± and k+ = k− =: ks . This condition indi-

5
cates that for a ribosome regardless of frames, either in the 0 or in ±1 frame, its forward translocation rate and
detachment/attachment rates are the same. Meanwhile, the rates of upstream and downstream frameshifting are also
equal.
At any time, only one of the three codons i, i+ and i− can be occupied by ribosome. Thus, if codon i is occupied
by one ribosome, then the codons i± will be empty. This phenomenon indicates that the ribosome at codon i always
has the possibility to frameshift and then translocate to either codon i− or codon i+. For convenience, Wi denotes
the probability that position i is unoccupied. One can show that (see Fig. 2),

 1 − q+ − q − q− − p ,
0 ≤ i ≤ N,
i
i
i
i
Wi =
+
−
 1 − q − qi − q ,
N + 1 ≤ i ≤ N + M.
i
i

(1)

The probabilities pi of finding ribosome with correctly synthesized peptide chain at codon i are governed by the
following equations:
dp0 /dt = −2ks p0 + αW0 − kE p0 W1 ,
dpi /dt

= −2ks pi + kE pi−1 Wi − kE pi Wi+1 − ωd pi ,

1 ≤ i ≤ N − 1,

(2)

dpN /dt = −2ks pN + kE pN −1 WN − βpN .
Similarly, the equations for probabilities qi± of finding ribosome at codon i± are as follows:
dq0± /dt = ks p0 − kE q0± W1 + ωa W0 − ωd q0± ,
±
dqi± /dt = ks pi + kE qi−1
Wi − kE qi± Wi+1 + ωa Wi − ωd qi± ,

1 ≤ i ≤ N,

dqi± /dt

N + 1 ≤ i ≤ N + M.

=

±
kE qi−1
Wi

−

kE qi± Wi+1

+ ωa Wi −

ωd qi± ,

(3)

Where WN +M+1 = 1. If M 6= 0 then the probabilities qi of finding ribosome at codon i but with incorrectly synthesized
peptide chain satisfy
dqi /dt

= kE qi−1 Wi − kE qi Wi+1 + ωa Wi − ωd qi ,

dqN /dt

= kE qN −1 WN − βqN ,

for 1 ≤ i ≤ N + M and i 6= N, N + 1,
(4)

dqN +1 /dt = −kE qN +1 WN +2 + ωa WN +1 − ωd qN +1 ,
and similar equations can be easily obtained for M = 0. With the values of probabilities pi , qi and qi± , the effective
rate of translation initiation can be obtained by αef f := α(1 − p0 − q0 − q0+ − q0− ), and the effective translation
rate, i.e. the rate of synthesizing correct peptide chains, can be obtained by βef f := βpN . The ratio of βef f to
αef f , r := βef f /αef f , is one index to describe the effectiveness of translation along given mRNA template. Without
ribosome frameshifting, attachment and detachment, the steady state value of r is equal to 1. For such simple cases,
each ribosome that successfully begins its translation process from the start codon will finally complete its translation
at the stop codon with one correctly synthesized peptide chain.

III.

RESULTS

To illustrate the modified TASEP used in this study for the description of ribosome translocation along mRNA with
frameshifting, typical examples of the probabilities pi , qi , qi± and their summation Pi = pi + qi + qi+ + qi− are plotted in
Fig. 3. Where Pi = 1 − Wi is the probability that site i is occupied by one ribosome. These examples indicate that,

6
from the viewpoint of total probability Pi of ribosome, the modified TASEP can be regarded as a combination of
two usual TASEPs for ribosome translocation along mRNA but without frameshifting. Where one involves ribosome
translocation from lattice site 0 to lattice site N , and the other involves for ribosome translocation from lattice site
N to lattice site N + M .
For TASEP without ribosome frameshifting, attachment or detachment, i.e., ks = ωa = ωd = 0, the theoretical
studies in [37, 38] show a total of three possible phases, namely, low ribosome density phase, high ribosome density
phase, and maximal current phase. The plots in Figs. 3(a-c) show that, such three phases also exist between lattice
site 0 and lattice site N in the modified TASEP. An example for maximal current cases is found in Fig. 3(a), in which
the total probability Pi is almost equals to 1/2 except for the sharp changes near sites 0 and N . The maximal current
phase occurs when both α and β are bigger than 1/2. In TASEP, the current is defined by J = kE Pi (1−Pi ). The plots
in Figs. 3(b) and 3(c) correspond to low and high density phases, respectively, with only sharp change at site N or site
0. For these special cases, considering the absence of ribosome frameshifting, attachment or detachment, probabilities
qi , qi± are equal to zero, and pi = Pi . The current j = KE pi (1 − pi ) of ribosome with correctly synthesized peptide
chain is conversed along the mRNA region between the start and stop codons. Thus the effectiveness r of translation
is equal to 1, and actually αef f and βef f are both equal to the current j = KE pi (1 − pi ) = kE Pi (1 − Pi ) = J.
For general TASEP, i.e., ωa , ωd 6= 0, previous studies have shown that domain wall (or shock wave) and sharp
changes at both or only one of the boundaries may exist [24, 25]. The examples plotted in Figs. 3(d-i) show that,
with frameshifting of ribosome, in the two regions [0, N ] and [N, N + M ], domain wall and sharp change of probability
at one or both of the two boundaries may be found. Meanwhile, the examples plotted in Fig. 3 show that, similar
to the total probability Pi , three different phases may also exist for probability pi (for the cases ωa = ωd = 0, see
Figs. 3(a-c)), domain wall and sharp change at boundaries may also exist (for general cases with nonzero attachment
and detachment rates, see Figs. 3(d-i)). In all these figures, the total probability Pi decreases suddenly at codon
N + 1 = 151. This phenomenon is due to the existence of the stop codon at site N = 150. Instead of moving
forward to codon N + 1 = 151, ribosomes at the stop codon will leave the mRNA template, and consequently the
total probability Pi at codon N + 1 = 151 will decrease rapidly.
For translation with ribosome frameshifting, the main properties that should be determined are the influences of
frameshifting on the rate of translation initiation αef f and the rate of synthesizing correct peptide chain βef f , as well
as their ratio r. Generally, shifted ribosomes, i.e., ribosomes in ±1 frame of mRNA, will not leave the mRNA from the
stop codon. The probability of establishing a ribosome at one codon, even if the codon is upstream of the stop codon
(i.e., its codon number is less than N ), may be influenced by the ribosome probabilities between the stop codon and
the 3’ end of the mRNA. Meanwhile, previous studies about usual TASEP show that ribosome probabilities between
sites N and N + M depend on the length M of the untranslated mRNA region [26]. Thus, the ribosome probability
at any mRNA codon may also depend on parameter M , and consequently, any properties of the modified TASEP
model for translation with ribosome frameshifting obtained from the probabilities pi , qi , and qi± may be parameter
M -dependent. Considering the lack of experimental measured values for parameter M , one strategy used in this study
is the selection of a sufficiently large value of M , such that all the interested properties of translation, especially the
effective initiation rate αef f and termination rate βef f , reach their steady values. Or in other words, αef f and βef f
will not change with further increase in parameter M , i.e., the length M of the 3’ untranslated mRNA region is large
enough to have as little influence as possible to the ribosome translocation in the translated region. The numerical

7
calculations show that, for the parameter values used in this study, the selection of one value of M that is larger than
20 is sufficient (Fig. S1 in [39]). In Fig. 3, M = 50 is used, and in Figs. 4-6, M = 25 is used.
Without frameshifting, attachment, or detachment, ribosomes initiate their translations from the mRNA start
codon and terminate their translations at the stop codon with correctly synthesized peptide chains. On the contrary,
with frameshifting, attachment, and detachment, ribosomes may begin/end their translations at any mRNA codon.
However, only ribosomes that initiate their translations from the start codon and leave the mRNA from the stop codon
synthesize correct peptide chains. Thus, the synthesizing rate of correct peptide chain, which is called the effective
translation rate βef f := βpN , will be less than the effective translation initiation rate αef f := α(1 − p0 − q0 − q0+ − q0+ ).
Their ratio r := βef f /αef f will be one important biophysical index to describe the effectiveness of gene translation.
In Fig. 4, the effective translation initiation rate αef f , effective translation speed βef f , and their ratio r = βef f /αef f
are plotted with the change in translation initiation rate α. The plots in Figs. 4(a,b) show that, without frameshifting
ks = 0, both αef f and βef f increase with α. By contrast, for nonzero attachment rate ωa , rates αef f and βef f will
reach their up limits rapidly. Given that the new ribosome attachment will quicken the saturation of the ribosome on
the mRNA. Fig. 4(c) shows that, if ωd = 0, then the ratio r = βef f /αef f is equal to 1. In such cases, all ribosomes
that begin their translations from the start codon will finally end their translations at the stop codon. Generally,
r < 1 holds, and r decreases with initiation rate α and finally tends to one low limit value. For ks > 0, i.e., translation
with ribosome frameshifting, the plots in Fig. 4(d) indicate that the effective translation initiation rate αef f increases
also with α, while the plots in Fig. 4(e) show that the effective translation rate βef f increases first and then decreases
with rate α. The reason that βef f decreases with large values of α is that for large α, the probability of finding a
ribosome with incorrect peptide chain will increase, so the translocation speed of ribosome with correct peptide chain
will decrease because of the block of ribosome with incorrect peptide chain. Finally, the plots in Fig. 4(f ) indicate
that for ks > 0, the ratio r will always be less than 1 and decreases with translation initiation rate α. The plots in Fig.
4 show that the main differences that resulted from ribosome frameshifting are as follows: the effective translation rate
βef f may decrease with translation initiation rate α (see Fig. 4(b,e)), and the effectiveness r of translation decreases
much rapidly with rate α (see Fig. 4(c,f)).
Meanwhile, the plots in Figs. 5(a-c) show that αef f , βef f , and their ratio r increase with the translation termination
rate β, and tend to corresponding limit constants with large β. These results imply that, with high leaving rate β
of ribosome from the stop codon, more correct peptide chains is synthesized, and the effective initiation rate also
increases. Given the increase in leaving rate β but fixed rates of frameshifting and detachment, ribosomes with
correct peptide chain rapidly translocate along the mRNA template and have less chance to frameshift or detach from
the mRNA before they reach the stop codon. On the contrary, the plots in Figs. 5(e,f ) indicate that, both βef f
and ratio r decrease with the rate ks of frameshifting. Considering large rate ks , ribosomes will have less chance to
complete their translation processes correctly, but have more chances to frameshift. Figs. 6(b,c) show that, βef f
and ratio r also decrease with ribosome attachment rate ωa . With the increase in attachment rate ωa , the mRNA
template is bound by more ribosomes with incorrect peptide chains, and then the translocation speed of ribosome
with correct peptide chain is reduced. Thus, ribosomes with correct peptide chains translocate along the mRNA with
lower speed and then have more chances to detach from the mRNA or frameshift before they reach the stop codon.
The plots in Fig. 6(e) show that βef f may not change monotonically with the ribosome detachment rate ωd . When
the detachment rate ωd is small, the increase in the rate ωd may help decrease the overall ribosome density along the

8
mRNA, and consequently, increase the translocation speed of ribosomes with correct peptide chain. For large values
of ωd , the detachment rate of ribosome with correct peptide chain may increase rapidly, and then the synthesizing
rate of correct peptide chain will decrease. This phenomenon implies that, one optimal ribosome detachment rate ωd
may exist, with which the synthesizing rate of correct peptide chain reaches its maximum.
The plots in Figs. 5(d), Fig. 6(a,d) show that the effective initiation rate αef f increases with the rate ks
of frameshifting and the rate ωd of detachment, but decreases with the attachment rate ωa . With large detachment/attachment rate, the start mRNA codon has more chances to be unoccupied/occupied, therefore αef f is enlarged/reduced correspondingly. Fig. 5(d) also shows that with large values of frameshifting rate ks , the effective
initiation rate αef f tends to approach one limit constant. With large frameshifting rate ks , the entrance rate of
ribosome to mRNA is only determined by the detachment rate ωd , the attachment rate ωa , and the termination rate
β. The overall density of the ribosome along the mRNA, with either correct peptide chain or incorrect peptide chain,
is completely determined by ωa , ωd , α, and β, see [23–25]. The plots in Fig. 6 show that, although the translation
effectiveness r always decreases with attachment rate ωa and detachment ωd , for some special cases the effective
(correct) translation rate βef f may increase by increasing the ribosome detachment rate ωd , see Fig. 6(e). Therefore,
detachment maybe one possible mechanism used by cells to increase the synthesizing rate of needed peptide chains.

IV.

CONCLUSIONS

Recent experiments found that, during translation, ribosome may frameshift along the mRNA, and the reasons of
frameshifting have been experimentally studied thoroughly [8–15, 17–20, 22, 40]. However, so far, no theoretical model
has been designed to describe the gene translation process with ribosome frameshifting, especially the influence of
frameshifting on translation, such as the effective translation rate and the efficiency (or effectiveness) of translation.
In this study, a modified TASEP model is presented to describe the translation process with possible ribosome
frameshifting. Similar to the usual translation process, i.e., translation without ribosome frameshifting, the probability
density of ribosome along the mRNA template may have shock wave (or domain wall) and boundary layers. The
effective translation rate, i.e., the rate of synthesizing correct peptide chain, increases with the translation termination
rate β, and decreases with the rate of frameshifting ks , but may not change monotonically with the translation
initiation rate α. Meanwhile, the translation effectiveness, which is defined as the ratio of effective synthesizing rate of
correct peptide chain to the effective initiation rate of translation, increases with the termination rate, but decreases
with initiation rate and the frameshifting rate of ribosome. At the same time, the influences of attachment/detachment
of ribosomes to/from the main body of mRNA were also discussed. The results will be beneficial for the understandings
of actual translation processes in cells, and the model presented may also be useful for the prediction of translation
rate with reasonable chosen parameters.

Acknowledgments

This study was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11271083), and the National
Basic Research Program of China (National “973” program, project No. 2011CBA00804).

9

[1] Anton A. Turanov, Alexey V. Lobanov, Dmitri E. Fomenko, Hilary G. Morrison, Mitchell L. Sogin, Lawrence A. Klobutcher,
Dolph L. Hatfield, and Vadim N. Gladyshev. Genetic code supports targeted insertion of two amino acids by one codon.
Science, 323(5911):259–261, January 2009.
[2] Julien Racle, Flora Picard, Laurence Girbal, Muriel Cocaign-Bousquet, and Vassily Hatzimanikatis. A genome-scale
integration and analysis of lactococcus lactis translation data. PLOS Computational Biology, 9(10), October 2013.
[3] J. Shine and L. Dalgarno. The 3’-terminal sequence of Escherichia coli 16s ribosomal RNA: Complementarity to nonsense
triplets and ribosome binding sites. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
71(4):1342–1346, April 1974.
[4] A. P. Czernilofskya, C. G. Kurlanda, and G. Stöfflerb. 30s ribosomal proteins associated with the 3’-terminus of 16s RNA.
FEBS Letters, 58(1):281–284, October 1975.
[5] Gulnara Zh. Yusupova, Marat M. Yusupov, J. H. D. Cate, and Harry F. Noller. The path of messenger RNA through the
ribosome. Cell, 106(2):233–241, July 2001.
[6] Andrei Korostelev and Harry F. Noller. The ribosome in focus: new structures bring new insights. Trends in Biochemical
Sciences, 32(9):434–441, September 2007.
[7] Mélodie Duval, Alexey Korepanov, Olivier Fuchsbauer, Pierre Fechter, Andrea Haller, Attilio Fabbretti, Laurence Choulier,
Ronald Micura, Bruno P. Klaholz, Pascale Romby, Mathias Springer, and Stefano Marzi. Escherichia coli ribosomal protein
S1 unfolds structured mRNAs onto the ribosome for active translation initiation. PLOS Biology, 11(12), December 2013.
[8] John F. Atkins and Raymond F. Gesteland, editors. Recoding: Expansion of Decoding Rules Enriches Gene Expression,
volume 24 of Nucleic Acids and Molecular Biology. Heidelberg: Springer, New York, 2010.
[9] Jin Chen, Alexey Petrov, Magnus Johansson, Albert Tsai, Seán E. O’Leary, and Joseph D. Puglisi. Dynamic pathways of
−1 translational frameshifting. Nature, page to appear, 2014.
[10] Bente Larsen, Norma M. Wills, Raymond F. Gesteland, and John F. Atkins. rRNA-mRNA base pairing stimulates a
programmed −1 ribosomal frameshift. Journal of Bacteriology, 176(22):6842–6851, November 1994.
[11] Bente Larsen, Raymond F. Gesteland, and John F. Atkins. Structural probing and mutagenic analysis of the stem-loop
required for Escherichia coli dnaX ribosomal frameshifting: programmed efficiency of 50%. Journal of Molecular Biology,
271(1):47–60, August 1997.
[12] Ignacio Tinoco Jr., Hee-Kyung Kim, and Shannon Yan. Frameshifting dynamics. Biopolymers, 99(12):1147–1166, December
2013.
[13] Ewan P. Plant, Kristi L. Muldoon Jacobs, Jason W. Harger, Arturas Meskauskas, Jonathan L. Jacobs, Jennifer L. Baxter,
Alexey N. Petrov, and Jonathan D. Dinman. The 9-Å solution: how mRNA pseudoknots promote efficient programmed
−1 ribosomal frameshifting. RNA, 9(2):168–174, February 2003.
[14] Pavel V. Baranov, Raymond F. Gesteland, and John F. Atkins. P-site tRNA is a crucial initiator of ribosomal frameshifting.
RNA, 10(2):221–230, February 2004.
[15] Julie A. Horsfield, Daniel N. Wilson, Sally A. Mannering, Frances M. Adamski, and Warren P. Tate. Prokaryotic ribosomes
recode the HIV-1 gag-pol−1 frameshift sequence by an E/P site post-translocation simultaneous slippage mechanism.
Nucleic Acids Research, 23(9):1487–1494, 1995.
[16] John D. Lopinski, Jonathan D. Dinman, and Jeremy A. Bruenn. Kinetics of ribosomal pausing during programmed −1
translational frameshifting. Molecular and Cellular Biology, 20(4):1095–1103, February 2000.
[17] Tyler Jacks, Hiten D. Madhani, Frank R. Masiarz, and Harold E. Varmus. Signals for ribosomal frameshifting in the rous
sarcoma virus gag-pol region. Cell, 55(3):447–458, November 1988.

10
[18] Olivier Namy, Stephen J. Moran, David I. Stuart, Robert J. C. Gilbert, and Ian Brierley. A mechanical explanation of
RNA pseudoknot functionin programmed ribosomal frameshifting. Nature, 441(7090):244–247, May 2006.
[19] R. B. Weiss, D. M. Dunn, M. Shuh, J. F. Atkins, and R. F. Gesteland. E. coli ribosomes re-phase on retroviral frameshift
signals at rates ranging from 2 to 50 percent. The New Biologist, 1(2):159–169, December 1989.
[20] Mélissa Léger, Dominic Dulude, Sergey V. Steinberg, and Léa Brakier-Gingras. The three transfer RNAs occupying the
A, P and E sites on the ribosome are involved in viral programmed −1 ribosomal frameshift. Nucleic Acids Research,
35(16):5581–5592, 2007.
[21] Tatsuya Maehigashi, Jack A. Dunkle, Stacey J. Miles, and Christine M. Dunham. Structural insights into +1 frameshifting
promoted by expanded or modification-deficient anticodon stem loops. Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences
of the United States of America, August 2014.
[22] Ashton Trey Belew, Arturas Meskauskas, Sharmishtha Musalgaonkar, Vivek M. Advani, Sergey O. Sulima, Wojciech K.
Kasprzak, Bruce A. Shapiro, and Jonathan D. Dinman. Ribosomal frameshifting in the CCR5 mRNA is regulated by
miRNAs and the NMD pathway. Nature, 512(7514):265–269, August 2014.
[23] B. Derrida, S. A. Janowsky, J. L. Lebowitz, and E. R. Speer. Exact solution of the totally asymmetric simple exclusion
process: Shock profiles. Journal of Statistical Physics, 73:813–842, 1993.
[24] A. Parmeggiani, T. Franosch, and E. Frey. Phase coexistence in driven one-dimensional transport. Physical Review Letters,
90:086601, 2003.
[25] Yunxin Zhang. Domain wall of the totally asymmetric exclusion process without particle number conservation. Chinese
Journal of Physics, 48:607–618, 2010.
[26] Yunxin Zhang. Microtubule length dependence of motor traffic in cells. Eur. Phys. J. E, 35:101, 2012.
[27] Joachim Krug. Boundary-induced phase transitions in driven diffusive systems. Phys. Rev. Lett., 67:1882–1885, 1991.
[28] A. Kolomeisky, G.M. Schutz, E.B. Kolomeisky, and J.P. Straley. Phase diagram of one-dimensional driven lattice gases
with open boundaries. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen., 31:6911–6919, 1998.
[29] Gunter M Schütz. Critical phenomena and universal dynamics in one-dimensional driven diffusive systems with two species
of particles. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen., 36:R339–R379, 2003.
[30] R. Lipowsky, Y. Chai, S. Klumpp, S. Liepelt, and M. J. I. Muller. Molecular motor traffic: From biological nanomachines
to macroscopic transport. Physica A, 372:34–51, 2006.
[31] Adélaı̈de Raguin, Andrea Parmeggiani, , and Norbert Kern. Role of network junctions for the totally asymmetric simple
exclusion process. Physical Review E, 88:042104, 2013.
[32] V. Popkov, J. Schmidt, and G. M. Schütz. Superdiffusive modes in two-species driven diffusive systems. Physical Review
Letters, 112:200602, 2013.
[33] Paul C. Bressloff and Jay M. Newby. Stochastic models of intracellular transport. Reviews Of Modern Physics, 85:135–196,
2013.
[34] Yunxin Zhang. Periodic one-dimensional hopping model with transitions between nonadjacent states. Phys. Rev. E,
84:031104, 2011.
[35] Yunxin Zhang. Theoretical analysis of kinesin KIF1A transport along microtubule. J. Stat. Phys., 152:1207C1221, 2013.
[36] Arvind Kumar Gupta and Isha Dhiman. Asymmetric coupling in two-lane simple exclusion processes with langmuir
kinetics: Phase diagrams and boundary layers. Physical Review Letters, 89:022131, 2014.
[37] G. Schutz and E. Domany. Phase transitions in an exactly soluble one-dimensional exclusion process. Journal of Statistical
Physics, 72:277–296, 1993.
[38] B. Derrida, M.R. Evans, V. Hakim, and V. Pasquier. Exact solution of a 1d asymmetric exclusion model using a matrix
formulation. J. Phys A: Math. Gen., 26:1493–1517, 1993.
[39] The supplementary material including one figure is available at {URL to be provided}.

11
[40] Pulkit Gupta, Krishna Kannan, Alexander S. Mankin, and Nora Vázquez-Laslop. Regulation of gene expression by
macrolide-induced ribosomal frameshifting. Molecular cell, 52(5):629–642, December 2013.

12
figures

α

β

ks

ωa

ωd

Fig. 3(a) 0.8 0.8

0

0

0

Fig. 3(b) 0.2 0.2

0

0

0

Fig. 3(c) 0.9 0.1

0

0

0

Fig. 3(d) 0.9 0.1 0.001 0.001 0.001
Fig. 3(e) 0.1 0.1 0.001 0.001 0.001
Fig. 3(f ) 0.9 0.9 0.001 0.001 0.001
Fig. 3(g) 0.1 0.9 0.001 0.001 0.001
Fig. 3(h) 0.3 0.1 0.001 0.001 0.001
Fig. 3(i) 0.3 0.7 0.001 0.001 0.001
TABLE I: Parameter values used in Fig. 3. In all calculations, N = 150, M = 50 and kE = 1 are used.

figures

Fig. 4(a,b,c)

Fig. 4(d,e,f )

Fig. 5(a,b,c)

Fig. 5(d,e,f )

Fig. 6(a,b,c)

Fig. 6(d,e,f )

label α

β

ks

ωa

ωd

-

1

0

0

0

×

1

0

0.001

0

+

1

0

0

0.001

◦

1

0

-

1

0.01

0

0

×

0.05 0.007

0

0

+

0.01 0.004

0

0

◦

0.01 0.003

0

0

0.001 0.001

-

1

×

1

0

+

1

0

-

1

1

0.001

0

×

0.1

1

0

0.001

+

1

0.1

0.001 0.001

◦

1

1

0.001 0.001

-

1

0.1

0

0

×

0.1

1

0

0

+

1

0.1

0

0.001

◦

1

0.1

0

0.01

0.1 0.1

0

0

0

0

-

0.001 0.001
0

0.001

0.001 0.001

×

1

0.1

+

1

0.1 0.001 0.001

◦

1

1

0

0.001 0.001

TABLE II: Parameter values used in Figs. 4, 5, and 6. Other parameter values used in the calculations are N = 150, M = 25
and kE = 1.

13

FIG. 1: (a) Normal translation process, in which the ribosome is always bound in the 0 frame of the mRNA. With one forward
hopping of ribosome, a new amino acid carried by tRNA is added to the tail of peptide chain. (b) Incorrect translation, in
which ribosome is bound in the −1 frame of mRNA. Compared with the normal ribosome in (a), the ribosome in (b) shifts
one nucleic acid upstream along the mRNA (see the long vertical lines as reference position.)

14

FIG. 2: Modified TASEP to describe translation with ribosome frameshifting. The initiation of translation begins with the
entrance of ribosome to the start codon, which corresponds to the left boundary of the lattice with site index 0. In any mRNA
codon i (lattice site i), ribosomes may have four possible states. pi in (a) is the probability of the existence of a ribosome at
codon i with a correctly synthesized peptide chain, while qi± are the probabilities of the presence of a ribosome at codon i of
mRNA in ±1 frame. Given that ribosomes may bind to any mRNA codon, the peptide chain produced by a ribosome in 0
frame may not be correct. For example, the ribosome at codon i may begin its translation from codon 1 ≤ j ≤ i. Thus, the
peptide chain synthesized by it is also incorrect. The probability of the existence of such a ribosome at codon i is denoted
by qi , see (b). Ribosomes in the 0 frame will leave mRNA from the stop codon [the codon N at the right boundary of the
middle lattice line in (a)]. Generally, ribosomes in ±1 frame will not stop their translation processes until they reach the 3’
end of mRNA. M denotes the number of mRNA codons between the stop codon and 3’ end of mRNA. In the figures, α is
the initiation rate of translation, β is the termination rate of translation, and ωa and ωd are the attachment and detachment
rates of a ribosome to and from mRNA, respectively. The elongation rate is denoted by kE , which is assumed to be the same
for ribosomes in any mRNA frame and at any codon. Finally, the rate of frameshifting, to either +1 frame or −1 frame, is
assumed to be the same and denoted by ks .

15

FIG. 3: Typical examples of probabilities pi , qi , qi± and their summation Pi = pi + qi + qi+ + qi+ of ribosome along one mRNA
with length N + M = 150 + 50 (see Fig. 2 for meanings of N, M and the corresponding probabilities.) The parameter values
used in these plots are listed in Tab. I. Roughly speaking, ribosome translocation along the mRNA with frameshifting consists
of two TASEPs, which are jointed at lattice site N . In (a,b,c), ωa = ωd = 0, i.e., except at the start codon and stop codon,
attachment and detachment of ribosome are not allowed. The legend given in (c) is right for all these nine figures.

16

FIG. 4: The effective translation initiation rate αef f := α(1 − p0 − q0 − q0+ − q0− ) (a,d), effective (or correct) translation
termination rate βef f := βpN (b,e), and their ratio r := βef f /αef f (c,f ), as functions of the translation initiation rate α. In
each figure, four typical examples are plotted, which are drawn by ‘-’, ‘×’, ‘+’ and ‘◦’, respectively. I calculations, the initiation
rate α changes from 0.01 to 0.5 with an increment of 0.01. The values of other parameters are listed in Table II. The main
difference between (a,b,c) and (d,e,f ) is that no frameshifting is allowed in (a,b,c), i.e. ks = 0, while in (d,e,f ) ribosomes
have nonzero frameshifting rate, i.e., ks > 0.

17

FIG. 5: The effective translation initiation rate αef f (a,d), effective (or correct) translation termination rate βef f (b,e),
and their ratio r := βef f /αef f (c,f ), as functions of the translation termination rate β (a,b,c), and the rate of ribosome
frameshifting ks (d,e,f ), where β changes from 0.01 to 0.5 with an increment of 0.01, and ks changes from 0 to 0.01 with an
increment of 0.002. See Table II for other parameter values.

18

FIG. 6: The effective translation initiation rate αef f (a,d), the effective (or correct) translation termination rate βef f (b,e),
and their ratio r := βef f /αef f (c,f ), as functions of the ribosome attachment rate ωa (a,b,c), and the ribosome detachment
rate ωd (d,e,f ), where ωa and ωd change from 0 to 0.01 with an increment of 0.002. See Table II for other parameter values.

