Critical dynamics of gene networks is a mechanism behind ageing and Gompertz law
D. Podolskiy1 , I. Molodtcov2,3 , A. Zenin3 , V. Kogan2,3 , L. I.
Menshikov3 , Robert J. Shmookler Reis4,5,6 & P. O. Fedichev2,3
1)

arXiv:1502.04307v1 [q-bio.MN] 15 Feb 2015

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
2)
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 141700,
Institutskii per. 9, Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region, Russian Federation,
3)
Quantum Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Ul. Kosmonavta Volkova 6A-1205, 125171, Moscow, Russian Federation,
4)
McClellan VA Medical Center, Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System, Little Rock, AR, USA
5)
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA and
6)
Department of Geriatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA
Although it has long been suggested that accumulation of errors in transcription and translation
is one of the most important molecular mechanisms leading to ageing, a quantitative link between
the error accumulation dynamics and mortality of species has so far remained elusive. We study
stability properties of a generic gene regulatory network (GRN) and demonstrate that phenomenology of ageing and the associated population mortality rate can be naturally described in terms of
critical dynamics of gene regulation and metabolic profiles. We analyze age-dependent microarray
datasets and metabolic profiles for Drosophila melanogaster and explicitly show that the resulting
GRNs are nearly critical and inherently unstable. This instability manifests itself as ageing in the
form of exponential distortions of gene expressions and metabolic profiles with age, and causes the
characteristic increase in mortality rate with age as described by the Gompertz law. On top of
that we explain the plateau in mortality rates observed at very late ages for large populations. We
show that ageing contains both a stochastic component, related to regulatory error accumulation in
transcription/translation/metabolic pathways, and a strong deterministic component, which can be
naturally associated with a part of a development programme. We conclude on this basis that two
opposing hypotheses of ageing, error accumulation and programmed ageing are in fact compatible
with each other. Since mortality in humans, where it is characterized best, is mostly associated with
age related diseases, we support the idea of ageing being the driving force behind the development
of major diseases.

INTRODUCTION

Ageing is a complicated interplay of different processes
in a living matter. The processes influenced by and affecting ageing take place at every possible scale characterizing the living organism, ranging from a single cell level
(e.g., oxidative damage to cells, or somatic mutations)
to the level of interaction between different body organs
(e.g., failure of individual organs with age or accumulation of dangerous byproducts of metabolic activity such
as arterial plaque). This is why it has been notoriously
difficult to pinpoint the ultimate cause, a single molecular mechanism behind ageing and relate it to such lifelong consequences as progression of chronic age-related
diseases and, ultimately, mortality. As a consequence, a
wide spectrum of propositions on the origin of ageing has
emerged over the years such as the hypothesis of damage accumulation [1–4], the hyperfunction theory [5, 6],
the disposable soma hypothesis [7, 8] and antagonistic
pleiotropy [9]. Since the theories of ageing, often very
different from each other in both spirit and letter, reflect
upon different “facets” of ageing [10], it is not always possible to see their mutual inconsistencies and compatibilities. In particular, there seems to exist a major collision
between theories that view ageing as a pre-programmed
process [5, 6, 11–13] or a stochastic process associated
with damage/error accumulation [1–4]. We shall argue
here that these two ideas are in fact fully compatible

with each other.
The argument is based on the hypothesis suggested
nearly 40 years ago by Leslie Orgel [14] (see also [15, 16]),
that one of the molecular-level processes responsible
for ageing is the accumulation of translation and transcription errors in cells, exceeding the ability of cellular
damage-response pathways to repair. Recently we have
performed a semi-quantitative study of a generic GRN
stability and suggested a causal relation between the accumulation of the regulatory errors, mortality increase
and ageing [17]. However, the underlying mechanistic
level details of the interplay between the dynamics of error accumulation in transcription/translation/metabolic
processes and the increase in mortality rates has not yet
been clearly established.
To identify such a link, we develop a theory of stochastic critical dynamics of GRN and show, that under very
generic assumptions, GRNs of most species are inherently unstable. Applying the method of proper orthogonal decomposition common in “Big Data” analysis [18]
to the publicly available age-variable transcriptome and
metabolome datasets for Drosophila melanogaster [19,
20], we demonstrate explicitly, that the auto-correlation
functions of transcriptional and metabolic datasets for
D. melanogaster exhibit stochastic exponential instability with a characteristic time scale, tα , which is of the
same order as mortality rate doubling time tMRDT of
D. melanogaster. We provide explicit solutions for the

2
stochastic ageing dynamics of realistic GRNs, obtain expressions for age-dependent mortality increase. We argue
that the two time scales, tα and tMRDT , should coincide
for any other species subject to Gompertz mortality law.
Therefore we are able to causally relate the GRN instability to the characteristic Gompertzian increase of mortality rate in populations. The exponential increase of
mortality eventually slows down and the mortality rate is
expected to approach a plateau, M (t & tls ) ∼ 1/tMRDT ,
at late ages, where tls is the mean lifespan of the species.
The result should be valid for sufficiently long lived animals, tls  tα and appears to be new. The prediction is confirmed by our analysis of the transcriptomes,
metabolomes and mortality curves for populations of D.
melanogaster on sugar-rich diets and mortality curves for
very large cohorts of medflies [21]. We establish specific metabolites and genes as be biomarkers of ageing
in D. melanogaster, the respective human orthologs, and
provide their associations with genes and pathways commonly related to the major diseases of elders.
We show that the dynamics of ageing, as manifested
in transcriptional and metabolic profiles, contains both
a stochastic component, related to regulatory error accumulation in transcription/translation/metabolic pathways, and a strong deterministic component, which can
be naturally associated with a development programme
and leads to ageing in a form of hyperfunction. We conclude on this basis that the error accumulation and the
programmed ageing hypotheses may, in fact, be compatible with each other. We show the presented model may
serve to embrace most of the known features of the ageing
processes and hence can emerge as a novel and universal
way for quantitative ageing characterization. We believe
that the theoretical ideas presented in the Letter be useful in identification of biomarkers and, after a proper development, mechanistic level processes regulating ageing
in any sufficiently long lived organisms.

RESULTS
Age-associated stochastic dynamics of
transcriptional and metabolic profiles. Quantitative
model of ageing

In this Section we first explain the theoretical basis for
our quantitative analysis of transcriptional and metabolic
profile changes with age and construct the quantitative
model of ageing. We consider the case of a gene regulatory network (GRN in what follows) described by a
generic set of non-linear matrix
 equations of systems biology, f x, dx/dt, d2 x/dt2 , ... = F . Here f is a vector function of any number of quantities representing the
state of the system, x, and its time derivatives, which
characterizes the interactions between different components of x, and the vector F describes the action of mostly
stochastic external or endogenous stress factors affecting
the gene expression levels. If, for example, the state vec-

tor x consists of the gene expression levels only, as in e.g.
[19], the functions f may be thought as encoding pathways, which the given genes contribute to. The vector
F may depend on time, t: F (t) = F0 + δF (t), where F0
and δF represent the mean stress and the fluctuations of
stress levels, respectively. In addition to gene expression
levels, the state vector x may include other descriptors,
[19], such as levels of metabolites [20] or methylation levels on CpG sites [22]. As the system state vector x is
not observable in its entirety, we presume that any sufficiently large part of it captures a sufficient amount of
information about the biological system state (and the
dynamics of ageing).
Over long times, gene expression levels typically fluctuate near certain, relatively slowly changing, mean values,
corresponding to the homeostatic state of an organism.
Therefore, we assume that there always exists a quasistationary point x0 (homeostasis of the organism), given
by the solution of the stationary equation f (x0 ) = F0 . As
a result, the slow dynamics of the fluctuations of the gene
expression levels, δx = x − x0 , follows in its leading order
thе matrix stochastic equation of a linear (continuumlimit) Markov chain:
Dδ ẋ + Kδx = δF,

(1)

where the matrices D and K correspondingly describe
the dynamical relaxation properties of the gene expression levels and the interactions between the components
of the gene regulatory network (see Supplementary Information, Section A for the in-depth derivation of Eq.
(1)).
It has been previously suggested that in most species
GRNs operate close to a stability-instability or orderdisorder bifurcation [23, 24]. The transition from stability to instability in networks with network graphs
not possessing specific symmetries is typically associated
with existence of co-dimension 1 bifurcations [25, 26].
Such transitions are characterized by the loss of stability
along a single principal component of the network state
vector, while contributions from all other principal components remain stable. This situation, known in the literature as a saddle-node bifurcation [25], is realized when
the lowest (real) eigenvalue, , of the regulatory network
matrix K reaches zero,  → 0, and then becomes negative. Accordingly, the stationary solution for x0 ceases to
exist, and the homeostatic state of the organism starts to
change in time. As we shall argue, this very instability
may be directly responsible for the process of ageing.
As explained in Supplementary Information A, close
to the co-dimension 1 bifurcation point the dynamics of
the gene expression levels δx becomes critical. This implies that fluctuations of the expressome δx are strongly
amplified with age, the phenomenon known as critical
slowing-down, see e.g. [27]. In particular, the autocorrelation time scale tauto = (aT · Db)/ of the expressome
diverges at  → 0, implying that stochastic dynamics
of δx becomes very slow near the point of bifurcation.
The fluctuations of the expressome state vector δx in-

3

B

A
α>0

2

α<0

V(z)

z2i , arbitrary units

1.5

transcriptome, i=1
transcriptome, i=2
metabolome, i=1
metabolome, i=2

1

0.5

0
z

0

20

40
age,days

60

80

Figure 1: (A) Schematic representation of the stochastic dynamics in the effective potential V (z) corresponding to
2
the cases of stable (α > 0) and unstable (α < 0) GRNs, see Eq. (2). (B) Age dependence of the variance, E(z1,2
),
T
z1,2 = (δx · b1,2 ), i = 1, 2, of the expressome state projections onto the first two principle component vectors b1,2 as
functions of age (gene expressions from [19], red, and metabolites levels from [20], blue). Here E(...) stands for the
average over the biological repeats; (aT · b) denotes a scalar product of two vectors a and b.

cluding those created in response to persistent external
stress are mostly amplified along the direction b of the
right eigenvector of K corresponding to the vanishing
eigenvalue [28]. This, in turn, guarantees, that over very
long times comparable to the average lifespan the gene
expression dynamics is dominated by the single principal component collinear with the direction of the vector
b. We conclude that the fluctuations of the GRN state
vector δx evolving over long intervals of time can be accurately described with the help of a single variable z,
such that δx ≈ z · b. Accordingly, Eq. (1) can be reduced
to the equation
dz
∂V (z)
+
= f,
dt
∂z

(2)

describing the Brownian motion of a particle in an effective potential V (z) ≈ −αz 2 /2, where the quantity
α = −/(aT · Db) characterizes the “stiffness” of the
gene regulatory network. The stochastic force, f =
(aT ·δF )/(aT ·Db), is a single unified quantitative measure
of all external and endogenous “genotoxic” stress, and is
characterized by the diffusion coefficient ∆ (see Supplementary Information A for the in-depth derivation and
discussion).
Depending on the specific morphological properties of
the gene regulatory network, the curvature of V (z) at

small z can be negative, α < 0, or positive, α > 0, as
shown on Figure 1A. In the latter case, the GRN is inherently unstable, and the variance of the gene expression levels, C(t), computed using the solutions of Eq. (2)
grows exponentially with age as
C(t) = E(δx(t)δxT (t)) ≈ E(δx20 )b · bT exp(2αt).

(3)

The expression (3) is fully consistent with earlier observation of increasing biological variability with age [29, 30].
Criticality of the dynamics of gene expression levels
implies that the parameter α is small and hence the covariance matrix C(t) of the expressome should be very
singular. The right eigenvector of the covariance matrix
corresponding to its largest eigenvalue coincides in this
case with the right eigenvector b of the matrix K corresponding to vanishing eigenvalue  → 0 (see Supplementary Information, Section A).
These conclusions are supported by Principal Components Analysis (PCA) of the age-dependent shifts of
RNA transcript and metabolite levels in D. melanogaster
from [19] and [20], respectively. The covariance matrices
computed from such datasets are indeed very singular,
see Supplementary Information, Figure 4. This means
that the dynamics of the state vector δx is dominated by
the variance along the first principal component, z ≡ z1 ,

4

B

z2, arbitrary units

2

0.1

1

z1

−2

10

0
bi

−2

10

CG32950
Drs
PebIII

mortality rate, days−1

0.2

desat1
MtnA

0

10

mortality rate

CG15068
LvpH

0

10

Pepck
Fer2LCH
IM3

A

tls=26 days
−4

10

−4

0

20

40
age,days

60

−0.3
0

10
80

Vm34Ca

10000

i

D
0

−2

10

10

0.4
bi

−2

0
−0.2
tls=42 days
−4

10

0

−4

20

40
age,days

60

10
80

acetylcarnitine

0.2

−0.4
0

histidine

1

0.6

50

100
i

myristoylcarnitine

0.8

carnitine

z2, arbitrary units

z21

C32:1 PC
C36:2 PC

mortality rate, days−1

mortality rate

phosphocholine
propionylcarnitine

1

10

C30:1 PC
C32:2 PC
C34:2 PC
C50:1 TAG

0

10

alpha−glycerophosphocholine
arginine
betaine

C

5000

Cp15

Vm26Aa

−0.2

Cp18
Vm26Ab
Cp36
Ser4
Cp19
Cp16
Cp38

−0.1

150

200

Figure 2: Basic biological evidence for the presented stochastic model of ageing: (A) The mortality along with the
projection z of the system state vector, δx, represented by the transcriptomes of ageing D. melanogaster [19], onto
the singular direction b of the covariance matrix E(δx(t)δxT (t0 )) as a function of age. (B) Components of the vector
b for D. melanogaster, analysis of age-associated changes in transcriptional profiles only. Peaks correspond to the
values of the components of the vector b for every gene in the dataset. (C) The mortality and the projection z of the
system state vector δx, represented by the metabolomes of ageing D. malanogaster [20]; (D) Components of the
vector b for D. melanogaster, computed using the levels of targeted metabolites only [20].

5

pos

neg

egg coat formation
eggshell formation

cell wall organization or biogenesis
generation of precursor metabolites and
energy
ion transport
protein localization to endoplasmic
reticulum

Metabolome enrichment

mitochondrial electron transport chain
purine metabolism
protein biosynthesis
urea cycle
citric acid cycle
methionine metabolism
pyrimidine metabolism
glycerol phosphate shuttle
ammonia recycling
glutamate metabolism
rna transcription
betaine metabolism

hydrogen transport

transmembrane transport

B

10

C

organophosphate metabolic process

8

Oxidative phosphorylation

anatomical structure formation involved
in morphogenesis

7

Neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction

nucleoside monophosphate metabolic
process

6

Pyruvate metabolism

protein folding

5

Biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids

inorganic ion transmembrane transport

multi-organism process
mitochondrial electron transport,
cytochrome c to oxygen
response to inorganic substance

1.95
1.80
1.65
1.50
1.35
1.20
1.05

KEGG enrichment

9

extracellular structure organization

2.10

pos

neg

4
3

response to stress
oxidation-reduction process
organic acid metabolic process
reactive oxygen species metabolic
process
carbohydrate metabolic process
humoral immune response

D

-log10(p-value)

Transcript GO enrichment

11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2

-log10(p-value)

2%
4%
6%
8%
10%

A

Human orthologs KEGG enrichment

Parkinson's disease
Alzheimer's disease
Huntington's disease
Oxidative phosphorylation
Cardiac muscle contraction
Pyruvate metabolism
PPAR signaling pathway
Glycine, serine and threonine metabolism

pos neg
8.0
7.6
7.2
6.8
6.4

-log10(p-value)

Frequency

6.0
5.6

Figure 3: Biological characterization of the “leading direction of ageing” b in D. melanogaster : (A) Gene Ontologies
(Biological Process only) enrichment by the leading positive and negative components of the vector b computed
using the gene expressions; (B) Metabolite set enrichment for the leading components of the vector b computed
using the levels of targeted metabolites; (C) KEGG pathways enrichment by the gene sets representing the leading
components of b, corresponding to positively and negatively regulated genes; (D) KEGG pathways enrichment by
human orthologs of the ageing direction in fruit flies.

where PC1 = (δxT · b1 ), as described on Figure 1B. The
variance along P C1 grows exponentially with age, both
in metabolome and in the transcriptome, in accordance
with Eq. (3). The exponent, roughly inferred from each
of the datasets for ages less than the mean lifespan, appears to be nearly constant, which is an indication of the
same GRN instability observed in each of the measurements. For the sake of comparison, we have also plotted
projections of the gene expressions on the next principal

component, P C2 . It is easy to see that the transcriptome remains dynamically stable along P C2 , exactly as
expected from an unstable GRN near a co-dimension 1
saddle-node bifurcation, governed by Eq. (2). We thus
conclude that at the origin, z ≈ 0, the expressome state
corresponds to a healthy or a “youthful” state, while the
larger values of z phenotypically describe transcriptionally distorted states of aged animals. Accordingly, ageing manifests itself as a slow dynamics of gene expression

6
levels, a “simple” exponential roll-out along the singular,
or “ageing” direction b, from the younger animals to the
older ones. The singular “direction of ageing” b is associated with a response to a generic stress and determined
by the properties of the gene interactions only. Since, at
least within the model assumptions, the direction b does
not depend on the genotoxic stress factors and appears to
hard-coded in the genome, the development of an organism along “the direction of ageing” b may be said to be
governed by a gene-encoded program (or a quasi-program
[31–34]).

Gompertz mortality law and biological age.

To causally relate the GRN instability with the process of ageing we further assume, in a way consistent
with hyperfunction hypothesis [5], that for every gene in
the genome there exists a particular threshold Zi of its
expression, which is associated with a strong build-up of
toxicity in associated pathways, such as e.g., generation
of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS), and a subsequent inevitable death of a specimen. After the projecting of the
expressome δx on the leading principal component ∼ b
most information about the geometry of this “threshold
surface” is of course lost. Nevertheless it is reasonable
to assume that the death of an organism occurs once
the projection z = (bT · δx) reaches a certain threshold,
z = Z.
If the limiting toxicity occurs late in life, i.e. if
γ = αZ 2 /∆  1, the mortality grows exponentially at
intermediate ages, α−1 . t . tls (where tls is the average
lifespan in the population),
M ≈ 0.61αeα(t−tls ) ∼

∆ αt
e ,
Z2

(4)

which is, essentially a form of the Gompertz law[35]
(see Supplementary Information, Section Bfor the details of the derivation). Therefore the exponent α is
directly related to the Mortality Rate Doubling Time
(MRDT), tMRDT , by equation α = log(2)/tMRDT . In
turn, the Initial Mortality Rate (IMR), ΛIMR , is related
to the genotoxic stress levels, ΛIMR = ∆/Z 2 . Normally,
γ ∼ (α/ΛIMR ) is large, and therefore average lifespan,
E(tls ) ∼ α−1 log γ  α−1 , is also large compared to the
characteristic time tα ∼ α−1 associated with the gene
network instability. The lifespan thus depends strongly
on the morphological properties of the GRN, such as its
topology and connectivity, through the matrix K, and,
more specifically, through its lowest eigenvalue  ∼ α.
The dependence of species lifespan on the genotoxic stress
factors through the parameter ∆ is, on the contrary, logarithmically weak. This may explain why interventions
aimed at insulating a living system from stress, e.g. by
regulating the environmental temperature or by decreasing ROS levels alone, failed to dramatically improve lifespan [36].

Mortality in the form similar to Eq. (4) can be associated with the gene network instability in a simple phenomenological model, where both IMR and MRDT were
related to generic network parameters, such as translation, gene repair and protein turnover rates, along with
the genotoxic stress levels, whereas mortality was directly
associated with the increasing number of regulatory errors [17]. Therefore the expressome remodeling along the
ageing direction b can be related to the total unrepaired
damage accumulated over the lifespan of an organism.
As we show in Supplementary Information, the dynamics of gene expression levels δx in a strong “Gompertzian” limit, γ  1, proceeds along a well-defined
trajectory, corresponding to a continuation of the development program. This conclusion is entirely consistent
with the hyperfunction hypothesis [5] as a special case of
pre-programmed ageing. The “distance travelled” along
the ageing direction up to a date, z ∼ (δxT ·b), is, according to Eq. (4), directly related to mortality and hence by
itself is a good biomarker of mortality and ageing. These
observations pave the way to define a number of biological “clocks” using any number of variables characterizing
a GRN state. For example, Figures 2A & C demonstrate
the feasibility of a transcriptome- and metabolome- derived biological clock for D. melanogaster. Those clocks
in turn may be compared to the biomarkers of age and the
biological age calculator (biological clock) derived from a
regression model established using age-dependent DNAmethylation levels [22].

The association of GRN instability and the
mortality rate

Our analysis of D. melanogaster age-dependent transcriptional data indicates that the gene expression variance grows exponentially with the age in agreement with
Eq. (3), with α ≈ 19.1 yr−1 , as shown on Figure 2A. In
a similar fashion we have studied the composition of the
“direction of ageing” b in metabolome of D. melanogaster
[20] maintained on a sugar diet. The projection of the
metabolome state vector onto the singular direction b increases very quickly with age, along with the reported
mortality as shown on Figure 2C. The average lifespan
of D. melanogaster is about 25 and 40 days in both experiments, respectively, and in both cases the initial exponetial growth of the projection z 2 (t) ceases at t & tls ,
as predicted by the theory. Figure 1B represents a side
by side comparison of the variance computed from the
gene expression and the metabolomes datasets. The values of instability rates, α, recovered both ways are very
similar, and close to the value of the Gompertz exponent α = ln 2/tMRDT = 17.1 yr−1 corresponding to the
mortality rate doubling time tMRDT ≈ 0.04 yr [37].

7
Mortality rate slowdown at advanced ages

At more advanced ages, t & E(tle ), where tle is the
average lifespan in the population, solutions of Eq. (2)
exhibit deceleration of mortality. More specifically, as
shown in Supplementary Information, Section B 4 d, we
expect that the mortality rate ceases growing and saturates at a constant value, M∞ ∼ α. This quantitative
prediction can be compared with the experimental data
for medflies [21], where the cohort sizes were sufficient
to observe both the regime of exponentially increasing
mortality and the mortality plateau (see Supplementary
Information, Figure 7). For the male medflies we find the
asymptotic value M∞ ≈ 0.16 day−1 , which is close to the
Gompertz exponent α ≈ 0.22 day−1 , as expected. The
asymptotic value of the mortality rate for female medflies, M∞ ≈ 0.12 day−1 , is also of the right order of magnitude, though nearly two times smaller than the slope
of the mortality exponent α = 0.25 day−1 . Nevertheless,
we emphasize the existence of a strong correlation between the asymptotic value M∞ of the mortality rate at
late ages and the value of the Gompertz exponent α in
both cases and note that the approximate Eq. (4) works
better for longer living, or “Gompertzian”, ΛIMR  α,
organisms.

Genes-biomarkers of ageing in D. melanogaster

The “direction of ageing”, vector b, is similar but not
the same as differential expression (DE) vector in ageing
animals, since the latter may include a contribution of
faster modes represented by the eigenvectors of the GRN
connectivity matrix K corresponding to eigenvalues with
larger absolute value. The results of Gene Ontolology
(GO) analysis of the leading components of b vector are
summarized in Figure 3A, for Biological Process (BP)
categories only. A summary for Molecular Function (MF)
and Cellular Compartment (CC) categories enrichment
can be found on Supplementary Information Figures 9B
& C.
The genes, providing the most significant negative
contribution to the ageing direction, b, can be roughly
split into three groups. First, there is a large group of
genes related to metabolic processes: organophosphate
metabolism, generation of precursor metabolites and energy, membrane and mitochondria ion transport. A detailed review of the GO categories involved seem to indicate that most of the down- regulated processes are
related to oxidative phosphorylation or respiration (see
below). Another seemingly large group of genes involves
apparent remedies of developmental processes, such as
anatomical structure formation involved in morphogenesis and extracellular structure organization. Genes encoding eggshell formation, more specifically, egg coat formation, correspond to strongly negative components of
the vector b, which is a clear sign of the reproductive
senescence in female flies. Finally, we observe the decline

in protein folding capacity, along with an apparently related “unfolded protein binding” GO MF category.
As expected, the cluster of genes corresponding to the
strongest positive components of the vector b includes
genes associated with a generic stress response. Among
other leading components are genes corresponding to humoral immune response (well in line with the earlier
conclusions of [38]), and the components of oxidationreduction and reactive oxygen species metabolic processes. The latter may be over-expressed with age in
response to Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) accumulation. This over-expression may be occurring on par with
the decline of the metabolic processes. The carbohydrate metabolic processes activation may be another programmed defensive measure on the background of the oxidative phosphorylation decline (see below). This observation seems to be consistent with enrichment of KEGG
oxidative phosphorylation pathway by the negative leaders of the ageing direction, see Figure 3C.
A few transcription factors (TF) expression shifts are
strongly associated with ageing. The top positively associated gene, hairy, is a transcriptional suppressor, and
believed to be a metabolic switch, found up-regulated
in the microarrays characterizing oxygen-deprived flies.
Conversely, mutations in hairy significantly reduced hypoxia tolerance [39]. This can be either a driving force
behind or an indication of a pre-programmed metabolic
adaptation to the oxidative phosphorylation decline. The
only negatively associated transcriptional factor, eve, is
a transcriptional factor involved in multiple organ an systems development.

Metabolites-biomarkers of ageing in D. melanogaster

We computed the ageing direction basing on the results of the metabolic remodeling study for Drosophila
melanogaster [20]. Most of the metabolites, used in the
analysis, are not annotated (see Supplementary Information, Figure 8). To facilitate the discussion, we also recomputed the “direction of ageing” b using only the targeted metabolites, see Figure 2D. The results for both
targeted and non-targeted metabolites should be taken
with a grain of salt, as metabolite level numbers for different metabolites resulting from metabolite profiling are
not equally normalized, are not generally in one-to-one
correspondence with metabolite concentrations in the live
tissue, and thus levels of two different metabolites estimated by metabolite profiling strictly speaking cannot
be quantitatively compared with each other. The effects of unequal normalization are especially pronounced
for non-annotated metabolites. Nevertheless, the relation between targeted metabolites turned out to be the
same in both analyses of the full metabolome and the
annotated list only, which is a good indication of the
stability of calculations and possibility to scale calculation to state vectors with more components. The issue
of unequal normalization in omics datasets can be fully

8
resolved by applying stochastic subspace identification
methods [40], which we shall leave for a future work.

DISCUSSION

The most reliable sets of enriched metabolites participating in mitochondrial electron transport chain
(alpha-glycerophosphate, succinate, NAD) mainly correspond to negative components in the vector b, which
is consistent with earlier reported age-associated decline in mitochondrial respiration and electron transport
in D. melanogaster [41]. The majority of the purine
metabolism category members, such as adenosine, guanosine, inosine, urate, glutamine, etc., are characterized by
the negative values of the vector b as well, which is consistent with the age-related expression decline of the gene
associated with major metabolic pathways (see above).

We have argued in the present paper that ageing is an
organismic level manifestation of an inherent instability
of gene regulatory networks. Proper orthogonal decomposition of age-dependent transcriptional and metabolic
profiles shows that for Gompertzian species the life-long
dynamics of the transcriptional and metabolic profiles
can be effectively described as a stochastic critical dynamics of a single degree of freedom, identified by the
projection of the expressome on the right eigenvector b
of the GRN connectivity matrix K, and associated with
the eigenvalue  vanishing at the critical point.
We established that depending on the sign of  a GRN
can be either stable or unstable. We further invoke a
form of hyperfunction theory and assume that a buildup
of metabolites beyond a certain lethal level leads to death
of the organism. We note that appearance of such toxicity thresholds is guaranteed, if non-linearities in the
equation (1) for expressome levels are accounted for (see
Supplementary Information, Section B). We show that
in this limit the mortality follows a form of Gompertz
law, i.e. first increases exponentially with age and then
saturates at a constant level, which is supported by experimental evidences. As predicted, we find a strong correlation between the rate of gene regulatory network instability and the value of mortality rate saturation. Thus
we are able to demonstrate that the Gompertzian ageing
is a property of organisms with inherently unstable gene
regulatory networks, and thus the gene network instability is a direct cause of ageing in the form of exponential
increase of all-causes mortality with age. Since mortality
in humans, where it is characterized best, is, for most of
its part, associated with age related diseases, our calculations support the idea of ageing being the driving force
behind the development of major diseases [44].
The stochastic theory of ageing presented is fully compatible with and, in fact, embraces the existing theories
and hypotheses on the origin of ageing in the following
sense:

Human orthologs for biomarkers of ageing in D.
melanogaster

According to OrthoDB, approximately 80% of all genes
in D. melanogaster have human orthologs. To provide
more quantitative insights into the nature of the ageing
direction, we searched for human orthologs to the leading
contributors to the ageing direction vector b computed
from the transcriptome of D. melanogaster. The results
of this analysis are represented on Figures 3C & D. A
fair number of the lead components of the ageing direction, such as e.g. egg shell proteins, are clearly species
dependent. At the same time the human orthologs list
appears to make sense. As expected, the downregulated genes enrich KEGG pathways associated with oxidative phosphorylation (consistently with the GO annotation and KEGG enrichment results above). On top of
that we find the KEGG categories corresponding to the
leading age-related neurodegenerative diseases (Huntington’s, Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s), and also cardiac
muscle contraction pathway. Heart failure is known to
be another common causes of death in elders. On the
contrary, KEGG PPAR signaling pathway is getting activated with age, which may be another indication of
the aforementioned activation of anti-oxidant metabolism
systems. There is an evidence suggesting that PPARα
and the genes under its control play a role in the evolution of oxidative stress excesses observed in the course of
ageing in mice [42].
Another characteristic piece of evidence relating the
stochastic instability of the gene regulatory network with
common age-related diseases is a strong positive contribution of Pepck gene, which encodes a rate-controlling
enzyme of gluconeogenesis, the process by which cells
synthesize glucose from metabolic precursors. RNAi approach to induce post-transcriptional gene silencing of its
human ortholog, PEPCK, was identified as an effective
way to sustain diabetes-induced hyperglycemia [43].

• programme of ageing [11–13]. We have shown
that ageing-driven dynamics of the expressome
δx(t) can be separated into stochastic and deterministic components. The deterministic component of δx(t) starts to dominate over the stochastic
one already early in life, at roughly the same time
when the low rank approximation of the GRN connectivity matrix K becomes valid. As the dynamics of the expressome δx(t) is largely determined by
the properties of the matrix K, we identify the low
rank approximation of K as a quasi-programme of
ageing.
• hyperfunction theory [5, 6]. The single mode
δx = z · b, describing a large cluster of genes provides a dominant contribution to the process of ageing, starts dominating the ageing dynamics soon
after the end of the developmental stage, and the

9
stochastic effects on the expressome dynamics can
be considered relatively weak [5, 6]. The same
genes, which were highly expressed close to the end
of the developmental stage, become even more overexpressed at late stages of life. Therefore it is natural to associate the progressing of δx(t) along the
ageing mode with the hyperfunction. Moreover, introduction of toxicity thresholds for metabolic profile and gene expression levels is also consistent with
the idea of hyperfunction. More evidence in favor
of the interpretation comes from recent works such
as [45], where a specific transcriptional circuit is
found, which guides the rapid ageing process in C.
elegans and indicate that this circuit is driven by
drift of developmental pathways rather than accumulation of damage.
• damage/error accumulation [1–4]. Although
the stochastic component of expressome δx(t) becomes small compared to the deterministic component at late ages, its effects are strongly pronounced
at all ages. The probability distribution function
P (δx, t) to find a specimen with the expressome
δx(t) and age t in a population is never peaked
near a particular value of δx. On the contrary, we
have argued in the
p present paper, that the mean
square deviation E(δx2 (t)) grows with age at the
same exponential Gompertz rate as the mortality
M (t). As we will demonstrate in the future work,
this growth of stochasticity in population can be
directly associated with the effect of error accumulation in metabolism and gene regulation through
the estimation of entropy growth rate, as has been
earlier suggested by [46, 47].
• antagonistic pleiotropy [9]. Since a single mode
δx = z · b determines the dynamics of the expressome δx(t) through the most of the adult life, expression levels of the genes, highly expressed in the
end of developmental stage, will first reach toxicity
thresholds leading to statistical increase of mortality. Such highly expressed genes are clearly selected
for, as they promote the fitness of the organism in
youth. This observation is very much in the spirit
of the hypothesis of antagonistic pleiotropy.
The established relation between the critical dynamics of
the gene regulatory network state vector and the Gompertzian mortality characteristic to many species allows
one to consider the projection z = (bT ·δx) as a biomarker
of ageing. Due to the low value of the eigenvalue  the direction b dominates a response to a generic stress. This,
in fact, was already demonstrated in [48], where transcriptional signatures of responses to very different genotoxic stresses were found to share a great number of gene
expression changes.
The expressions of the genes or metabolites corresponding to the most significant components of theageing
direction b are strongly associated with age and age related diseases. Therefore ageing in the form the GRN

instability described here leads to the impairment of
the normal functioning of the body, has characteristic
biomarkers and symptoms including signs of major age
related diseases, and produces exponentially increasing
morbidity. Accordingly, the process of ageing itself falls
under the definition of a disease recently used by AMA
for a common condition such as obesity [49]. We must
note here that therapeutic or experimental interventions
aimed to counter-balance the age related changes in the
genes or metabolites expressions may not be very effective ways to extend lifespan of the species. For example,
even though ageing in D. melanogaster is associated with
increased internal and external bacterial load, as well as
with increase of antibacterial peptides expression, both
reducing the bacteria population with antibiotics and reducing the humoral antibacterial response failed to induce lifespan increasing effect in experiments [50]. The
transcriptional factor hairy is overexposed with age, nevertheless its inhibition did not result in lifespan increase
either [39]. This reinforces the conclusion that the markers of ageing are, in general, not the same as regulators
of ageing.
Even though most of the analysis in the manuscript
is performed for D. melanogaster, our conclusions are
generic and should be applicable to other species. Realistic GRNs with different properties may not lead to
Gompertz law. We believe that even more intriguing
possibility may arise if the effective potential V (z) has a
local minimum with small but positive curvature. The
higher order nonlinearities, such as cubic component of
the effective potential, cannot be neglected anymore and
in this case genetic network turns out to be metastable. If
the minimum of the potential V (z) is separated from the
region of large z by a sufficiently high activation barrier
(see Figure 1A and Supplementary Information, Section
B 5 c), the mortality rate, determined by the probability
of activation, is exponentially small and age-independent.
This situation is consistent with the negligible senescence hypothesis [51]. This model feature may provide an
explanation behind the apparent lack of age-dependent
physiological changes as well as behavior of the mortality
rate observed in naked mole rat and some other species
over a long lifespan [52]. This argument is also supported
by the analysis in [53], where the number of the genes differentially expressed with the age was compared in naked
mole rats, mice, and humans [53, 54].

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Gene annotation

We have used the open source Ontologizer [55] tool to
annotate the gene set representing the leading components of the vector b of biomarkers of ageing. The vector b was first computed from the gene expression variance to gene ontologies using “Parent-Child-Intersection”
GO enrichment analysis procedure described in [56], a

10
method, which considers genes in the background if they
are present in all parent terms of the term of interest. For
comparison purposes we also present a standard Termby-Term GO enrichment (BP only) analysis on Supplementary Information Figures 9A. We employed 0.01 adjusted p-value cutoff (Benjamini-Hochberg multiple test
correction). We have performed KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of the genes corresponding to the most significant components of vector b, computed from the transcriptome of D. melanogaster [19] and the corresponding
human orthologs using DAVID web-tool [57, 58].

set enrichment analysis for the components of vector b
using MetaboAnalyst 3.0 [59]. The total number of the
targeted metabolites is too small to analyze the positively
and negatively regulated substances separately. 80 components of the vector b with highest absolute value are
represented on Figure 3B.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

To analyze the vector b, obtained from the metabolome
of D. melanogaster [20], we have performed a metabolite

The authors are grateful to Profs. A. Moskalev, V.
Gladyshev and V. Fontana, Drs. A. Avanesov and M.
Konovalenko for valuable discussions, Dr. U. Fischer and
to S. Filonov and M. N. Kholin for enlightening comments, discussions and substantial help in preparation of
the manuscript. We would also like to thank Prof. J.
Carey for access to the experimental data.

[1] Partridge, L. & Gems, D. Mechanisms of ageing: public
or private? Nat. Rev. Genet. 3, 165–75 (2002). URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrg753.
[2] Sinclair, D. A. & Oberdoerffer, P. The ageing epigenome:
damaged beyond repair? Ageing Res. Rev. 8, 189–98
(2009). URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1568163709000245.
[3] Gladyshev, V. N. On the cause of aging and control of
lifespan: heterogeneity leads to inevitable damage accumulation, causing aging; control of damage composition
and rate of accumulation define lifespan. Bioessays 34,
925–9 (2012).
[4] Gladyshev, V. N. The origin of aging: imperfectnessdriven non-random damage defines the aging process and
control of lifespan. Trends Genet. 29, 506–12 (2013).
[5] Blagosklonny, M. V. Aging and immortality: quasiprogrammed senescence and its pharmacologic inhibition. Cell Cycle 5, 2087–2102 (2006).
[6] Blagosklonny, M. V. & Hall, M. N. Growth and aging: a
common molecular mechanism. Aging 1, 357 (2009).
[7] Kirkwood, T. B. L. Evolution of ageing. Nature 270,
301–304 (1977).
[8] Kirkwood, T. B. & Austad, S. N. Why do we age? Nature
408, 233–8 (2000).
[9] Williams, G. Pleiotropy, natural selection, and the evolution of senescence. Science’s SAGE KE 2001, 13 (2001).
[10] Reis, R. J. S. Model systems for aging research: syncretic
concepts and diversity of mechanisms. Genome 31, 406–
412 (1989).
[11] Skulachev, V. The programmed death phenomena, aging,
and the Samurai law of biology. Exp. Gerontol. 36, 995–
1024 (2001).
[12] Longo, V. D., Mitteldorf, J. & Skulachev, V. P. Programmed and altruistic ageing. Nat. Rev. Genet. 6, 866–
72 (2005).
[13] de Magalhães, J. a. P. Programmatic features of aging
originating in development: aging mechanisms beyond
molecular damage? FASEB J. 26, 4821–6 (2012). URL
http://www.fasebj.org/content/26/12/4821.short.
[14] Orgel, L. E. Ageing of Clones of Mammalian Cells. Nature 243, 441–445 (1973).

[15] Hopfield, J. J. Kinetic Proofreading: A New Mechanism
for Reducing Errors in Biosynthetic Processes Requiring
High Specificity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 71, 4135–4139
(1974).
[16] Danchin, A.
Natural selection and immortality.
Biogerontology 10, 503–16 (2009).
[17] Kogan, V., Molodtcov, I., Menshikov, L. I., Reis, R. J. S.
& Fedichev, P. Stability analysis of a model gene network
links aging, stress resistance, and negligible senescence.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.0463 (2014).
[18] Antoulas, A. C. Approximation of Large-Scale Dynamical
Systems (SIAM, 2009).
[19] Pletcher, S. D. et al. Genome-wide transcript profiles in aging and calorically restricted< i> drosophila
melanogaster</i>. Current Biology 12, 712–723 (2002).
[20] Avanesov, A. S. et al.
Age-and diet-associated
metabolome remodeling characterizes the aging process
driven by damage accumulation. eLife 3 (2014).
[21] Vaupel, J. W. et al. Biodemographic trajectories of
longevity. Science 280, 855–860 (1998).
[22] Horvath, S. Dna methylation age of human tissues and
cell types. Genome biology 14, R115 (2013).
[23] Balleza, E. et al. Critical dynamics in genetic regulatory
networks: examples from four kingdoms. PLoS One 3,
e2456 (2008).
[24] Krotov, D., Dubuis, J. O., Gregor, T. & Bialek, W.
Morphogenesis at criticality. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 111, 3683–3688 (2014).
[25] Fiedler, B. E. Handbook of Dynamical Systems, Volume
2 (Gulf Professional Publishing, 2002).
[26] Seydel, R. Practical Bifurcation and Stability Analysis,
vol. 1 (Springer Science & Business Media, 2009).
[27] Suzuki, M. Passage from an initial unstable state
to a final stable state.
In Advances in Chemical
Physics, Volume 46, 195–276 (John Wiley & Sons, 2009).
URL http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=
6uAY7tkKEVkC&pgis=1.
[28] The latter observation is supported by the analysis of the
recent experiments in D. melanogaster, where transcriptional responses to different stress factors were found to
contain a good fraction of similar differentially expressed

Metabolic enrichment analysis

11

[29]

[30]
[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]
[45]

genes both in the limit of nearly lethal [60] and weak
stressors [48].
Morse, C. Does variability increase with age? an archival
study of cognitive measures. Psychol Aging 8, 156–64
(1993).
Rother, P. The aging changes of biological variability
(author’s transl). ZFA 33, 463–6 (1978).
Khalyavkin, A. & Krutko, V. Aging is a simple deprivation syndrome driven by a quasi-programmed preventable and reversible drift of control system set points
due to inappropriate organism-environment interaction.
Biochemistry (Moscow) 79, 1133–1135 (2014).
Arlia-Ciommo, A., Piano, A., Leonov, A., Svistkova, V.
& Titorenko, V. I. Quasi-programmed aging of budding yeast: a trade-off between programmed processes
of cell proliferation, differentiation, stress response, survival and death defines yeast lifespan. Cell Cycle 13,
3336–3349 (2014).
Blagosklonny, M. V. Answering the ultimate question"
what is the proximal cause of aging?". Aging 4, 861–877
(2012).
Blagosklonny, M. V. Mtor-driven quasi-programmed aging as a disposable soma theory. Cell Cycle 12, 1842–
1847 (2013).
Gompertz, B. On the nature of the function expressive
of the law of human mortality, and on a new mode of
determining the value of life contingencies. Philosophical
transactions of the royal society of London 115, 513–583
(1825).
Gems, D. & Doonan, R. Antioxidant defense and aging
in c. elegans: is the oxidative damage theory of aging
wrong? Cell Cycle 8, 1681–1687 (2009).
Tacutu, R. et al. Human ageing genomic resources: Integrated databases and tools for the biology and genetics of
ageing. Nucleic acids research 41, D1027–D1033 (2013).
Khan, I. & Prasad, N. The aging of the immune response
in drosophila melanogaster. The Journals of Gerontology
Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 68,
129–135 (2013).
Zhou, D. et al. Mechanisms underlying hypoxia tolerance
in drosophila melanogaster: hairy as a metabolic switch.
PLoS genetics 4, e1000221 (2008).
Overschee, V. & Moor, D. Subspace Identification for
Linear Systems: Theory, Implementation, Applications
(Kluwer Academic, 1996).
Ferguson, M., Mockett, R., Shen, Y., Orr, W. & Sohal, R.
Age-associated decline in mitochondrial respiration and
electron transport in drosophila melanogaster. Biochem.
J 390, 501–511 (2005).
Poynter, M. E. & Daynes, R. A. Peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor α activation modulates cellular redox
status, represses nuclear factor-κb signaling, and reduces
inflammatory cytokine production in aging. Journal of
Biological Chemistry 273, 32833–32841 (1998).
Gómez-Valadés, A. G. et al. Overcoming diabetesinduced hyperglycemia through inhibition of hepatic
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (gtp) with rnai.
Molecular Therapy 13, 401–410 (2006).
Blagosklonny, M. V. Validation of anti-aging drugs by
treating age-related diseases. Aging 1, 281 (2009).
Budovskaya, Y. V. et al. An< i> elt-3/elt-5/elt-6</i>
gata transcription circuit guides aging in< i> c. elegans</i>. Cell 134, 291–303 (2008).

[46] Hayflick, L. Entropy explains aging, genetic determinism
explains longevity, and undefined terminology explains
misunderstanding both. PLoS Genet. 3, e220 (2007).
[47] Christensen, K., Doblhammer, G., Rau, R. &
Vaupel, J. W.
Ageing populations:
the challenges ahead. Lancet 374, 1196–208 (2009). URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0140673609614604.
[48] Moskalev, A. et al.
Mining gene expression data
for pollutants (dioxin, toluene, formaldehyde) and low
dose of gamma-irradiation.
PLoS ONE 9, e86051
(2014). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.
pone.0086051.
[49] American medical association, resolution 420 (a-13):
recognition of obesity as a disease. In Proceedings of the
House of Delegates 162nd Annual Meeting (2013).
[50] Ren, C., Webster, P., Finkel, S. E. & Tower, J. Increased internal and external bacterial load during< i>
drosophila</i> aging without life-span trade-off. Cell
metabolism 6, 144–152 (2007).
[51] Finch, C. E. Longevity, senescence, and the genome (University of Chicago Press, 1994).
[52] Buffenstein, R. The naked mole-rat: a new long-living
model for human aging research. The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences
60, 1369–1377 (2005).
[53] Kim, E. B. et al. Genome sequencing reveals insights into
physiology and longevity of the naked mole rat. Nature
479, 223–227 (2011).
[54] Jeannette Loram, A. B. Age-related changes in gene expression in tissues of the sea urchin< i> strongylocentrotus franciscanus</i>. Mechanisms of Ageing and Development 133, 338–347 (2012).
[55] Bauer, S., Gagneur, J. & Robinson, P. N. Going bayesian:
model-based gene set analysis of genome-scale data. Nucleic acids research 38, 3523–3532 (2010).
[56] Grossmann, S., Bauer, S., Robinson, P. N. & Vingron,
M. Improved detection of overrepresentation of geneontology annotations with parent–child analysis. Bioinformatics 23, 3024–3031 (2007).
[57] Da Wei Huang, B. T. S. & Lempicki, R. A. Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists using
david bioinformatics resources. Nature protocols 4, 44–57
(2008).
[58] Huang, D. W., Sherman, B. T. & Lempicki, R. A. Bioinformatics enrichment tools: paths toward the comprehensive functional analysis of large gene lists. Nucleic
acids research 37, 1–13 (2009).
[59] Xia, J., Mandal, R., Sinelnikov, I. V., Broadhurst, D. &
Wishart, D. S. Metaboanalyst 2.0-a comprehensive server
for metabolomic data analysis. Nucleic acids research 40,
W127–W133 (2012).
[60] Brown, J. B. et al. Diversity and dynamics of the
drosophila transcriptome. Nature (2014).
[61] Kadish, I. et al. Hippocampal and cognitive aging across
the lifespan: a bioenergetic shift precedes and increased
cholesterol trafficking parallels memory impairment. The
Journal of Neuroscience 29, 1805–1816 (2009).
[62] The number of different principal components P Cn representing the signal x(t1 ), . . . , x(tm ) does not exceed m.
[63] Schervish, M. J. Theory of Statistics, vol. 21 (Springer
New York, 2011).
[64] In particular, the rate of these changes is limited by a
single gene transcription time, ∼ 1 min.

12
[65] In particular, they are not small at early times, close to
the initial state of the expressome.
[66] When higher order derivatives in Eq. (A1) are taken
into account, this argument, albeit becoming more involved, remains valid: one has to construct the perturbation theory in powers of small parameter , which
still determines the smallest eigenvalue of the matrix
A(f ) = K + i2πf D + (2πf )2 M + . . . . Similarly to the
case considered here, all higher eigenvalues of A(f ) possess positive real parts.
[67] Zwanzig, R. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics (Oxford University Press, USA, 2001).
[68] Of course, albeit natural, this is still an assumption, as
different gene expressions are not truly independent GRN
state variables.
[69] Suzuki, M. Scaling theory of transient phenomena near
the instability point. Journal of Statistical Physics 16,
11–32 (1977). URL http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/BF01014603.
[70] Redner, S. A Guide to First-Passage Processes (Cambridge University Press, 2001).
[71] Aalen, O., Borgan, O. & Gjessing, H. Survival and Event
History Analysis: A Process Point of View (Springer,
2008).
[72] Weitz, J. S. & Fraser, H. B. Explaining mortality rate
plateaus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98, 15383–6
(2001).
[73] Steinsaltz, D. & Evans, S. N. Markov mortality models: implications of quasistationarity and varying initial
distributions. Theor. Popul. Biol. 65, 319–37 (2004).

13
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

1

0.8

Si(x(t))/S1(x(t))

In the following, we explain the physical basis for Eq.
(2) and provide its derivation. We also explicitly find
the expressions for the mortality rate, the survival probability, the lifespan distribution function and the average
lifespan of species with expressome subject to Eq. (2).

D. melanogaster, transcriptome
R. norvegicus, hyppocamp., transcriptome
D. melanogaster, metabolome (annotated)
D. melanogaster, metabolome (full)

0.9

Appendix A: Stochastic dynamics of gene expression
and metabolic levels

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

1.

Getting a grasp on the dynamics of expressome.
Model reduction and physical considerations

The analysis represented in this paper is mainly based
on the observation that time series datasets describing
changes of expressome profiles with age are often well
susceptible to Model Reduction techniques [18]. One of
such methods often used in Big Data analysis is proper
orthogonal decomposition (POC).
Applying POC to age-associated transcriptional and
metabolic profile dynamics datasets (for example, [19,
20, 61]) shows that the long-time behavior of the expressome x is largely determined by a single principal
component (see Fig. 4). Although the number of time
snapshot points in corresponding time series is typically
limited,[62] clear dominance of P C1 in the signal is a nontrivial fact. As we argue here, it carries an important information about biological gene regulatory and metabolic
networks; namely, it shows that such networks are precritical in the sense, which will be explained below.
Consider a meta-stable gene regulatory network
(GRN) with the instantaneous network state represented
by a vector x, whose components xi are given by expression levels of different genes, proteins or metabolites
participating in the GRN.
Dynamics of the vector x is affected by mRNA levels,
concentrations of proteins and metabolites, involved in
regulatory pathways and in are in turn influenced by external as well as endogenous stress factors acting on the
cell. This dynamics is governed by differential matrix
equations of systems biology

dx d2 x
g x, , 2 , . . . = F,
dt dt


(A1)

where g is a vector function of the state vector x, encoding interactions between different components of the
expressome, where the notations and variables are introduced in the main text of the paper.
Generally, the vector function g may depend on arbid2 x
dn x
trarily high time derivatives dx
dt , dt2 , . . . , dtn , . . . of the
expressome state vector. Hereinafter the focus is on the
study of dynamics of x at time scales comparable to the
mortality rate doubling time tMRDT , which is of the order of tens of days for nematodes and drosophilae, and is

0

1

2

3

4

5

i, # of singular value

Figure 4: Five largest singular values Si (x(t)) of the
expressome x(t) divided by the largest one, S1 (t);
transcriptome of D. melanogaster [19] (blue),
transcriptome of R. norvegicus, hippocampus [61]
(green), metabolome of D. melanogaster, targeted
metabolites only [20] (red), metabolome of D.
melanogaster, all metabolites [20] (purple). One of the
principal components of the expressome x(t) clearly
dominates over the others in all considered cases.

even larger, hundreds of days, for mice. This time scale
is to be compared to a typical time scale of protein translation and regulation, or a life time of mRNA, encoded
in the dynamics of the vector F . In order to describe this
slow dynamics of the expressome state vector x, one can
neglect all time derivatives of x higher the first derivative
dx
dt . The matrix Eq. (A1) thus reduces to


dx
g x,
= F.
dt

2.

(A2)

Frequency domain properties of the vector F of
stress factors

As was explained above, the vector F of environmental
and endogeneous stress factors affecting gene expression
levels x has both slowly changing component, F0 (t), and
stochastic component, δF (t), rapidly changing in time.
Below we assume for simplicity that F0 (t) = F0 , i.e.,
slowly changing component is in fact constant.
Since dynamics of the vector δF can be considered essentially random at time scales of interest for us, dynamics of x is driven by correlation properties of δF . The
total number of environmental and internal stress factors affecting gene expression levels x is extremely large,
and the vector δF (t) represents a superposition of these
factors. According to the central limit theorem [63] it
can thus be considered a Gaussian stochastic process, so
that
E(δF (t)δF (t0 )) = B(t − t0 ),

14
where B(t − t0 ) is a function of the time difference |t − t0 |
only, while E(. . .) as usual denotes the expectation value
of the fluctuating quantity . . ., and statistical average
is understood as average over ensemble of species/cells
of a given organism. In the frequency domain, one has
correspondingly
E(δF (f )δF (−f )) =
ˆ
=

0

df e−2πif (t−t ) E(δF (t)δF (t0 )) = B(f ),

where f is frequency of a given mode in the Fourier expansion of the function B(t − t0 ).
The function B(f ) has multiple singularities in the
complex plane of f . These singularities encode characteristic time scales of pathways’ dynamics. However, the
two following observations are important for the subsequent analysis. First of all, the function B(f ) decays
quickly with f as f → ∞. This guarantees that the
amount of stress affecting the gene expression levels x
does not change very rapidly.[64] On the other hand, the
behavior of B(f ) is smooth at very small frequencies,
i.e., B(f ) → B as f → 0, so that the amplitude of rare
fluctuations of δF remains limited. As we would like to
understand the dynamics of x at time scales comparable
to tMRDT , we consider the case B(f ) ∼ B in what follows. In this, the stochastic process δF (t) in the r.h.s. of
Eq. (A2) has correlation properties of white noise:

4.

Saddle-node bifurcation and critical
slowing-down

Domination of a single principle component in the expressome vector x(t) is not a generic prediction of the
model (A4). We would like to argue that such a dominance implies that GRNs under consideration are operating at the critical point. This critical point is a bifurcation, separating regimes of stable and unstable run-away
behavior of the expressome δx.
Transition from stability to instability in networks with
network graphs not possessing specific symmetries is typically associated with existence of co-dimension 1 bifurcations [25, 26]. Such transition is characterized by the
loss of stability along a single principal component of the
network state vector. Contributions from all other principal components remain stable. This situation is known
in the literature as saddle-node bifurcation [25] and is
realized, when the lowest (real) eigenvalue of the matrix
K reaches zero and then becomes negative.
Let us denote the smallest (vanishing, but positive)
eigenvalue of the matrix K as  and its corresponding
left and right eigenvectors - as a and b. In order to understand dynamics of the expressome δx near the GRN
bifurcation, it is convenient to analyze the autocorrelation function E(δx(t)δx(t0 )). The latter is given by the
following expression (in the frequency domain)
E(δx(t)δxT (t0 )) =

0

0

E(δF (t)δF (t )) = Bδ(t − t ),

(A3)

ˆ

0

where δ(t − t ) is the Dirac delta-function.
3.

=

In the vicinity of a stationary point
(homeostasis)

When the genotoxic forces are relatively weak, |δF | 
|F0 |, the fluctuations of the expressome state vector are
also small: x = x0 + δx, δx  x0 . Here x0 is the stationary point given by the solution of the equation
g(x0 ) = F0 .
In the vicinity of this point Eq. (A2) reduces to
Dδ ẋ + Kδx + Γ(3) δxδx + . . . = δF,

(A4)

where the matrices D and K describe the relaxation effects and the “interaction” between genes in the GRN.
The matrix Γ(3) encodes the leading non-linear terms
in the expansion of the vector function g(x) in powers of small δx, while . . . denote higher order terms in
this expansion. Generally, such non-linear terms are not
small[65] However, a common feature of the dissipative
network described by Eq. (A4) is the decay of (most)
principal components of δx with time, which makes nonlinearities in Eq. (A4) less relevant at later stages of the
time dynamics. Whether this feature holds for the GRN
under consideration is a non-trivial question, which we
shall now address.

0

df · e−2πif (t−t ) A−1 (f )E(δF (−f )δF T (f ))A∗,−1 (f ),

(A5)
where A(f ) = i2πDf + K. Its behavior is determined
by the poles of the integrand in the complex plane of
frequency f . In turn, the latter are given by the solution
of the equation
det(A(f )) = 0,
i.e., by the solution of the eigenvalue problem for the
matrix ±i(2π)−1 D−1 K. In particular, at very large time
separations |t − t0 | one finds that


(aT · Ba)b · bT
|t − t0 |
T 0
E(δx(t)δx (t )) ≈
exp − T
.
(aT · Db)3
(a · Db)
(A6)
Several important observations can be made at this point:
(1) as the parameter  approaches 0, amplitude of the autocorrelation function (A6) grows as −1 , i.e., fluctuations
of the expressome vector are strongly amplified both with
age and among the population (the statistical ensemble);
(2) the autocorrelation time scale τ = (aT · Db)/ also
grows strongly at  → 0, implying that stochastic dynamics of the expressome becomes very slow near the point of
bifurcation, phenomenon known as critical slowing-down
(see for example [27]); (3) fluctuations of the expressome
vector δx mostly develop along the direction b of the

15
right eigenvector of K corresponding to the vanishing
eigenvalue , this in turn guarantees that a single principal component of the expressome vector δx dominates;
(4) the corresponding left eigenvector a determines directions of high sensitivity of the expressome to genotoxic
stress factors δF .
As the behavior (A6) of the autocorrelation function
is dominated by the lowest eigenvalue of the matrix
−i(2π)−1 D−1 K (proportional in turn to the lowest eigenvalue  of the matrix K), other remaining eigenvalues
of −i(2π)−1 D−1 K have strictly positive real parts and
thus correspond to contributions to (A6), rapidly decaying with time. This guarantees that only one principal
component of δx dominates, in accordance with experimental observations.[66]
When  crosses 0 and becomes negative, the autocorrelation function (A6) develops unstable behavior, again
directed along the corresponding right eigenvector b of
K. In particular, one finds for the dispersion of the expressome at large t


2t
T
2
T
E(δx(t)δx (t)) ≈ E(z (0))b · b exp
,
(aT · Db)
(A7)
where E(z 2 (0)) is the dispersion of the projection z =
(δxT · b) of the expressome on the vector b, taken at the
initial moment of time. Dynamics of the expressome δx
along other principal components remains stable.
Thus, the quantity of interest in the critical regime
 → 0 is the projection of the expressome δx on the right
eigenvector b:
z = (δxT · b),

t. Another quantity of interest is the survival probability
S(t), defined as the ratio of the number of species N (t)
still alive at time t to their initial number N0 . The associated mortality rate can then be found using the expression M (t) = − dS
dt /S. In this Section we shall explain how
to estimate both the probability density P (z, t), the survival probability S(t) and the mortality rate M (t) from
the stochastic dynamics of the expressome state vector
δx.

1.

Estimating the probability density P (z, t)

As was discussed above, the process of ageing is characterized by slow changes in gene expression levels δx over
time, described by the Langevin equation (A8). Hereinafter in this Section for the sake of briefness we drop
δ in δz, denoting the fluctuation of the expressome δz
simply as z. The probability P (z, t) is the solution of the
associated Fokker-Planck equation [67]

∂P (z, t)
∂
=
(αz + βz 2 + γz 3 + . . .)P (z, t) +
∂t
∂z
1 ∂ 2 P (z, t)
+ ∆
,
2
∂z 2

(B1)

subject to the initial condition P (z, t = 0) = P0 (z) and
a boundary condition at large z. In what follows we
consider two particular cases: a “deterministic” initial
condition
P (z, t = 0) = δ(z),

(B2)

which satisfies the Langevin equation
dz
= αz + βz 2 + . . . + f, E(f (t)f (t0 )) = ∆δ(t − t0 ) (A8)
dt
T

T

(3)

T

where α = /(a · Db), β = (a · Γ bb)/(a · Db), . . .
and ∆ = (aT · Ba)/(aT · Db)3 .
This concludes the derivation of Eq. (2).
Appendix B: Estimating mortality rates from the
stochastic dynamics of expressome

So far we have only considered stochastic dynamics of
the expressome state vector δx of an organism. To proceed with population properties, such as mortality, we
need to construct a statistical description for populations,
ensembles of organisms. Consider a large population of
animals with the number of species N (t = 0) = N0  1,
born at the same moment of time, t = 0. The development and ageing of animals in the population depends
on the dynamics of the expression levels x and can be
naturally described in terms of the probability density
dN = P (x, t) dx, where P (x, t) is the fraction of of specimen within the population with the gene expression levels within the interval (x − dx, x + dx) estimated at time

where z is the Dirac delta-function, and the Gaussian
initial condition
P (z, t = 0) = p

1

e
2

−

2πδz0

(z−z0 )2
2
2δz0

.

(B3)

A physically relevant choice of the boundary condition at
large z is
P (z → ∞, t) = 0,

(B4)

implying that all specimen with sufficiently large z associated with high toxicity will necesserily die and drop out
from the distribution. Our reasoning behind the choice
of this particular boundary condition is as follows. Let
us assume that for every gene in the genome there exists a particular threshold Xi of its expression, which is
associated with a strong build-up of toxicity in associated pathways and a subsequent inevitable death of a
specimen.[68] After the projection on the leading principal component ∼ b of the expressome δx most information about the geometry of this “threshold surface” is
of course lost. However, one notes that the characteristic time for the stochastic process z(t) to reach infinity z = ∞ is always finite, as long as non-linear terms

16
are present in the Fokker-Planck equation (B1), and the
state z = ∞ is certainly associated with the death of the
specimen. Thus, expressions for the average lifespan and
the survival probability derived below are at least good
upper bounds on the real average lifespan and survival
probability of the species in question.
The choice of the boundary condition (B4) is especially
suitable in the case, when non-linearities in Eq. (A8) are
taken into account, i.e., at least some of β, γ, . . . in Eq.
(B1) are non-zero.
In the case, when only α 6= 0 the appropriate counterpart of the boundary condition (B4) is

The “intermediate”
regime realized at α−1 < t .
 1/2 
α−1 log α∆1/2Z , when the deterministic force αz dominates over the random force f (t) in the Langevin equation (A8), is characterized by so called Suzuki scaling
[27, 69]. In this regime, the Fokker-Planck equation (B1)
effectively reduces to a deterministic drift equation

∂P (z, t)
∂
=
(αz + βz 2 + γz 3 + . . .)P (z, t) .
∂t
∂z
Its solution is
P (z, τ ) =

P (z = Z, t) = 0,

(B5)

meaning that specimen die, when z reaches a certain
threshold value Z. The boundary conditions (B4) and
(B5) are associated in the following sense. If β 6= 0,
while all other non-linearities in Eq. (A8) are absent,
all the expressions for the probability distribution functions and correlation functions of the expressome remain
the same as in the linear case, but with a substitution
Z ∼ (α/β)1/2 . A similar conclusion (but with a slightly
different expression for Z) holds, when the next order
non-linearity γ is taken into account, see below. Thus,
the cases (B4) and (B5) are essentially physically equivalent, and one can switch between the discussion of nonlinear Fokker-Planck equation (B1) and the linear one,
whenever convenient.
The Fokker-Planck equation (B1) with the boundary
conditions (B4) or (B5) cannot be solved exactly. However, this is not really needed: a large amount of useful
information about stochastic dynamics of the expressome
can be extracted from the asymptotic behavior of the
probability density P (z, t) in various physically interesting regimes [27, 69].
In particular, at sufficiently early times t  α−1 behavior of δz described by the Langevin equation (A8) is
entirely dominated by the effect of the random force f (t),
dominating over the “deterministic” force −αz [27, 69].
One immediately finds for the case of Gaussian initial
distribution (B3):
P (z, t) ≈ p

1
2πE(δz 2 (t))

e

−

(z−E(z(t)))2
2E(δz 2 (t))

,

where E(z(t)) = z0 exp(αt) and


∆
E(δz 2 (t)) = δz02 + δz02 +
(exp(2αt) − 1).
α

(B6)

(B7)

Therefore, in the average both expressome and its fluctuations grow exponentially with time. This conclusion
is confirmed by the data analysis of senescence-associated
transcriptional dynamics. It is worth emphasizing that
the characteristic time scale of the stochastic growth of
the expressome is ∼ α−1 . It thus depends only on the
morphological properties of the GRN and does not depend on the genotoxic stress amplitude ∆ at all.

 2 
h (z)
h0 (z)
exp
−
,
2τ
(2πτ )1/2

(B8)

where τ = exp(2αt) is the Suzuki time variable, and the
function h(z) has to be found on the case-by-case basis by matching the solution (B8) to the solution of the
Fokker-Planck equation at early times (for example, to
Eq. (B6)). We would like to again emphasize that the expression (B8) holds for both linear and non-linear cases,
although the form of the function h(z) will be different
for them. The regime of Suzuki scaling will be discussed
in more details in the next Subsection.
Finally, no general statement can be made

 regarding
1/2
the behavior of P (z, t) at large t  α−1 log α∆1/2Z . If
´z
the function V (z) = − dz 0 (αz + βz 2 + γz 3 + . . .) has
not only a maximum at z = 0, but also a true minimum
at some large z = zequilib , the probability density P (z, t)
approaches a normalizable time-independent asymptotics


V 00 (zequilib )(z − zequilib )2
P (z) ∼ exp −
.
∆
On the other hand, if no true minima of the function V (z)
exist, the non-normalizable probability density P (z, t)
exponentially quickly vanishes at t → +∞ (also see below). This choice seems to be a physically appropriate
one, since at very high (toxic) values z GRNs simply dissociate, and the whole description of the system state in
terms of the leading principal component of δz no longer
makes sense.
2.

Estimating the first passage time and survival
probabilities

In the case under consideration, a more relevant quantity to calculate and analyze is not the probability density
P (z, t) itself, but a so called first passage time distribution function PFPT (t) [70, 71]. The reason is that the
probability density P (z, t) represents a sum over all possible stochastic trajectories z(t), including those, which
pass the threshold z = Z and then return back. On the
other hand, by definition, PFPT (T ) is a probability for a
given stochastic trajectory z = z(t) to pass the threshold z = Z at t = T for the very first time. As such, it
does not take into account trajectories, which then return
back into the allowed domain of z.

17
S(t), using the prescription PF P T (t) = − dS(t)
dt . From Eq.
(B11) we immediately find

1

PFPT(t)/2α
S(t)

0.8


S(t) ≈ Erf

αZ 2
2∆

1/2

!
e−αt

,

(B12)

expression precise up to terms, exponentially small at
αZ 2
∆  1, i.e., when a species is considered long-lived
compared to the characteristic time scales of molecular
dynamics in the cell, see the next Subsection. The function (B12), initially exponentially close to 1, then falls off
quickly (as we shall see below, this fall-off corresponds to
an exponentially growing mortality rate) and
 finally
 ap-

0.6

0.4

proaches zero as exp(−αt) at t  α−1 log

α1/2 Z
∆1/2

.

0.2

0

3.

5

10
2α t

15

Figure 5: The first passage time distribution function
PFPT (t) (in units of 2α) and the survival probability
2
S(t) as a function of time 2αt; αZ
∆ = 1000.

Average lifespan

Although it is impossible to find an exact solution
for the first passage time distribution function and the
survival probability in a generic non-linear case with
β, γ, . . . 6= 0 (expressions found in the previous Subsection are only generally valid in the regime of Suzuki scaling), it is possible to find a closed form expression for the
average lifespan E(tls ) within the population as well as
arbitrarily high moments E(tnls ) of the lifespan. Here we
shall present the final result for E(tls ) without derivation:

When a deterministic initial condition (B2) is chosen,
the first passage time distribution function is given by


ˆ
ˆ +∞
2αZ · e2αt  α 1/2
αZ 2
1 +∞
PFPT (t) ≈ 2αt
exp
−
,
E(tls ) =
dz · exp(−2v(z))
dz 0 exp(2v(z 0 )),
2∆(e2αt − 1)
(e − 1)3/2 2π∆
∆ z0
z
(B9)

while for the Gaussian initial condition (B3) one finds
(z)
1 1
1
2
3
where v(z) = V ∆
= −∆
2 αz + 3 βz + . . . . In particular, for the case α, β 6= 0, γ = 0, . . . one immediately
2Z∆ · e2αt
PFPT (t) ≈ √
×
finds


2αt − 1) 3/2
2π δz02 + δz02 + ∆
α (e


1
α
E(t
)
≈
log
(B13)
ls
!
α
β 1/2 ∆1/2
2
Z

 .
(B10)
× exp −
2αt − 1)
2 δz02 + δz02 + ∆
at large β 1/2α∆1/2  1 . Similarly, in the case α 6= 0, β =
α (e
0, γ 6= 0, . . . one finds
In the  regime
of Suzuki scaling α−1 < t .

1/2
 2 
α−1 log α∆1/2Z the expression (B9) reduces to
1
α
E(tls ) ≈ log
,
α
γ∆2


 α 1/2
2
αZ −2αt
PFPT (t) ≈ 2αZ
exp −αt −
e
,
etc. One again sees that non-linear cases are equal to
2π∆
2∆
(B11)
the linear one with the appropriately chosen threshold
well known in literature. The function (B11) grows expovalue Z (for instance, Z = (α/β)1/2 in the case β 6= 0,
−1
nentially at small t . α , possesses
a distinct
maximum
Zeff = α3/2 /(γ∆3/2 ) in the case β = 0, γ 6= 0, etc.).



1/2
It is interesting to note that the average lifespan deαZ 2
, with its width
at tmax = E(tls ) = α−1 log
∆
pends strongly on the morphological properties (topolδt ∼ α−1 near the maximum and finally decays as e−αt
ogy, connectivity) of the GRN through the dependence
at t  tmax ,see Fig. 5.
on α−1 , while the characteristic amount of stress (its amComputing the first passage time distribution function
plitude given by ∆) affects the value of E(tls ) only logaalso allows one to easily estimate the survival probability
rithmically weakly.

18
4.

The value of the Gompertz exponent is thus equal to

Behavior of the mortality rate

As usual, the mortality rate is defined following the
prescription M (t) = − dS
dt /S, so that one has precisely
PFPT (t)
.
M (t) =
S(t)

(B14)

We shall now focus on the particular case of the deterministic initial condition (B2).
a.

Vanishing mortality at very early ages t  α−1
−1

At very early ages t  α the first passage time distribution function is exponentially strongly suppressed:


Z2
2αZ  α 1/2
exp −
.
PFPT (t) ≈
4∆t
(2αt)3/2 2π∆

(B15)

In this regime the survival probability S(t) remains exponentially close to 1:


2

2
4∆t
Z2
.
S(t) ≈ 1 − √
exp −
4∆t
π Z2
Therefore, the mortality rate remains exponentially close
to 0, and one approximately has M (t) ≈ PFPT (t). From
our opinion, this behavior might explain relatively small
mortality, often observed in cohorts at very early ages.
We note that the behavior of the mortality rate in this
regime is not universal as it strongly depends on the amplitude ∆ of stochastic genotoxic stress.
b.

Gompertz behavior at later ages 0.54α−1 < t . α−1

Z 2 (2αt0 + 1)
Z2
α2
+ 2α ≈
≈ αZ 2 =
.
2t0
2t0
β
This expression is manifestly universal, as it depends on
morphological properties of the GRN only through the
parameters α and β characterizing GRN.
c.

Universal Gompertz behavior in the regime of Suzuki
scaling

At even later times of the order t ∼ E(tls ), when the
regime of Suzuki scaling is realized, we also find a universal Gompertz behavior. As was explained above, the
first passage time probability distribution PFPT reaches
a maximum at tmax = α−1 log Λ = E(tls ), where Λ =
α1/2 Z
, and its half-width near the the maximum is of the
∆1/2
order α−1 , see Fig. 5. By the time t ∼ tmax the argument
of the error function in Eq. (B12) is already sufficiently
small for it to be expanded. One thus has
2
2
S(t) ≈ √ Λe−αt − √ Λ3 exp(−3αt) + . . . .
π
3 π
One the other hand, one finds for PFPT (t) in the same
regime
2
2αΛ
PFPT (t) = √ e−Λ exp(−2αt) e−αt ,
π

so that approximately
2

M (t) ≈ αe−Λ

exp(−2αt)

.

Introducing t = tmax + δt one finally finds at small δt .
(2α)−1

M (t) ≈ e−1/2 αeαδt ≈ 0.61αeαδt .
(B17)
As was explained above, the effect of the stochasThus, the Gompertz law with the universal exponent
tic force δF in Eq. (A4) quickly becomes negligible
α−1 is realized at times tmax − (2α)−1 . t . tmax +
with age in comparison to the effect of the “determin(2α)−1 . We again emphasize that the Gompertz rate
istic” force −Kδx; one can easily find from the exdepends only on the properties of the GRN under conpression (B7) that the two
√ effects become comparable
sideration and does not depend on stress. The transition
at times t0 ≈ α−1 log( 3) ≈ 0.54α−1 , and the “debetween the regimes (B16) and (B17) is smooth.
terministic” force then always dominates at later times
t > t0 [27, 69]. Correspondingly, the behavior (B15)
quickly changes at later times t0 < t . α−1 , leading to
d. Slowing-down of mortality at late ages
the Gompertz-like dependence of the mortality rate on
age. For the mean square deviation E(δz 2 ) one finds
Finally, at t  tmax both the first passage time distirE(δz 2 (t0 )) = δz02 ≈ ∆
α (exp(2αt0 ) − 1) at the time t0 , and
2α(t−t0 )
2
2
2
bution
function (B11) and the survival probability (B12)
− 1 at
thus E(δz (t)) ≈ δz0 + 2(δz0 + ∆/α) e
−1
decay
exponentially.
This corresponds to an asymptotilater times t0 < t . α . As the survival probability is
cally
constant
behavior
of the mortality rate
still very close to 1, and the mortality rate is completely
determined by the behavior of the first passage time disα2 Z 2 −2αt
M (t) ≈ α −
e
− ...,
(B18)
tribution function, one finds the following expression for
2∆
the logarithm of the mortality rate
 2
 see Fig. 6. For late t corrections to the leading constant
Z2
Z (2αt0 + 1)
term become exponentially small with time. The exislog M (t) ≈ −
+log 2Z∆+2αt0 +
+ 2α (t−t0 ).
tence of mortality plateau in models of the type (A4) is
4∆t0
2t0
(B16)
known in literature [72, 73].

19
5.

1

Phenomenology of the different regimes of
ageing
a.

The case

αZ 2
∆

1

M(t)/α

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

5

10
2α t

15

Figure 6: The mortality rate M (t) for the case of the
2
deterministic initial conditions (B2); αZ
∆ = 1000. The
maximum of PFPT (t) is reached at 2αt ≈ 6.9.

0

10

males
females

M(t), 1/days

−1

10

This case includes the one with a very weak nonlinearity in the Fokker-Planck equation (B1) and Z 2 ∼
α/β and corresponds to a very high toxicity threshold Z
as compared to the characteristic amplitude of fluctuations of the stress factors ∆. As was explained above, we
naively expect a species with such a GRN to be relatively
long-lived, as the average life expectancy (B13) is logarithmically larger than the inverse Gompertz exponent
α−1 . Four very distinct regimes of mortality exist for
such species: (a) the regime of small mortality at early
ages, (b) a Gompertz regime with the Gompertz expo2
nent ∼ αβ  α, (b) a Gompertz regime with a universal
Gompertz exponent α and finally (c) a regime of constant p
mortality M∞ ∼ α. On the other hand, if indeed
Z  δz02 , the initial Gompertz exponent is very large,
and an arbitrary not too strongly sized population simply dies out before the regime of mortality slowing-down
is observed. The observed value of the average lifespan in
such populations is lower than the estimate (B13). However, it strongly depends on the size of the population;
increasing this size would lead to an apparent extension of
the observed average lifespan and eventually — to the observation of the regime of mortality slowing-down. This
is perhaps what we observe in very large cohorts of Homo
sapiens. Note that (a) the observed value of the Gompertz exponent ∼ α2 /β is much larger than the mortality
M∞ at late ages, (b) the value of the Gompertz exponent
is relatively insensitive to the amplitude ∆ of genotoxic
stress, since it only depends on the morphological properties of the GRN of a species.

b.
−2

10

−3

10

10

20
30
t,days

40

50

Figure 7: The mortality rate as a function of age from
the very large cohorts study, medflies, males and
females from [21].

The case

αZ 2
∆

&1

There are again four distinct regimes (a), (b), (c) and
(d) of ageing discussed above, with that difference that
the regime (b) is a Gompertz regime with the exponent
∼ α. Clearly, the regimes (b) and (c) are very close to
each other, and there is a strong correlation between the
observed value of the Gompertz exponent and the mortality rate M∞ at late ages. This, as it seems, is what we
observe in D. melanogaster, see Fig. 2A&C of the main
text of the paper. A relatively short average lifespan of
such species is comparable to the value of Gompertz exponent.

c.

The case α < 0, β > 0

In this case, arguably the most tempting to consider,
the effective potential V (z) of the Langevin equation possesses a false minimum, separated from the roll-down to

20
z → ∞ by a potential barrier, see Fig. 1d of the main
text. There exists a single regime of ageing realized for
the GRN of this type. It is characterized by a constant
mortality rate M∞ , its value being determined by the exponentially small Kramers probability of passage through

the barrier. If a GRN with such properties indeed exists
in nature, it would correspond to a species with negligible
senescence. We leave the in-depth study of this regime
for a future work.

[1] Partridge, L. & Gems, D. Mechanisms of ageing: public
or private? Nat. Rev. Genet. 3, 165–75 (2002). URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrg753.
[2] Sinclair, D. A. & Oberdoerffer, P. The ageing epigenome:
damaged beyond repair? Ageing Res. Rev. 8, 189–98
(2009). URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1568163709000245.
[3] Gladyshev, V. N. On the cause of aging and control of
lifespan: heterogeneity leads to inevitable damage accumulation, causing aging; control of damage composition
and rate of accumulation define lifespan. Bioessays 34,
925–9 (2012).
[4] Gladyshev, V. N. The origin of aging: imperfectnessdriven non-random damage defines the aging process and
control of lifespan. Trends Genet. 29, 506–12 (2013).
[5] Blagosklonny, M. V. Aging and immortality: quasiprogrammed senescence and its pharmacologic inhibition. Cell Cycle 5, 2087–2102 (2006).
[6] Blagosklonny, M. V. & Hall, M. N. Growth and aging: a
common molecular mechanism. Aging 1, 357 (2009).
[7] Kirkwood, T. B. L. Evolution of ageing. Nature 270,
301–304 (1977).
[8] Kirkwood, T. B. & Austad, S. N. Why do we age? Nature
408, 233–8 (2000).
[9] Williams, G. Pleiotropy, natural selection, and the evolution of senescence. Science’s SAGE KE 2001, 13 (2001).
[10] Reis, R. J. S. Model systems for aging research: syncretic
concepts and diversity of mechanisms. Genome 31, 406–
412 (1989).
[11] Skulachev, V. The programmed death phenomena, aging,
and the Samurai law of biology. Exp. Gerontol. 36, 995–
1024 (2001).
[12] Longo, V. D., Mitteldorf, J. & Skulachev, V. P. Programmed and altruistic ageing. Nat. Rev. Genet. 6, 866–
72 (2005).
[13] de Magalhães, J. a. P. Programmatic features of aging
originating in development: aging mechanisms beyond
molecular damage? FASEB J. 26, 4821–6 (2012). URL
http://www.fasebj.org/content/26/12/4821.short.
[14] Orgel, L. E. Ageing of Clones of Mammalian Cells. Nature 243, 441–445 (1973).
[15] Hopfield, J. J. Kinetic Proofreading: A New Mechanism
for Reducing Errors in Biosynthetic Processes Requiring
High Specificity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 71, 4135–4139
(1974).
[16] Danchin, A.
Natural selection and immortality.
Biogerontology 10, 503–16 (2009).
[17] Kogan, V., Molodtcov, I., Menshikov, L. I., Reis, R. J. S.
& Fedichev, P. Stability analysis of a model gene network
links aging, stress resistance, and negligible senescence.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.0463 (2014).
[18] Antoulas, A. C. Approximation of Large-Scale Dynamical
Systems (SIAM, 2009).

[19] Pletcher, S. D. et al. Genome-wide transcript profiles in aging and calorically restricted< i> drosophila
melanogaster</i>. Current Biology 12, 712–723 (2002).
[20] Avanesov, A. S. et al.
Age-and diet-associated
metabolome remodeling characterizes the aging process
driven by damage accumulation. eLife 3 (2014).
[21] Vaupel, J. W. et al. Biodemographic trajectories of
longevity. Science 280, 855–860 (1998).
[22] Horvath, S. Dna methylation age of human tissues and
cell types. Genome biology 14, R115 (2013).
[23] Balleza, E. et al. Critical dynamics in genetic regulatory
networks: examples from four kingdoms. PLoS One 3,
e2456 (2008).
[24] Krotov, D., Dubuis, J. O., Gregor, T. & Bialek, W.
Morphogenesis at criticality. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 111, 3683–3688 (2014).
[25] Fiedler, B. E. Handbook of Dynamical Systems, Volume
2 (Gulf Professional Publishing, 2002).
[26] Seydel, R. Practical Bifurcation and Stability Analysis,
vol. 1 (Springer Science & Business Media, 2009).
[27] Suzuki, M. Passage from an initial unstable state
to a final stable state.
In Advances in Chemical
Physics, Volume 46, 195–276 (John Wiley & Sons, 2009).
URL http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=
6uAY7tkKEVkC&pgis=1.
[28] The latter observation is supported by the analysis of the
recent experiments in D. melanogaster, where transcriptional responses to different stress factors were found to
contain a good fraction of similar differentially expressed
genes both in the limit of nearly lethal [60] and weak
stressors [48].
[29] Morse, C. Does variability increase with age? an archival
study of cognitive measures. Psychol Aging 8, 156–64
(1993).
[30] Rother, P. The aging changes of biological variability
(author’s transl). ZFA 33, 463–6 (1978).
[31] Khalyavkin, A. & Krutko, V. Aging is a simple deprivation syndrome driven by a quasi-programmed preventable and reversible drift of control system set points
due to inappropriate organism-environment interaction.
Biochemistry (Moscow) 79, 1133–1135 (2014).
[32] Arlia-Ciommo, A., Piano, A., Leonov, A., Svistkova, V.
& Titorenko, V. I. Quasi-programmed aging of budding yeast: a trade-off between programmed processes
of cell proliferation, differentiation, stress response, survival and death defines yeast lifespan. Cell Cycle 13,
3336–3349 (2014).
[33] Blagosklonny, M. V. Answering the ultimate question"
what is the proximal cause of aging?". Aging 4, 861–877
(2012).
[34] Blagosklonny, M. V. Mtor-driven quasi-programmed aging as a disposable soma theory. Cell Cycle 12, 1842–
1847 (2013).

21

0.1
0
0.05

−0.1

betaine

phosphocholine
histidine

bi

−0.2
−0.3

0

−0.4

C32:2 PC
acetylcarnitine

−0.5
−0.6
0

−0.05
0.5

50
1
i

100

150

200

1.5

2
4

x 10

Figure 8: Components of the vector b for D. melanogaster, calculated from the full metabolic profiles (including all
detected targeted and non-targeted metabolites) from [20].

[35] Gompertz, B. On the nature of the function expressive
of the law of human mortality, and on a new mode of
determining the value of life contingencies. Philosophical
transactions of the royal society of London 115, 513–583
(1825).
[36] Gems, D. & Doonan, R. Antioxidant defense and aging
in c. elegans: is the oxidative damage theory of aging
wrong? Cell Cycle 8, 1681–1687 (2009).
[37] Tacutu, R. et al. Human ageing genomic resources: Integrated databases and tools for the biology and genetics of
ageing. Nucleic acids research 41, D1027–D1033 (2013).
[38] Khan, I. & Prasad, N. The aging of the immune response
in drosophila melanogaster. The Journals of Gerontology
Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 68,
129–135 (2013).
[39] Zhou, D. et al. Mechanisms underlying hypoxia tolerance
in drosophila melanogaster: hairy as a metabolic switch.
PLoS genetics 4, e1000221 (2008).
[40] Overschee, V. & Moor, D. Subspace Identification for
Linear Systems: Theory, Implementation, Applications
(Kluwer Academic, 1996).
[41] Ferguson, M., Mockett, R., Shen, Y., Orr, W. & Sohal, R.
Age-associated decline in mitochondrial respiration and
electron transport in drosophila melanogaster. Biochem.
J 390, 501–511 (2005).
[42] Poynter, M. E. & Daynes, R. A. Peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor α activation modulates cellular redox
status, represses nuclear factor-κb signaling, and reduces
inflammatory cytokine production in aging. Journal of
Biological Chemistry 273, 32833–32841 (1998).
[43] Gómez-Valadés, A. G. et al. Overcoming diabetesinduced hyperglycemia through inhibition of hepatic
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (gtp) with rnai.
Molecular Therapy 13, 401–410 (2006).
[44] Blagosklonny, M. V. Validation of anti-aging drugs by
treating age-related diseases. Aging 1, 281 (2009).

[45] Budovskaya, Y. V. et al. An< i> elt-3/elt-5/elt-6</i>
gata transcription circuit guides aging in< i> c. elegans</i>. Cell 134, 291–303 (2008).
[46] Hayflick, L. Entropy explains aging, genetic determinism
explains longevity, and undefined terminology explains
misunderstanding both. PLoS Genet. 3, e220 (2007).
[47] Christensen, K., Doblhammer, G., Rau, R. &
Vaupel, J. W.
Ageing populations:
the challenges ahead. Lancet 374, 1196–208 (2009). URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0140673609614604.
[48] Moskalev, A. et al.
Mining gene expression data
for pollutants (dioxin, toluene, formaldehyde) and low
dose of gamma-irradiation.
PLoS ONE 9, e86051
(2014). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.
pone.0086051.
[49] American medical association, resolution 420 (a-13):
recognition of obesity as a disease. In Proceedings of the
House of Delegates 162nd Annual Meeting (2013).
[50] Ren, C., Webster, P., Finkel, S. E. & Tower, J. Increased internal and external bacterial load during< i>
drosophila</i> aging without life-span trade-off. Cell
metabolism 6, 144–152 (2007).
[51] Finch, C. E. Longevity, senescence, and the genome (University of Chicago Press, 1994).
[52] Buffenstein, R. The naked mole-rat: a new long-living
model for human aging research. The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences
60, 1369–1377 (2005).
[53] Kim, E. B. et al. Genome sequencing reveals insights into
physiology and longevity of the naked mole rat. Nature
479, 223–227 (2011).
[54] Jeannette Loram, A. B. Age-related changes in gene expression in tissues of the sea urchin< i> strongylocentrotus franciscanus</i>. Mechanisms of Ageing and Development 133, 338–347 (2012).

22
Term-For-Term, biological process

nucleoside triphosphate biosynthetic process
purine nucleoside triphosphate biosynthetic process
ribonucleoside triphosphate biosynthetic process
purine ribonucleoside triphosphate biosynthetic process
ATP biosynthetic process
purine nucleoside biosynthetic process
purine ribonucleoside biosynthetic process
energy coupled proton transport, down electrochemical gradient
ATP synthesis coupled proton transport
purine nucleoside monophosphate biosynthetic process
purine ribonucleoside monophosphate biosynthetic process
glycosyl compound biosynthetic process
nucleoside biosynthetic process
ribonucleoside biosynthetic process
nucleoside monophosphate biosynthetic process
ribonucleoside monophosphate biosynthetic process
hydrogen ion transmembrane transport
hydrogen transport
proton transport
chorion-containing eggshell formation
eggshell formation
purine ribonucleotide biosynthetic process
purine nucleotide biosynthetic process
ribonucleotide biosynthetic process
ribose phosphate biosynthetic process
purine-containing compound biosynthetic process
nucleoside phosphate biosynthetic process
nucleotide biosynthetic process
ATP metabolic process
egg coat formation
vitelline membrane formation involved in chorion-containing eggshell formation
vitelline membrane formation
purine nucleoside monophosphate metabolic process
purine ribonucleoside monophosphate metabolic process
nucleoside monophosphate metabolic process
ribonucleoside monophosphate metabolic process
proteolysis
extracellular matrix assembly
organophosphate biosynthetic process
inorganic cation transmembrane transport
inorganic ion transmembrane transport
mitochondrial electron transport, cytochrome c to oxygen
monovalent inorganic cation transport
purine nucleoside triphosphate metabolic process
ribonucleoside triphosphate metabolic process
purine ribonucleoside triphosphate metabolic process
nucleoside triphosphate metabolic process
cellular component assembly involved in morphogenesis
carbohydrate derivative biosynthetic process
ovarian follicle cell development
columnar/cuboidal epithelial cell development
columnar/cuboidal epithelial cell differentiation
purine nucleoside metabolic process
purine ribonucleoside metabolic process
ribonucleoside metabolic process
nucleoside metabolic process
glycosyl compound metabolic process
epithelial cell development
purine ribonucleotide metabolic process
purine nucleotide metabolic process
ribose phosphate metabolic process
ribonucleotide metabolic process
cation transmembrane transport
purine-containing compound metabolic process
organonitrogen compound biosynthetic process
oxidative phosphorylation
single-organism biosynthetic process
protein localization to endoplasmic reticulum
extracellular matrix organization
epithelial cell differentiation
cation transport
nucleotide metabolic process
nucleoside phosphate metabolic process
SRP-dependent cotranslational protein targeting to membrane, translocation
nucleobase-containing small molecule metabolic process
mitochondrial ATP synthesis coupled electron transport
ATP synthesis coupled electron transport
ion transmembrane transport
respiratory electron transport chain
carbohydrate derivative metabolic process
electron transport chain
generation of precursor metabolites and energy
extracellular structure organization
female gamete generation
cell wall macromolecule catabolic process
cell wall organization or biogenesis
cell wall macromolecule metabolic process
organophosphate metabolic process
epithelium development
ion transport
cellular respiration
eggshell chorion assembly
germ cell development
oogenesis
developmental process involved in reproduction
transmembrane transport
cellular process involved in reproduction in multicellular organism
energy derivation by oxidation of organic compounds
ATP catabolic process
purine nucleoside monophosphate catabolic process
purine ribonucleoside monophosphate catabolic process
multi-organism process
nucleoside monophosphate catabolic process
ribonucleoside monophosphate catabolic process
gamete generation
anatomical structure formation involved in morphogenesis
single organism reproductive process
SRP-dependent cotranslational protein targeting to membrane
cotranslational protein targeting to membrane
establishment of protein localization to endoplasmic reticulum
protein targeting to ER
protein folding
intracellular protein transmembrane transport
protein targeting to membrane
oxidation-reduction process
response to stress
response to inorganic substance
humoral immune response
defense response

B

pos neg

Parent-Child-Intersection, molecular function

pos neg

oxidoreductase activity, acting on a heme group of donors

heme-copper terminal oxidase activity

structural constituent of chorion

6.5
6.0

structural constituent of egg coat

5.5
5.0
4.5

structural molecule activity

-log10(p-value)

A

4.0
3.5

serine hydrolase activity

unfolded protein binding

iron ion binding

13.5
12.0
10.5
9.0
7.5

C

Parent-Child-Intersection, cellular component

pos neg

6.0
4.5
3.0

external encapsulating structure

lipid particle
15.0
13.5
envelope

12.0
10.5
9.0

cytochrome complex

7.5

-log10(p-value)

2%
4%
6%
8%
10%

-log10(p-value)

Frequency

6.0
4.5
respiratory chain

extracellular region

Figure 9: GO enrichment analysis of the leading gene compounds of the ageing direction, b. (A) Term-by-term
results summary, Biological Process only (cf to Figure 3a); Parent-Child-Intersection results, (B) Cellular
Compartment and (C) Molecular Function.

23
[55] Bauer, S., Gagneur, J. & Robinson, P. N. Going bayesian:
model-based gene set analysis of genome-scale data. Nucleic acids research 38, 3523–3532 (2010).
[56] Grossmann, S., Bauer, S., Robinson, P. N. & Vingron,
M. Improved detection of overrepresentation of geneontology annotations with parent–child analysis. Bioinformatics 23, 3024–3031 (2007).
[57] Da Wei Huang, B. T. S. & Lempicki, R. A. Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists using
david bioinformatics resources. Nature protocols 4, 44–57
(2008).
[58] Huang, D. W., Sherman, B. T. & Lempicki, R. A. Bioinformatics enrichment tools: paths toward the comprehensive functional analysis of large gene lists. Nucleic
acids research 37, 1–13 (2009).
[59] Xia, J., Mandal, R., Sinelnikov, I. V., Broadhurst, D. &
Wishart, D. S. Metaboanalyst 2.0-a comprehensive server
for metabolomic data analysis. Nucleic acids research 40,
W127–W133 (2012).
[60] Brown, J. B. et al. Diversity and dynamics of the
drosophila transcriptome. Nature (2014).
[61] Kadish, I. et al. Hippocampal and cognitive aging across
the lifespan: a bioenergetic shift precedes and increased
cholesterol trafficking parallels memory impairment. The
Journal of Neuroscience 29, 1805–1816 (2009).
[62] The number of different principal components P Cn representing the signal x(t1 ), . . . , x(tm ) does not exceed m.
[63] Schervish, M. J. Theory of Statistics, vol. 21 (Springer
New York, 2011).
[64] In particular, the rate of these changes is limited by a
single gene transcription time, ∼ 1 min.
[65] In particular, they are not small at early times, close to
the initial state of the expressome.
[66] When higher order derivatives in Eq. (A1) are taken
into account, this argument, albeit becoming more involved, remains valid: one has to construct the perturbation theory in powers of small parameter , which
still determines the smallest eigenvalue of the matrix
A(f ) = K + i2πf D + (2πf )2 M + . . . . Similarly to the
case considered here, all higher eigenvalues of A(f ) possess positive real parts.
[67] Zwanzig, R. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics (Oxford University Press, USA, 2001).
[68] Of course, albeit natural, this is still an assumption, as
different gene expressions are not truly independent GRN
state variables.
[69] Suzuki, M. Scaling theory of transient phenomena near
the instability point. Journal of Statistical Physics 16,
11–32 (1977). URL http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/BF01014603.
[70] Redner, S. A Guide to First-Passage Processes (Cambridge University Press, 2001).
[71] Aalen, O., Borgan, O. & Gjessing, H. Survival and Event
History Analysis: A Process Point of View (Springer,
2008).
[72] Weitz, J. S. & Fraser, H. B. Explaining mortality rate
plateaus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98, 15383–6
(2001).
[73] Steinsaltz, D. & Evans, S. N. Markov mortality models: implications of quasistationarity and varying initial
distributions. Theor. Popul. Biol. 65, 319–37 (2004).

24
[Competing Interests] The authors declare that they
have no competing financial interests.
[Author Contrbutions] All authors contributed equally
to this work.

[Correspondence] Correspondence and requests for
materials should be addressed to P.O.F. (email: peter.fedichev@gmail.com) and D.P. (email:
dpodolskiy@research.bwh.harvard.edu).

