Stochastic Dynamics of Virus Capsid Formation:
Direct versus Hierarchical Self-Assembly
Johanna E Baschek,∗ Heinrich C R Klein,∗ and Ulrich S Schwarz

arXiv:1502.00156v1 [q-bio.SC] 31 Jan 2015

Institute for Theoretical Physics and BioQuant,
Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany

Abstract
In order to replicate within their cellular host, many viruses have developed self-assembly strategies for their capsids which are sufficiently robust as to be reconstituted in vitro. Mathematical
models for virus self-assembly usually assume that the bonds leading to cluster formation have
constant reactivity over the time course of assembly (direct assembly). In some cases, however,
binding sites between the capsomers have been reported to be activated during the self-assembly
process (hierarchical assembly). In order to study possible advantages of such hierarchical schemes
for icosahedral virus capsid assembly, we use Brownian dynamics simulations of a patchy particle
model that allows us to switch binding sites on and off during assembly. For T1 viruses, we implement a hierarchical assembly scheme where inter-capsomer bonds become active only if a complete
pentamer has been assembled. We find direct assembly to be favorable for reversible bonds allowing for repeated structural reorganizations, while hierarchical assembly is favorable for strong
bonds with small dissociation rate, as this situation is less prone to kinetic trapping. However, at
the same time it is more vulnerable to monomer starvation during the final phase. Increasing the
number of initial monomers does have only a weak effect on these general features. The differences
between the two assembly schemes become more pronounced for more complex virus geometries,
as shown here for T3 viruses, which assemble through homogeneous pentamers and heterogeneous
hexamers in the hierarchical scheme. In order to complement the simulations for this more complicated case, we introduce a master equation approach that agrees well with the simulation results.
Our analysis shows for which molecular parameters hierarchical assembly schemes can outperform
direct ones and suggests that viruses with high bond stability might prefer hierarchical assembly
schemes. These insights increase our physical understanding of an essential biological process, with
many interesting potential applications in medicine and materials science.

∗

These authors contributed equally.

1

I.

BACKGROUND

The structure and dynamics of viruses are a fascinating research subject not only from
a biological, but also from a physical perspective [1]. In particular, they are a very instructive model system to study self-assembly of large protein complexes with a relatively clear
biological function. As viruses do not show metabolic activity of their own, they need to
infect host organisms in order to replicate. One key step during the replication process
is the formation of the protein shell containing the viral genome. For many viruses, the
capsid formation is sufficiently autonomous that it occurs even in vitro [2]. This robustness
of the process guarantees successful replication within the dynamic and heterogeneous environment of a living cell. Although virus shell formation is considered as a paradigm for
the self-assembly of protein complexes [3], its underlying principles are far from being fully
understood. Progress in our understanding of virus assembly would increase our knowledge of a process of large biological and medical relevance as well as help to advance new
self-assembly strategies in material science applications [4].
A large variety of mathematical models and simulation approaches has been developed to
gain insight into the dynamics of capsid formation from a theoretical perspective. In these
approaches the characteristics of protein association and dissociation processes were analyzed
depending on parameters like interaction strength, subunit geometry or temperature. The
employed techniques range from large-scale Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations with only
a modest amount of coarse-graining of the atomic details [5] through various schemes of
coarse-grained MD [6–11] to patchy particle simulations with interaction potentials [12, 13].
A thermodynamic framework for assembly of icosahedral viruses has been established by
Zlotnick and coworkers [14–20]. In general, these studies have revealed that the formation
of complete virus capsids requires intermediate bond stability. If interaction strength is
too high (or, equivalently, temperature too low), the system becomes kinetically trapped in
intermediates which cannot reconstruct anymore due to the strong binding. If interaction
strength is too low (or, equivalently, temperature too high), the target structure is not
sufficiently stable. Another mechanism which can prevent complete capsid formation is the
occurrence of misfits, leading to structural polymorphism as often studied with MD-schemes
allowing for cluster distortions [21–23].
Due to the large number of single building blocks assembling during virus formation (the
2

simplest icosahedral capsid, T1, has already 60 protein components), there is a multitude
of topologically possible assembly pathways. Similar to protein folding, the dominance of
few key structures is believed to limit the number of pathways and to speed up the process
[14]. In this respect it has been observed that some viruses have developed mechanisms to
orchestrate self-assembly by regulating the reactivity of their binding sites [24, 25]. This
switching establishes a hierarchy in the formation of transient intermediates during the
assembly process. In a number of experiments, partly supported by theoretical calculations,
it has been shown that intermediates of pentameric and hexameric symmetry are of special
importance for the assembly process of icosahedral viruses [3, 26–32]. Early observations of
in vitro assembly of phages and small viruses revealed pentamer sub-structures to play a
key role [26, 27]. Experiments on Brome Mosaic Virus [28], Cowpea Chlorotic Mottle Virus
[30], Human Papillomavirus [31] and Simian Virus 40 in vivo and in vitro [32] explicitly
treat capsid assembly from pentameric capsomers. A model for the assembly of Cowpea
Chlorotic Mottle Virus suggests that its protein shell assembles from pentamers as well as
from trimers of dimers (hexamers) [3].
Despite the described variety of computational approaches used for virus assembly, to our
knowledge the effect of a state-dependent activation of binding sites during the assembly
process (hierarchical assembly) has not been explored yet from the theoretical point of
view. Although some models consider assembly from pentameric and hexameric clusters,
these subunits at the same time represent the smallest entities of the system and their
formation from single proteins is not included [10, 21, 33]. Here we investigate the effect
of a binding hierarchy on the assembly of icosahedral viruses by comparison of hierarchical
and non-hierarchical (direct) assembly from single monomers. We use Brownian Dynamics
simulations with reaction patches which have previously been used to study transport-limited
protein reactions [34, 35]. Our approach assumes well-defined capsid geometries (in the
spirit of local rules) and does not require the use of interaction potentials. This makes our
simulations relatively fast, but does not allow us to study structural polymorphism. One
particular strength of our approach is that it implements the correct mobility matrix for each
possible geometry of the assembling clusters [34]. Another advantage which is exploited here
is that one can easily implement hierarchical assembly by an event-driven switching of patch
reactivity.
This paper is organized as follows. We first give an overview of the simulation framework
3

and the implemented geometries. Then we present our results for direct and hierarchical
assembly of T1 virus capsids. The analysis of T1-assembly is completed with a comparison of
the two assembly mechanisms and a discussion of the effect of an increased number of initial
monomers. We then explain our results for direct and hierarchical assembly of the more
complex T3 virus. They are followed by a detailed analysis of the formation of individual
capsomers, which includes a master equation approach. The paper closes with concluding
remarks and an outlook to potential future applications of our approach.

II.

METHODS
A.

Outline of the Computer Simulations

To study virus assembly we use a Brownian Dynamics approach with patchy particles
which has been developed before to investigate diffusion and association of model proteins
and their complexes [34, 35]. Single proteins are modeled as hard, spherical particles with
equal radius. They are equipped with a specific number of reaction patches representing
the binding sites. The geometry of the virus capsid is coded in the position of the reaction
patches on the spheres. Assemblies of several proteins are treated as rigid objects whose
diffusive characteristics are calculated on the fly upon formation [36]. In each simulation
step the particles are propagated according to their translational and rotational diffusive
properties, followed by possible association and dissociation steps. Binding of two proteins is
implemented as a two-step process following the notion of the encounter complex [37]. Upon
diffusional overlap of two reaction patches, binding occurs stochastically with a predefined
patch-specific rate ka . Thus, the probability for the transition from encounter to a bound
state within a given timestep ∆t is pbind = ka ∆t. If the bond formation is accepted, the
binding partners instantaneously click into their predefined relative orientation, assuming
that his processes is much faster and less stochastic than diffusion and association. The
repositioning is distributed among the two clusters according to their diffusive weights. If
this reorientation leads to a steric overlap of the two associating partners with each other or
with other protein complexes, binding is rejected and the old positions and orientations of
the clusters are used for the next simulation step. Similarly to association, dissociation of an
existing bond occurs stochastically with the bond specific rate kd . Thus, a bond is disrupted
4

within ∆t with the probability pbreak = kd ∆t. If the broken bond was the only connection
between two clusters, both are propagated independently in the following simulation step.
The simulation algorithm is combined with a visualization routine which enables us to follow
the assembly process. Some representative snapshots of the step-wise assembly of a T1 virus
capsid are shown in Figure 1. While the upper row shows direct assembly from 60 monomers
(dark blue), in the lower row monomers (light blue) first have to form pentamers (red), which
then in turn form the complete capsid (hierarchical assembly).

B.

Capsid Geometries

The capsid geometries follow the well-established Caspar-Klug scheme where the quasiequivalent positions in the scaffold of an icosahedral capsid are represented by different types
of monomers [38]. The structural complexity is described by the triangulation number T
derived from the capsid geometry. T is restricted to certain integer values (T=1,3,4,7,9,...)
and denotes the number of protein types which are needed to form a full icosahedral shell.
The total number of monomers per capsid is nf =60 T. The icosahedron vertices represent
points around which the proteins cluster into close-packed arrays. The proteins grouped
around the twelve vertices (which represent axes of fivefold symmetry) form pentamers,
while the triangular faces of the icosahedron are covered with hexamers. Every scaffold
consists of 12 pentameric and 10 · (T−1) hexameric capsomers. In our description we restrict
the effect of growing complexity (T> 1) to the hexamers. Thus, every hexamer contains
(T−1) different proteins, so that the number of hexameric subunits as well as the number
of individual components of each hexamer increase with T. We want to point out that this
scheme for virus geometries into ringlike subunits represents only one out of several possible
realizations. Following previous approaches to the characterization of icosahedral geometries
[39], we use a set of local rules to define the bond angles between the individual particles.
In this way, the resulting structure is encoded in the bond properties of the elementary
subunits. Due to the high symmetry of the viral capsid, only a small number of different
bonds is sufficient to define a unique target geometry. We note that the exact definition
of bond properties impedes the formation of aberrant cluster structures. Therefore the
approach used here does not allow us to study structural polymorphism.
5

FIG. 1. Visualization of the computer simulations. The snapshots show the course of T1 virus
capsid formation for direct (top) and hierarchical assembly (bottom) from nf =60 single monomers.
In hierarchical assembly, a color change of the proteins from blue to red indicates the switch of
binding characteristics upon completed formation of a pentameric capsomer.

C.

Direct and Hierarchical Assembly

Direct assembly is defined as the formation of a capsid from monomers whose bond
properties remain unchanged throughout the whole simulation. Thus every reaction patch
is active at all times. In contrast to this unconstrained assembly mechanism, hierarchical
assembly is decomposed into multiple steps of switching of patch reactivity depending on
the configuration of the particles. Since pentameric and hexameric rings have been identified
as key subunits in the assembly process, we implement hierarchical assembly as switching
of reactivity upon formation of these structures. Initially only the two patches leading
to assembly of pentameric or hexameric ring structures are active on every single protein
(intra-capsomer bonds). These patches are locked once the ring has closed, so that the
formation of these subunits is irreversible. Simultaneously to the locking of intra-capsomer
patches the binding sites which connect the pentamers and hexamers with each other (intercapsomer bonds) are activated so that in a second step, formation of the capsid proceeds
via association of the capsomer rings. This collective switching in binding properties should
not be confused with the conformational switching of individual subunits which has been
used before to study structural polymorphism [21–23].
6

D.

Simulation Details

At the beginning of each simulation run the single proteins are placed at random, nonoverlapping positions in a cubic periodic boundary box. From this configuration we let the
system evolve according to the algorithm described above with a constant timestep ∆t corresponding to a real time of 0.1 ns. A trajectory (one simulation run of predetermined finite
length) is considered as successful if a complete virus shell is formed within the simulation
time. The diffusive properties used here correspond to a temperature value of T=293 K
and a viscosity value of η=2 · 10−3 Pa s. The single proteins have a radius of R=1 nm and
a patch radius of r=0.4 nm with the center of the spherical patches placed at the surface
of the protein. We choose the same initial concentrations for all simulations of one virus
geometry. To observe a considerable number of association events within a reasonable time
we use relatively high concentrations of several mM. Although these concentration values
exceed those applied in experimental setups (several µM [37]), this is a common practice
in simulation approaches [7, 11, 34, 35]. During the simulations we record the number of
clusters of size n, νn (1 ≤ n ≤ nf =60 T), as well as the first passage times (FTPs) of
intermediates of specific sizes. The probability that some monomer belongs to a cluster of
size n is p(n) = (νn n)/nf . The sum of these probabilities is normalized to one. The average
cluster size is given by
n=

nf
X

p(n)n =

n=1

III.
A.

nf
X
νn n
n=1

nf

n.

(1)

RESULTS
Overview

In this section we investigate the dynamics of virus capsid formation for direct and hierarchical assembly and compare them in order to identify their generic differences. To
characterize the assembly performance, the yield (i.e. the relative number of successful
trajectories within a given simulation time) and the first passage times (FPTs) of selected
intermediates are recorded for different model parameters. We systematically compare both
assembly mechanisms in a parameter space ranging from ka =3.0 ns−1 to 9.0 ns−1 and from
kd =1.5 · 10−3 ns−1 to 1.95 · 10−2 ns−1 . For the simulations of assembly of T1 capsids we
7

FIG. 2. T1 direct assembly. a) and b) show the relative population of different cluster sizes as
a function of time for a favorable (ka =5.0 ns−1 , kd =13.5 · 10−3 ns−1 ) and a unfavorable (ka =8.0
ns−1 , kd =1.5 · 10−3 ns−1 ) set of parameters, respectively. The average cluster size is shown as solid
line. In the inset the monomer population ν1 (t) is shown as a function of time. c) Parameter space
analysis of direct assembly. Relative yield (left) and relative assembly speed (right) are depicted
using a heat-map representation for various combinations of ka and kd . All data are obtained from
40 independent simulation runs.

use an initial monomer concentration of c=4.5 mM (60 particles in a cubic box with side
length L=28 nm). Investigation of T3 is carried out at an initial concentration of c=1.7 mM
(nf =180, L=55 nm). To classify different assembly regimes we distinguish between three
different phases: the early, intermediate and final phases which we define to be delineated
by the emergence of cluster sizes 1/3 nf , 2/3 nf and nf , respectively.
8

B.

T1 Direct Assembly

Figures 2a and b show the temporal evolution of the relative population of all cluster
sizes for one favorable and one unfavorable set of model parameters, respectively. The
average cluster size n̄(t) (see Eq. 1) is shown as solid line and shows a sigmoidal shape.
Starting from a full set of available monomers, we observe subsequent formation of dimers,
trimers and then larger intermediate clusters. In the favorable case shown in Figure 2a, the
distribution always stays close to the average and complete capsid formation is achieved.
Remarkably, this successful case is also characterized by the relatively long persistence of a
monomer pool (inset to Figure 2a). The persistence of a relatively high number of monomers
during the intermediate assembly phase shows the system’s capability to reorganize and
enables one dominant cluster to grow. In marked contrast, for the unfavorable case shown
in Figure 2b, the distribution of intermediates considerably broadens. The average does not
reach complete capsid formation, and the monomer pool is depleted much earlier. Here the
intermediates are more restricted in undergoing recombinations, many trajectories become
kinetically trapped and the average does not capture anymore the dynamics of the assembly
process. In both cases, the assembly dynamics slow down during the final phase. This can,
at least partly, be attributed to monomer starvation as the slow-down occurs when only very
few monomers are left. The prominent features found here (sigmoidal kinetics, fast growth
after lag time, kinetic trapping, monomer starvation in the final phase) have been found
before also with coarse-grained MD-simulations [6, 7, 9].
The main difference between the two parameter sets used in Figure 2 is that the second
(unfavorable) case leads to more stable intermediates (higher ka , lower kd ). In Figure 2c we
systematically investigate the effects of the bond parameters on direct assembly by comparing yield and assembly speed for different combinations of ka and kd . The upper left corner
of the parameter plots represent strong bonds (high ka , low kd ), while weak bonds are found
in the lower right corner (low ka , high kd ). The left plot shows the relative yield averaged
over an ensemble of 40 trajectories. Direct assembly of T1 shows a large region of high yield
for dissociation rate values above a threshold of around kd =10.5 · 10−3ns−1 . Below this value
almost no successful assembly is observed. This is due to the limited possibilities of the intermediates to reorganize, which results in the occurrence of kinetically trapped structures.
For low dissociation rates we also observe a dependency of the yield on the choice of ka . In
9

this region, lowering of the bond breaking rate kd can at least partly be compensated by
lowering of the association rate ka .
In the right plot of Figure 2c, we show the relative assembly speed as a function of
model parameters. The assembly speed is defined as the inverse of the completion time
of the capsid, v = 1/FPT(nf ). Because this quantity can be obtained only for successful
assemblies, here we average only over completed trajectories. In contrast to the relative
yield, we see a clear dependence of the assembly speed on the association rate ka across the
whole parameter space. Fastest assembly is observed for relatively low values of ka . The
observation that relatively high association rates lead to slower assembly can be explained
by the increasing tendency to form more than one large cluster in the early and intermediate
phases. Thus, even for high dissociation rates, the necessary rearrangement of the clusters
slows down the assembly process considerably. We also record a relatively high assembly
speed at low kd values where only low yield is observed. Since the relative speed values
are obtained by averaging over successful trajectories only, these results show that, if a full
capsid is formed, it is completed within a short time.
To conclude, we see that the success of assembly in terms of yield is mostly determined
by the choice of the dissociation rate kd . For low values of kd the system becomes kinetically
trapped, while large values of kd allow for the reorganization of the clusters. The relative
assembly speed of successful trajectories is strongly influenced by the choice of ka . Here
we identify an optimum at ka =5.0 ns−1 , with speed being worse both at larger and smaller
values. In agreement with previous studies, we observe that most efficient assembly (i.e. high
yield combined with fast capsid completion) occurs at intermediate bond stability and that
bond reversibility is an important requirement for successful capsid formation [9, 40, 41].

C.

T1 Hierarchical Assembly

Hierarchical assembly of a T1 virus capsid is analyzed in a similar manner as direct
assembly. Figures 3a and b show the evolution of relative cluster size population and the
average cluster size for assembly under favorable and unfavorable conditions, respectively.
Due to the imposed hierarchy, clusters above pentamer size adopt only particular size values
(multiples of five). Hierarchical assembly under favorable conditions (Figure 3a) shows a
long early phase during which the first pentamers are formed. The following intermediate
10

FIG. 3. T1 hierarchical assembly. a) and b) show the relative population for a favorable (ka =8.0
ns−1 , kd =1.5 · 10−3 ns−1 ) and unfavorable (ka =5.0 ns−1 , kd =1.35 · 10−2 ns−1 ) set of parameters,
respectively. The average cluster size is shown as solid line. In the inset of a) the FPT(nf ) is
plotted against the FPT of the last pentamer. The inset of b) shows the completion times of the
pentamers for the parameter sets analyzed in a) and b), respectively. c) Parameter space analysis
of hierarchical assembly. The relative yield of full capsids (left) and of clusters of size n=55 (right)
are depicted using a heat-map representation for various combinations of ka and kd . All data are
obtained from 40 independent simulation runs.

phase is characterized by addition of newly formed capsomers to one dominant cluster.
A striking feature of hierarchical assembly is the dramatic slow-down in the final phase.
A majority of trajectories remains in the n=55 state for a long time where all but one
pentamer have formed and joined the almost complete capsid. This can be explained by
11

increased monomer starvation. In hierarchical assembly, all small clusters of sizes below
five are connected by single bonds only. Since the low monomer concentration in the final
phase reduces the frequency of diffusional encounter, it takes a long time before the last
pentameric ring can be closed irreversibly. From the inset of Figure 3a we clearly identify
the formation of the last pentamer as the bottleneck of capsid completion in hierarchical
assembly. Here the capsid completion time is plotted against the formation time of the last
pentamer for several successful trajectories of one exemplary parameter set. We observe
that the completion of the last pentamer is almost instantly followed by its integration into
the capsid.
The assembly dynamics shown in Figure 3b for an unfavorable parameter combination
does not lead to complete assembly within the given simulation time. In contrast to the
favorable case (Figure 3a), the association rate is lower and the dissociation rate is higher,
which results in a reduced overall bond stability. This is found to strongly hinder the
formation of the late pentamers. Although slower, the overall course of the assembly process
is not substantially different from the successful case in Figure 3a. The main difference
between the two parameter combinations becomes clear by looking at the completion times
of the pentamers which are shown in the inset of Figure 3b. We see that the pentamer FPTs
of both cases follow the same shape during the early and intermediate phases, but that for
low bond stability the completion times in the late phase are delayed. This delay grows
with ongoing assembly, so that the final pentamer does not close within the simulation time.
Here the negative effect of low monomer concentration on capsomer assembly, which was
discussed earlier, is amplified by the low bond stability.
To quantify the effects of different combinations of ka and kd on hierarchical assembly
of T1, we again perform a systematic investigation of the bond parameter space as shown
in Figure 3c. Considering the relative yield of complete capsids (Figure 3c, left image), we
observe that only a narrow range of parameters leads to a considerable fraction of successful
trajectories. High yield is only observed at high bond stabilities (high ka , low kd ) in the
upper left corner of the parameter plot. To take into account the critical role of the formation
of the last pentamer in our simulations, we also show the yield of almost finished capsids
(n=55) at the end of the simulation time (Figure 3c, right image). The region where we
observe almost finished capsid is considerably expanded and a large fraction of trajectories
reaches n=55 in the upper left corner of parameter space. The yield decreases along the
12

FIG. 4. Comparison of T1 direct and hierarchical assembly. We evaluate a) FPT(30), b) FPT(40),
c) FPT(50) and d) FPT(60) for different parameter combinations (ka , kd ). Blue fields indicate
points at which the respective FPT for direct assembly is smallest while red fields identify hierarchical assembly to be faster. Points where no clear distinction is possible are colored in gray.
Every data point is obtained from 40 simulation runs.

diagonal from high towards low bond stability values (lower right corner). It becomes clear
that the unfavorable parameter combinations do not show kinetically trapped states as they
occur in direct assembly, and that most trajectories are close to capsid completion. The high
yield of almost finished capsids and the lack of trapped trajectories suggests that the bond
hierarchy promotes successful capsid completion, but is vulnerable to monomer starvation.

D.

T1 Direct versus Hierarchical Assembly

The above analysis has revealed a marked difference between direct and hierarchical
assembly schemes. From Figures 2 and 3, it is also clear that the final state of a trajectory is
strongly affected by the finite length of the simulation and provides only limited information
on the dynamics of assembly. In particular hierarchical assembly depends strongly on the
formation of the last pentamer and suffers from monomer starvation in the final phase. To
evaluate in more detail the performance of the assembly process in its different phases, we
systematically compare the FPTs of certain intermediates for both direct and hierarchical
assembly. The results are depicted in Figure 4 in a sequence of phase diagrams. Blue areas
are those where direct assembly performs better while red indicates parameter combinations
where hierarchical assembly is faster. Points where a clear distinction is not possible are
13

shown in gray (difference of direct and hierarchical FPTs less than 10% of the sum of both
FPTs).
For the first emergence of intermediates of half the capsid size (FPT(30), Figure 4a),
direct assembly is faster throughout the whole parameter space. This is related to the
earlier observation of an extended initial phase of hierarchical assembly when compared to
direct assembly (see Figure 3). It can be explained by the fact that the monomers in direct
assembly exhibit three active binding sites and thus easily form clusters of considerable size.
Since hierarchically assembling monomers are designed to form flat pentamer rings, only
the two patches forming intra-capsomer bonds are active until full capsomers are formed.
Thus the number of fruitful encounters is reduced remarkably, which leads to the observed
slow-down of the initial phase.
Looking at the FPTs for the two-third assembled capsid (FPT(40), Figure 4b), we see a
large region in the upper left part of the parameter space (high ka , low kd ) where hierarchical
assembly is now able to overtake direct assembly. This can be attributed to two effects.
Firstly, hierarchical assembly speeds up once a pool of capsomers is available. Secondly,
direct assembly is slowed down at high bond stabilities. Since the combination of fast
formation of large, stable clusters in the early phase (due to high ka ) and slow dissociation
of small clusters leads to a small number of free monomers, the dominant cluster grows
only slowly. In the region of lower bond stability, direct assembly remains faster. Here
the increased ability of un- and rebinding of single proteins allows for fast rearrangement,
leading to a sufficiently large supply of free monomers so that the dominant cluster can
easily grow beyond n=40. Simultaneously the pentamer rings in the hierarchical setup form
slower than at high bond stabilities.
The difference between the two assembly mechanisms becomes even more evident when
looking at FPT(50) (Figure 4c). At low kd values, direct assembly experiences kinetic trapping. As a consequence, hierarchical assembly is superior for almost all small kd values, also
at points where the question of dominance remained undecided for FPT(40). The parameter
region of weak bonds where direct assembly is faster than hierarchical one is observed to
extend during the step from FPT(40) to FPT(50) (lower right corner of parameter space).
Under these conditions the effect of beginning monomer starvation delays the pentamer
completion of hierarchical assembly.
For the assembly speed of the complete virus capsid (FPT(60), Figure 4d), direct as14

sembly dominates again across almost the whole parameter space. Only at very high bond
stabilities hierarchical assembly shows lower or comparable FPT values. This is not surprising taking into account the results for the overall yield of hierarchical assembly (Figure 3c)
and underlines the large impact of monomer starvation on hierarchical assembly.
We conclude that hierarchical assembly is not always better than direct assembly. Direct
assembly performs better both at the initial and final phases. During the intermediate
phase, however, hierarchical assembly is more successful, because it does not suffer from
stable bonds preventing structural rearrangements. Due to the limited number of possible
interactions, hierarchical assembly is unlikely to get trapped in sub-pentameric units. In
general, for hierarchical assembly parameter combinations resulting in high bond stability
are favorable. At these values we observe kinetic trapping of most of the directly assembling
systems. In addition, the symmetry of the pentamers themselves and the low complexity of
their interactions prevent them from getting trapped in large clusters incompatible with the
final capsid. For T1, this favors the step-wise build-up of the target structure.

E.

T1 Effect of Initial Number of Monomers

Until now we have used exactly as many monomers as needed to form one complete capsid.
In experiments, monomers are likely to be present in surplus or to be provided with a certain
rate. To study the effect of the limited number of monomers on our simulation, we next
increase the initial supply to N=80 and N=120 monomers while keeping the concentration
constant by enlarging the simulation box. For the case N=80, a surplus of 20 monomers will
be present upon formation of a complete capsid. For the case N=120, two capsids might
be formed in parallel and thus the benefit of an increased initial monomer concentration
might be shared by them in a complex manner. Figures 5a-5c show a comparison between
direct and hierarchical assembly of the FPT(50) for an initial number of N=60, N=80 and
N=120 monomers, respectively. As in Figure 4, blue fields indicate that direct assembly
has a lower FPT(50), red fields mark parameter pairs for which hierarchical assembly is
faster and for gray fields no clear distinction is possible. We see that the comparison of
both mechanisms leads to similar results for all setups. When increasing number of initial
monomers we observe a slightly larger region of the parameter space in which hierarchical
assembly becomes favorable. This is not surprising, as we identified monomer starvation to
15

FPT(50)
9

a)

Yield
d)

’-’ matrix

’-’ matrix

-1

ka [ns ]

N=60

8
7
6
5
4
3
9

b)

e)

’-’ matrix

’-’ matrix

ka [ns ]

7

-1

N=80

8

6
5
4
3
9

c)

f)

’-’ matrix

’-’ matrix

ka [ns ]

7

-1

N=120

8

6
5
4
3
1.5 4.5 7.5 10.5 13.5 16.5 19.5 1.5 4.5 7.5 10.5 13.5 16.5 19.5

kd [10-3ns-1]

-3

-1

kd [10 ns ]

FIG. 5. Effect of initial number of monomers on T1 assembly. Comparison of FPT(50) (a-c) and
yield (d-f) for direct and hierarchical assembly with an initial number of N=60, N=80 and N=120
monomers, respectively. Blue fields indicate points at which the FPT for direct assembly is smallest
or the yield is largest while red fields identify hierarchical assembly to be faster or the yield to
be higher. Points where no clear distinction was possible are colored in gray. Every data point is
obtained from 45 simulation runs.

strongly hinder the final capsid completion for hierarchical assembly. However, in general the
effect of monomer starvation seems to have relatively little impact on the relative efficiency
of the two different assembly schemes for clusters of size N=50.
Figures 5d-5f show the yield of the first capsid within simulation time for an initial
number of N=60, N=80 and N=120 monomers, respectively. Here again red indicates a
higher yield of hierarchical assembly while blue indicates a higher yield of direct assembly.
Gray marks parameter pairs with the same yield. In contrast to the FPT(50), we can
clearly see that increasing the initial number of monomers results in a largely expanded
16

FIG. 6. Model for T3 virus capsid. (a) Visualization of the T3 virus capsid and its capsomers of
(b) pentameric and (c) hexameric structure. The hexamer is composed of two different protein
types.

parameter space in which hierarchical assembly is favorable. This shows that monomer
starvation affects the final phase of hierarchical assembly in particular as it has been inferred
in the previous section. In fact hierarchical assembly performs well throughout the whole
parameter space and shows high yield for intermediate and weak bonds. At very high bond
strength we even observe some trapping for hierarchical assembly. However, direct assembly
still strongly suffers from kinetic trapping so that the parameter space corresponding to
high bond strength remains clearly dominated by hierarchical assembly. We also note that
increasing the initial number of monomers from N=80 to N=120 does not lead to a further
promotion of hierarchical assembly, presumably because now two capsids form in parallel,
each drawing monomers in a similar manner as before for N=60.
To conclude, we find that our main results from the previous section remain valid for
an increased number of initial monomers. Hierarchical assembly is favorable at high bond
strength due to the decreased possibility of trapping while direct assembly is favorable at
low bond strength allowing for fast reorganization of large clusters. In general, we expect
that our results also carry over to even larger systems.
17

F.

T3 Direct versus Hierarchical Assembly

Given the results for T1 virus assembly, we now ask how they carry over to more complicated geometries like T3 viruses. In this section we compare the characteristics of direct and
hierarchical assembly of T3 viruses which are composed of nf =180 monomers. Now we place
again exactly the number of monomers needed for the formation of one complete capsid into
the simulation box. While in the hierarchical assembly of T1 viruses the capsid was built
from pentameric subunits only, T3 virus capsids consist of 12 pentameric and 20 hexameric
capsomers. Figure 6 shows a model capsid which, in the hierarchical case, assembles from
two different subunits. While the pentamers are formed from identical proteins, the hexamers contain two different particle types. Due to the increased complexity of the T3 capsid,
we observe only a small range of bond parameters to lead to high yield for direct assembly
in our computer simulations. Moreover, we are not able to identify a parameter combination
that allows successful hierarchical assembly within the used simulation time. This is caused
by the lowered concentration of individual species of monomers which leads to a dramatic
slow-down of capsomer formation in the final phase. As hierarchical assembly reaches the
largest cluster sizes at a high association rate of ka =9.0 ns−1 , we now systematically analyze
the effect of different dissociation rates kd (5 · 10−4 ns−1 ≤ kd ≤ 1.35 · 10−2ns−1 ) while keeping
ka fixed.
Figure 7 shows different FPTs (1/3 nf , 2/3 nf and 5/6 nf ) for direct (blue color) and
hierarchical (red) assembly for ka =9.0 ns−1 and varying dissociation rate. The FPTs are complemented with yield histograms showing the relative number of trajectories which reached
the corresponding size within the simulation time. From Figure 7a we immediately see that
all trajectories in the investigated parameter interval have grown beyond a cluster size of
n=60 at the end of the simulation. Comparison of the FPTs for direct and hierarchical
assembly reveals assembly speeds of the same magnitude at low values of kd . With growing
dissociation rate the FPTs increase for direct as well as for hierarchical assembly. This
is not surprising since a lower bond stability leads to an increased number of dissociation
events and a slower cluster growth. The FPTs of direct assembly increase only moderately
(about one order of magnitude) compared to those of hierarchical assembly (two orders of
magnitude). This extreme sensitivity of hierarchical assembly is caused by the strong impact of the low bond stability on capsomers formation. The effect was already observed in
18

FIG. 7. Comparison of T3 direct and hierarchical assembly. a), b) and c) show the first passage
times FPT(60), FPT(120) and FPT(150) together with the relative yield of the corresponding
cluster size for fixed ka =9.0 ns−1 . Blue and red boxes show the results for direct and hierarchical
assembly, respectively. The data points are obtained from 10 simulation runs. The maximum
simulation length of 9 · 106 ns represents the upper boundary of the FPT values.

hierarchical assembly of T1 and is amplified here due to the presence of several protein types
and the resulting lowered effective initial concentration: The number of fruitful monomer
encounters is not only reduced by the smaller number of active patches compared to direct
assembly, but also by the limited number of suitable binding partners. As a consequence of
the dramatic slow-down of hierarchical assembly with increasing kd , we observe zero yield of
intermediates of size n=120 above a threshold around kd =7.5 · 10−3ns−1 (Figure 7b). On the
contrary, we record a decrease in the yield of direct assembly below this kd value. This can
19

N=180

107

N=198

FPT(120)
N=216

c)
7

b)

c)

106

6

105

5

104

4

1
yield

a)

0

7

7

f)

e)

d)

6

5

5

4

4

4.5

7.5

10.5

13.5

1
yield

6

1.5

1.5

4.5

7.5
kd [10-3ns-1]

10.5

13.5

0
1.5

4.5

7.5
kd [10-3ns-1]

10.5

13.5

FIG. 8. Effect of initial number of monomers on T3 assembly. Comparison of T3 direct and
hierarchical assembly for an initial number of N=180, N=198 and N=216 monomers. a)-c) show
the FPT(120) and d)-f) show the FPT(150) together with the relative yield of the corresponding
cluster size for the respective initial number of monomers while. Blue and red boxes show the results
for direct and hierarchical assembly at a fixed ka =9.0ns−1 in a range of kd = 1.5 · 10−3 ns−1 − 13.5 ·
10−3 ns−1 .For N=180 a additional value at kd = 0.5 · 10−3 ns−1is shown. The data points were
obtained from at least 10 simulation runs with a maximum length of 9 · 106 ns

be explained with the occurrence of kinetic trapping which we already encountered in T1
direct assembly. Analysis of the corresponding FPT values of so far successful trajectories
reveals that, despite the trapping tendency, the speed of direct assembly is still comparable
to that of hierarchical assembly at low kd values. For even larger cluster sizes (FPT(150),
Figure 7c) we see further partitioning of the parameter space. Above a threshold around
kd =4.5 · 10−3ns−1 , no hierarchical assembly is observed, while below this value, only one
directly assembling trajectory reaches this size.

G.

T3 Effect of Initial Number of Monomers

As for the assembly of T1 capsids, we again investigate the role of an increased initial
number of monomers on the simulation results for the T3 capsid. We increase the initial
number of monomers by 10% and 20% (without changing the concentration) and record the
20

FPTs for these simulations. In Figures 8a-8c the FPT(120) and the yield of clusters of size
120 is shown for an initial number of N=180, N=196 and N=216 monomers, respectively. As
in the previous section we explore the effect of varying kd while keeping ka = 9.0ns−1 fixed.
Comparing the FPT(120) for the different setups we see that above kd = 1.5, hierarchical
assembly becomes faster for an increased initial number of monomers. Direct assembly in
contrast is only slightly affected throughout the parameter space. When looking at the
yield of clusters of size 120 within simulation time (9 · 106 ns), we clearly see the positive
effect of an increased initial number of monomers on hierarchical assembly for weaker bonds
(higher kd ). However, it remains worse than direct assembly at these bond strengths. These
findings are in agreement with the effect observed for T1 when increasing the initial number
of monomers. While the dynamic of direct assembly is only weakly affected by the initial
number of monomers, hierarchical assembly suffers less from the effect of monomer starvation
at weak bond strength. Considering the FPT(150) we again see a complete separation of
the parameter space into one region in which only direct assembly is observed and another
region in which hierarchical assembly dominates. Looking at the yield we see that for an
initial number of 180 monomers hierarchical assembly is only observed for kd ≤ 1.5 · 10−3 ns
while this region expands to kd ≤ 4.5 · 10−3 ns for an increased initial number of monomers.
It might be possible that the parameter space in which hierarchical assembly is favorable
expands further for a larger increase of the initial number of monomers, similar as it was
observed for T1 (Figure 5). However, it seems that the favorable effect of an increased initial
number of monomers is weaker for T3 capsids than for T1 capsids due to the more complex
geometry. In the following section we will investigate the role of complexity of the T3 capsid
for the hierarchical assembly of a T3 capsid.

H.

Capsomer Formation in T3 Hierarchical Assembly

In order to further investigate the effects that slow down hierarchical assembly, we now
analyze the dynamics of hexamer and pentamer formation both with computer simulations
and a master equation approach. To compare the FPTs for pentamer and hexamer formation, we scale these values with the number of monomers per capsomer ring. This linear
scaling is based on the assumption that the mean time for a net addition of monomers to
small ring-forming clusters is independent of the cluster size. This simplification in par21

FIG. 9. Analysis of T3 capsomer assembly. a) FPTs of pentamer and hexamer capsomers emerging
during T3 hierarchical assembly are compared to those of T3-like and identical hexamers from the
down-scaled simulations. All simulations use ka =9.0 ns−1 and kd =1.5 · 10−3 ns−1 . As there are
different total numbers of capsomers to be formed of each type, we compare the relative progress
of assembly by plotting all species in the same plot with different scales (1 to 12 for pentamers, 1 to
20 for hexamers). FPTs are scaled with the ring size. All values are obtained from 10 independent
simulation runs each. b) Relative cluster size population n · νn (t) during hexamer assembly in
the down-scaled systems. The results for monomers (ν1 ) and complete capsomers (ν6 ) from the
analytical master equation approach (lines) are compared to the simulation data (symbols) for
T3-like and identical hexamers.

ticular neglects the increased number of decay paths of hexamers compared to pentamers.
However, the assumption seems justified for the present case of high bond stabilities (high
ka , low kd ), at least for the early and intermediate phase of assembly.
In Figure 9a the average capsomer formation times from T3 assembly at the most promising parameters identified from Figure 7 are shown (now again for N=120). We find that
during T3 capsid assembly hexamers form slower than pentamers (for the same sequential
number). The difference between the completion times increases with time (the last hexamer
data point, no. 18, is an exception to this rule since its FPT is artificially cut down to lower
values by the finite length of the simulation). In order to investigate whether this is caused
by the different relative densities of monomers forming pentamers (60/180) and hexamers
(120/180) or a result of the increased complexity of the hexamer rings, we perform a separate
set of simulations. In this complementary simulation we compare the assembly of hexamers
consisting of one type of protein (identical hexamers) and hexamers built from two different
types of proteins (T3-like hexamers). To reduce the computational effort we downscale the
22

system to half its size while preserving the concentration (i.e. assembly of 10 hexamers
in the presence of 30 pentamer-forming monomers). In Figure 9a the hexamer-FPTs from
the complementary simulation are compared to those at the same relative positions in the
assembly process of the full simulations. The FPTs are again scaled with the ring size.
While the dynamics of the identical hexamers follow the course of the pentamers in the full
simulation, the FPTs of the T3-like hexamers and the T3 hexamers of the full simulation are
in good agreement. This observation suggests that the delay in hexamer formation observed
in the full simulation is caused by the two-type complexity of the hexamers compared to the
uniformly structured pentamers.

To complement this investigation we use an analytical master equation approach to perform a closer analysis of the dynamics of parallel assembly of several hexamers. Here we
develop a set of equations which gives analytic results for the number of clusters of size n,
νn (t) (1 ≤ n ≤ nf =6), as a function of association and dissociation rate. The time evolution
of the macroscopic quantity νn is the result of reactions between clusters of all sizes k which
cause a change of νn . We introduce the association rate a for successful binding of two
clusters per unit time and the dissociation rate bnk which denotes the rate for decay of a
cluster of size n to two daughters of sizes k and (n − k). bnk is composed of the dissociation
rate per bond per unit time, b, and a factor dnk which quantifies the probability for the
decay of a cluster of size n to a constellation where one of the daughters is of size k. dnk
is determined by the ratio of total dissociation probability (proportional to the number of
bonds which compose n) and the probability of the decay products to have the required
size. The population νi increases by the decay of clusters with sizes larger than i, so that
dji (i < j < nf ) is always positive. For these cases we find dji =2 for each pair j, i, since the
decay from 2i to two daughters of sizes i accounts for a double increase of νi . The factor dnn
denotes the total decay probability of a cluster, it is thus negative and proportional to the
cluster size. Here we use dnn = −(n−1) for every n < nf . We account for one-step processes
only, which means we focus on transitions where two clusters merge or one cluster falls apart
into two daughter clusters. If we assume that the formation of the complete hexamer ring
is irreversible and that the total number of particles N is preserved, the complete set of
equations describing the time evolution of the system reads
23

ν̇n (t) =

aνk (t)νl (t) − νn (t)

k+l=n

|

nf −1

nf −n

X

{z

}

growth by association
of smaller clusters

X
k=1

{z

|

aνk (t) +
}

decrease by association
with other clusters

X
k=n

|

bkn νk (t)
{z

(2)

}

growth/decrease
by dissociation events

nf /2

ν̇nf (t) =

X

aνk (t)ν(nf −k) (t)

(boundary condition)

(3)

k=1
nf
X

n · νn (t) = N

(constraint)

(4)

n=1

Numerical evaluation with the initial condition ν1 (t=0)=N gives the time evolution of
all cluster size populations νn . By fitting the set of equations to the course of all νn (t) from
the complementary simulation (nf =6, N=60), we obtain parameter combinations a, b which
reproduce the observed assembly dynamics. Under the constraint that the dissociation rate
b per bond is constant for identical and T3-like hexamers (since the simulations apply the
same kd ), we find the following parameters: aid =2.4·10−6ns−1 (identical hexamers), aT 3 =1.2·
10−6 ns−1 (T3-like hexamers) and b=9 · 10−5 ns−1 . In general, all νn (t) are reproduced well.
This suggests that the assumption of a constant association rate a per bond, independent
of the sizes of the encountering clusters, is a reasonable approximation for the formation
of small rings. The results for ν1 (t) and ν6 (t) are displayed in Figure 9b together with the
simulation data points for both types of hexamers. The early phase is the region which
exhibits the largest discrepancies between data and ME results, while the final phase of
assembly shows a high level of consistency. This can be explained by the fact that the
rate equation framework does not include any spatial constraints and is thus not able to
reproduce the same sort of lag time before the first protein reactions as was observed in
the simulations, where the randomly distributed particles react only after diffusional mixing
leads to the first encounter events. This is also the reason why the difference between the
cases of T3-like and identical hexamers becomes visible in the simulation data only after a
certain time, while the ME results differ from the very first iteration step (see Figure 9b).
Since the rate equations do not contain a diffusional component, the coefficients a and b can
not be directly related to the simulation parameters ka and kd . While ka determines the rate
of transition from encounter to a bound state, a as well includes the formation of diffusional
patch overlap. Their relation is defined as a = ka /(NA · V ), where V is the simulation box
volume. Using the initial concentration c = N/(NA · V ), we find the expression a = ka ·
24

c
.
N

a is thus, as expected, proportional to the initial monomer concentration in the simulation
box. Applying this relation to the fit parameters using the effective initial concentration of
the protein types, we estimate the overall association rate values to be kafiitd =3.3 · 107 s−1 M−1
and kafTit3 = 6.5 · 107 s−1 M−1 . The fact that the association rate aid for identical hexamers
is about twice the value found for aT 3 confirms that the difference in assembly dynamics
for identical and T3-like hexamers has its origin in a reduced association rate, caused by
reduced encounter of matching protein types. Our observations suggest that the association
rate decreases linearly with increasing number of bond partners in the system and thus
the number of different protein types needed to form a capsomer ring. When comparing
our values for the diffusional encounter rate to data from experiments, we see that we
overestimate the association rate. In general, the association rate for bimolecular binding
reactions is experimentally found to lie between 4 · 106 and 107 s−1 M−1 [37]. Absence of longranged forces, as it is the case for our simulation framework, is predicted to push the rates
below 106 s−1 M−1 [42]. The reason for our relatively high estimates for the encounter rate
could be the treatment of dissociation as a stochastic event without immediate relocation
of the partners. In the present implementation, two patches stay in an encounter after
dissociation and their movement is subject to the cluster mobility. We assume this to
cause an overestimation of rebinding frequencies which results in an increased association
constant. Whereas the association rate constant can be related to other results, there is no
such argument for the value of b.

IV.

CONCLUSION

Understanding the biophysical principles underlying the self-assembly of virus capsids is
of fundamental importance for biology and medicine, and might also promote novel applications in materials science. Here we have presented a Brownian dynamics study of the
assembly of icosahedral virus capsids. Using a patchy particle model without potentials,
our simulations are relatively fast and therefore we are able to obtain good statistics with
relatively modest computing times. One special strength of our approach is the rigorous
treatment of translational and rotational diffusion, with the motility matrices for any cluster shape calculated on the fly. Our approach is particularly suited to focus on the effect of
a bonding hierarchy on the performance of the assembly process. The hierarchy was estab25

lished by an event-driven switching of bond characteristics upon the formation of capsomer
rings, which have earlier been identified as key intermediate structures of the assembly pathway of some icosahedral viruses [3, 26–28, 30–32]. We first conducted a detailed comparison
of direct versus hierarchical assembly for T1 viruses. To elucidate the effects of an increased
complexity of the capsid geometry on the formation of the capsomer rings, we then performed a detailed analysis of capsomer assembly for T3 viruses, including a master equation
approach complementing the computer simulations.
Our results for direct assembly of T1 virus capsids show that capsid completion is only
successful if the bonds are weak enough to allow for a sufficient number of unbinding and
reorganization events. Otherwise kinetically trapped clusters appear. These findings are in
good agreement with the results of previous approaches [6, 9, 40, 41]. In marked contrast,
hierarchical assembly performs better for high bond stabilities, as the imposed hierarchy
reduces kinetic trapping. However, hierarchical assembly is more vulnerable to monomer
starvation in the final phase. This effect has previously been observed in other approaches for
direct assembly [6, 43], but it is even more severe for hierarchical assembly specifically studied
here. Comparison of direct and hierarchical assembly at various reveals that hierarchical
assembly, although slower in the early phases, is able to outperform direct assembly at high
and intermediate bond strength. This is due to the fact that capsids assembling from highly
symmetric capsomers do not require fundamental reorganizations to achieve large cluster
size, as it is the case in direct assembly.
The analysis of T3 virus assembly shows that the effects apparent for T1 viruses become
amplified by the increased complexity of the capsid geometry. In general, the assembly
process of T3 viruses is slower due to the size of the capsid and the increased complexity of the
protein interactions. Starting with exactly 180 monomers the parameter space for successful
direct assembly is narrowed and we do not observe any complete capsids in hierarchical
assembly within the used simulation times. Investigation of the course of assembly of the
two mechanisms reveals that they both perform best in distinct regions of the parameter
space. Increasing the initial number of monomers we find that hierarchical assembly performs
better while direct assembly remains widely unaffected. However, we still observe that both
mechanisms are favorable in distinct regions of the parameter space. To analyze the effect
of geometric complexity on capsomer formation during hierarchical assembly, we perform a
closer analysis of assembly of different capsomer types. The results show a significant slow26

down of capsomer formation with increasing structural complexity, which explains why we
do not observe any full T3 virus capsids in the hierarchical setup within the given simulation
time. These findings suggest a further slow-down for the assembly dynamics of more complex
capsids such as T4 and T7 for hierarchical assembly.
Computer simulations of virus assembly are usually carried out with a fixed number of
initial monomers and therefore necessarily lead to monomer starvation in the final phase.
In vivo, this constraint should be less relevant than in our simulations. Once a cell is
infected by a virus, one expects to see a constant production rate for viral proteins, and
therefore monomer starvation should be less of an issue. It would be interesting to test if
in such a situation, hierarchical assembly becomes even more favorable than found here.
In computer simulations, this could be done by continuously adding new monomers and
removing completed capsids. We leave this to future studies as it would entail to introduce
at least two more model parameters, namely the rates for monomer injection and capsid
removal, as well as explicit rules on the spatial positioning of the new monomers. A similar
study could be done experimentally for viruses which self-assemble in vitro, although here
too there might be technical problems to implement such procedures. For in vivo systems,
such studies would depend very much on the details of the virus assembly of interest, in
particular on the spatial coordination in regard to the different cellular compartments.
Our simulation framework has great potential for further investigation of assembly of
icosahedral viruses, i.e. capsids with higher T-number (T4, T7,...). Although larger simulation times become necessary, they are potentially much smaller than the ones required for
less coarse-grained approaches, including patchy particle models with interaction potentials
or coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations. A particular strength of our approach
is the possibility to switch patch reactivity during the assembly process. This suggests to
investigate even more complex ways to build virus capsids. Our approach could also be
applied to other interesting cases of protein assembly, for example to the actin cytoskeleton,
for which different regulatory proteins lead to changes in local reactivity.
We conclude that it might be beneficial for icosahedral viruses to assemble hierarchically,
since it prevents kinetic trapping and allows for faster formation of larger structures. Our
results suggest that hierarchical assembly performs better than direct assembly for high and
intermediate bond stability, while direct assembly is favorable for weak bonds allowing for
fast reorganization. For complex viruses, our study suggests that the problem of monomer
27

starvation and critical concentrations has to be addressed for each type of monomer separately, thus making the process more vulnerable for fluctuations in the supply chain and
imposing limits to the overall degree of complexity. The partitioning of parameter space into
favorable regions for direct versus hierarchical schemes becomes even stronger for more complex capsid geometries and suggests ways to design optimal assembly schemes for different
molecular species.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Jakob Schluttig for providing the initial computer code and for helpful discussions. HCRK was supported by fellowships from the Landesgraduiertenstiftung BadenWuerttemberg and from the Cusanuswerk. USS is member of the CellNetworks cluster of
excellence at Heidelberg.

[1] Roos WH, Bruinsma R, Wuite GJL: Physical virology. Nature Physics 2010, 6:733–743,
link.
[2] Fraenkel-Conrat H, Williams RC: Reconstitution of Active Tobacco Mosaic Virus
from its Inactive Protein and Nucleic Acid Components. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1955, 41:690–698, link.
[3] Johnson JE, Speir JA: Quasi-equivalent viruses: a paradigm for protein assemblies.
Journal of Molecular Biology 1997, 269(5):665–75, link.
[4] Pawar AB, Kretzschmar I: Fabrication, Assembly, and Application of Patchy Particles. Macromolecular Rapid Communications 2010, 31(2):150–168, link.
[5] Arkhipov A, Freddolino PL, and Schulten K: Stability and dynamics of virus capsids
described by coarse-grained modeling. Structure 2006, 14(12):1767–1777, link.
[6] Hagan MF, Chandler D: Dynamic Pathways for Viral Capsid Assembly. Biophysical
Journal 2006, 91:42–54, link.
[7] Nguyen HD, Reddy VS, Brooks CL: Deciphering the kinetic mechanism of spontaneous
self-assembly of icosahedral capsids. Nano Letters 2007, 7(2):338–344, link.
[8] Rapaport DC:Self-assembly of polyhedral shells: A molecular dynamics study. Physical Review

28

E 2004, 70(5):051905, link.
[9] Rapaport DC: Role of Reversibility in Viral Capsid Growth: A Paradigm for SelfAssembly. Physical Review Letters 2008, 101(18):186101, link.
[10] Johnston IG, Louis AA, Doye JPK: Modelling the self-assembly of virus capsids. Journal
of Physics: Condensed Matter 2010, 22(10):104101, link.
[11] Rapaport DC: Modeling capsid self-assembly: design and analysis. Physical Biology
2010, 7(4):045001, link.
[12] Wilber AW, Doye JPK, Louis AA: Self-assembly of monodisperse clusters: Dependence on target geometry. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2009, 131(17):175101, link.
[13] Wilber AW, Doye JPK, Louis AA, Lewis ACF: Monodisperse self-assembly in a model
with protein-like interactions. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2009, 131(17):175102,
link.
[14] Moisant P, Neeman H, Zlotnick A: Exploring the paths of (virus) assembly. Biophysical
Journal 2010, 99(5):1350–1357, link.
[15] Zlotnick A: To Build a Virus Capsid: An Equilibrium Model of the Self Assembly
of Polyhedral Protein Complexes. Journal of Molecular Biology 1994, 241:59–67, link.
[16] Zlotnick A, Johnson JM, Wingfield PW, Stahl SJ, Endres D: A Theoretical Model Successfully Identifies Features of Hepatitis B Virus Capsid Assembly. Biochemistry
1999, 38(44):14644–14652, link.
[17] Zlotnick A, Ceres P, Singh S, Johnson JM: A Small Molecule Inhibits and Misdirects
Assembly of Hepatitis B Virus Capsids. Journal of Virology 2002, 76(10):4848–4854.
[18] Endres D, Zlotnick A: Model-Based Analysis of Assembly Kinetics for Virus Capsids
or Other Spherical Polymers. Biophysical Journal 2002, 83(2):1217–1230, link.
[19] Johnson JM, Tang J, Nyame Y, Willits D, Young MJ, Zlotnick A: Regulating SelfAssembly of Spherical Oligomers. Nano Letters 2005, 5(4):765–770, link.
[20] Zlotnick A, Mukhopadhyay S: Virus assembly, allostery and antivirals. Trends in Microbiology 2010, 19:14–23, link.
[21] Nguyen HD, Brooks CL: Generalized Structural Polymorphism in Self-Assembled
Viral Particles. Nano Letters 2008, 8(12):4574-4581, link
[22] Elrad OM, Hagan MF: Mechanism of Size Control and Polymorphism in Viral Capsid
Assembly. Nano Letters 2008, 8(11):3850-3857, link

29

[23] Nguyen HD, Reddy VS, Brooks CL: Invariant Polymorphism in Virus Capsid Assembly. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2009, 131(7):2606-2614, link
[24] Cardarelli L, Maxwell KL, Davidson AR: Assembly mechanism is the key determinant
of the dosage sensitivity of a phage structural protein. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2011, 108(25):10168–10173, link.
[25] Dokland T: Freedom and restraint: themes in virus capsid assembly. Structure 2000,
8(8):157–162, link.
[26] Tonegawa S, Hayashi M: Intermediates in the assembly of phi X 174. Journal of Molecular Biology 1970, 48(2):219–242, link.
[27] Salunke DM, Caspar DL, Garcea RL: Self-assembly of purified polyomavirus capsid
protein VP1. Cell 1986, 46(6):895–904, link.
[28] Flasinski S, Dzianott A, Speir JA, Johnson JE, Bujarski JJ: Structure-based rationale for
the rescue of systemic movement of brome mosaic virus by spontaneous secondsite mutations in the coat protein gene. Journal of Virology 1997, 71(3):2500–2504,
link.
[29] Zlotnick A, Aldrich R, Johnson JM, Ceres P, Young MJ: Mechanism of Capsid Assembly
for an Icosahedral Plant Virus. Virology 2000, 277(2):450–456, link.
[30] Willits D, Zhao X, Olson N, Baker TS, Zlotnick A, Johnson JE, Douglas T, Young MJ: Effects
of the Cowpea chlorotic mottle bromovirus hexamer structure on virion assembly.
Virology 2003, 306(2):280 –288, link.
[31] Hanslip SJ, Zaccai NR, Middelberg APJ, Falconer RJ: Assembly of Human Papillomavirus Type-16 Virus-Like Particles: Multifactorial Study of Assembly and
Competing Aggregation. Biotechnology Progress 2006, 22(2):554–560, link.
[32] Oppenheim A, nun Shaul OB, Mukherjee S, Abd-El-Latif M: SV40 assembly in vivo and
in vitro. Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine 2008, 9(3-4):265–276, link.
[33] Fejer SN, James TR, Hernandez-Rojas J, Wales DJ: Energy landscapes for shells assembled from pentagonal and hexagonal pyramids. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics
2009, 11:2098–2104, link.
[34] Schluttig J, Alamanova D, Helms V, Schwarz US: Dynamics of protein-protein encounter: A Langevin equation approach with reaction patches. The Journal of
Chemical Physics 2008, 129(15):155106, link.

30

[35] Schluttig J, Korn CB, Schwarz US: Role of anisotropy for protein-protein encounter.
Physical Review E 2010, 81(3):030902, link.
[36] Carrasco B, Garcia de la Torre J: Improved hydrodynamic interaction in macromolecular bead models. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1999, 111(10):4817–4827, link.
[37] Schreiber G, Haran G, Zhou HX: Fundamental Aspects of Protein-Protein Association
Kinetics. Chemical Reviews 2009, 109(3):839–860, link.
[38] Caspar DLD, Klug A: Physical Principles in the Construction of Regular Viruses.
Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 1962, 27:1–24, link.
[39] Schwartz R, Shor PW, Prevelige P, Berger B: Local Rules Simulation of the Kinetics of
Virus Capsid Self-Assembly. Biophysical Journal 1998, 75(6):2626–2636, link.
[40] Hagan MF, Elrad OM, Jack RL: Mechanisms of kinetic trapping in self-assembly and
phase transformation. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2011, 135(10):104115, .
[41] Rapaport DC: Studies of reversible capsid shell growth. Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter 2010, 22(10):104115, link.
[42] Northrup SH, Erickson HP: Kinetics of protein-protein association explained by
Brownian dynamics computer simulation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1992, 89(8):3338–3342, link.
[43] Mukherjee S, Kler S, Oppenheim A, Zlotnick A: Uncatalyzed assembly of spherical particles from SV40 VP1 pentamers and linear dsDNA incorporates both low and
high cooperativity elements. Virology 2010, 397:199–204, link.

31

