Differential growth of wrinkled biofilms
D. R. Espeso
Centro Nacional de Biotecnologı́a, CSIC, Madrid 28049, Spain

A. Carpio∗
Departamento de Matematica Aplicada, Universidad Complutense 28040, Madrid, Spain

B. Einarsson

arXiv:1502.06416v1 [physics.bio-ph] 23 Feb 2015

Center for Complex and Nonlinear Science, UC Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA
(Dated: Feb 2015, published in Physical Review E 91, 022710 (2015))
Biofilms are antibiotic-resistant bacterial aggregates that grow on moist surfaces and can trigger
hospital-acquired infections. They provide a classical example in biology where the dynamics of
cellular communities may be observed and studied. Gene expression regulates cell division and
differentiation, which affect the biofilm architecture. Mechanical and chemical processes shape the
resulting structure. We gain insight into the interplay between cellular and mechanical processes
during biofilm development on air-agar interfaces by means of a hybrid model. Cellular behavior is
governed by stochastic rules informed by a cascade of concentration fields for nutrients, waste and
autoinducers. Cellular differentiation and death alter the structure and the mechanical properties
of the biofilm, which is deformed according to Föppl-Von Kármán equations informed by cellular
processes and the interaction with the substratum. Stiffness gradients due to growth and swelling
produce wrinkle branching. We are able to reproduce wrinkled structures often formed by biofilms
on air-agar interfaces, as well as spatial distributions of differentiated cells commonly observed with
B. subtilis.
PACS numbers: 87.10.Mn, 87.18.Hf, 87.18.Fx

I.

INTRODUCTION

From bacterial communities to multicellular tissues,
three dimensional biological structures emerge through
poorly understood interactions between mechanical
forces and cellular processes. Being apparently less complex than multicellular organisms, bacterial biofilms may
provide model systems for analyzing the interplay between cellular and mechanical features of three dimensional self-organization during growth.
Biofilms are bacterial aggregates that form on moist
surfaces and are sheltered from external aggressions
by a self-produced extracellular matrix (ECM) made
of exopolymeric substances (EPS) [1, 2]. This matrix
makes them uncommonly resistant to antibiotics, disinfectants, flows and other chemical or mechanical agents
[3]. Biofilms are involved in chronic infections associated to biomedical implants [4, 5] and in many industrial
problems, such as biocorrosion, biofouling, efficiency reduction in heat exchange systems and food poisoning [6–
8]. They are beneficial in bioremediation and biocontrol
[9, 10] or in wastewater treatments [11].
Biofilm structure depends among other variables on
the bacterial strain and the nutrient source, but is also
influenced by environmental conditions. Biofilms grown
in flows [12, 13] differ noticeably from biofilms expanding on air-solid or air-liquid interfaces not exposed to
a shear force [14, 15]. These vary depending on the sur-

∗

Corresponding author: carpio@mat.ucm.es

face, as it is the case for Bacillus subtilis forming pellicles
on air-fluid interfaces [16] or wrinkled films on agar [17].
Pattern formation is crucial to the development of biological systems. In cellular organisms, growth is a complex
process implicating biochemical and physical mechanisms
occurring at a variety of length and timescales [18]. On
one side, genetic programs govern cellular processes, such
as growth and differentiation. On the other, mechanical properties and physical forces induce macroscopic
movements of cell populations and chemical compounds
[17, 19]. Detailed models trying to describe biofilm evolution on surfaces should take into account the interaction
of these processes.
Many models have been proposed for biofilm expansion in flows [20, 21], focussing typically on growth due
to nutrient consumption. The standard geometry consists of a biofilm attached to a solid substratum submerged in a fluid. Growth is limited by diffusion of
oxygen and nutrients from the surrounding flow into the
biofilm. EPS production favors vertical spread, pushing
cells into the flow to improve access to nutrients and oxygen [1, 22]. Depending on the nutrient and oxygen availability, the bacterial strain and the hydrodynamic conditions, biofilms evolve to form a variety of patterns: mushrooms, streamers, mounds, ripples and patchy shapes are
observed [12, 13, 23, 24]. The volume fraction of EPS in
these biofilms is large [13]. Some models view them as
cells embedded in a fluid EPS matrix [25]. Experimental observations and measurements suggest that biofilms
behave as viscoelastic materials, i.e., exhibit elastic solidlike response to short time scale stimuli and viscous fluidlike response to long time scale stimuli [26]. Two-phase

2
flow models of biofilm spread in fluids [27] coexist with
models that consider the growing biofilm an hyperelastic material [28]. The interplay of biofilm filaments with
the flow, however, is described as interaction between an
elastic structure and a fluid [29, 30]. These models represent the microbial community as a continuum. To investigate the influence of interactions at bacterium level,
‘agent’ based models have been developed. Bacteria are
described as individuals whose behavior responds to external continuum fields. Different modeling frameworks
characterize individual bacteria in different ways. Cellular automata [31–33], cellular Potts [34] and individualbased [22, 25, 35] representations have been proposed for
biofilms in flows. We will comment on the general approaches in Section II. Basic mechanisms incorporated
in them include biofilm expansion due to cell division,
phenomenological descriptions of EPS production and
biofilm erosion caused by the external flow.
Biofilms grown in other environments show a different structure and undergo different processes. Understanding their evolution requires different models, that
must take into account the specific behavior of the selected bacterial strain. We consider here the development of B. subtilis biofilms on air-agar interfaces, for
which detailed experimental evidence is becoming available [14, 15, 17, 36, 37]. Recent observations reveal the
role of cellular behavior and inner mechanical processes
on the biofilm constitution. These biofilms extract nutrients and water from the agar substratum itself. Cells
are densely packed, glued together by a small volume
fraction of extracellular substances [36]. The specific
autoinducer sequence triggering EPS secretion has been
identified [14]. EPS production favors water absorption
and horizontal spread [36]. Localized cell death leads to
mechanical stress relief through buckling [17]. Instead
of networks of vertical mushrooms or filaments undulating with the external flow, wrinkled films are observed
[15, 17, 37]. Partial aspects of this picture have been
modeled. Ref. [36] analyzes accelerated horizontal expansion due to EPS production and swelling by means
of thin film approximations calibrated to experiments.
A reaction-diffusion model for the density of living cells
combined with equations for the accumulation of EPS
and waste provides understanding of the cell death patterns in Ref. [17]. We introduce here a hybrid framework
that might be suitable to simulate the interplay between
the mechanical and cellular processes identified so far.
We couple a stochastic treatment of individual cellular
activities with a continuum description of elastic deformations. To facilitate the coupling of stochastic cell division, death, differentiation and swelling processes with
macroscopic elastic deformations and the description of
the complex interaction with the substratum, we have
represented bacteria as cellular automata. Cells respond
to a number of concentration fields (nutrients, waste,
secreted substances), and are affected by water migration processes and elastic deformations resulting of inner
stresses due to growth, swelling and the interaction with

the substratum. Our numerical simulations suggest that
the wrinkle branching observed in experiments may be
the result of elastic deformations triggered by stiffness
gradients.

FIG. 1. (Color online) (a) B. subtilis biofilm grown on a 1.5%
agar surface in a biofilm-inducing medium. Photograph taken
after four days. Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge
University Press from Chai L, Vlamakis H, Kolter R, MRS
Bulletin, 36: 374-379 (2011), [14]. (b) In silico film showing
a corona of radial wrinkles emerging from a central core.

Typical wild type B. subtilis biofilms on agar show a
central core with highly connected wrinkles surrounded
by a corona with radial branches, as in Figure 1. Successive branching is also reported, see Figure 2. These structures differ from those commonly observed in biofilm pellicles formed on air-liquid interfaces [16]. Such pellicles
spread on a space confined by the walls of the vessel containing the liquid. Ref. [16] assumes an expression for the
compression stresses and performs a stability analysis of
the equilibria of a plate model, concluding that a buckling
instability should appear above a threshold. The presence of walls stresses the pellicles as they grow, producing wrinkles. In contrast, the biofilms studied here spread
on an air-agar interface with no boundaries around. The
mechanism for wrinkle formation is bound to be differ-

3

FIG. 2. (Color online) (a) B. subtilis biofilm grown on the
air-solid surface of agar gel containing water and nutrients.
Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press
from Wilking JN, Angelini TE, Seminara A, Brenner MP,
Weitz DA, MRS Bulletin, 36: 385-391 (2011) [15]. (b) In
silico film showing successive wrinkle branching.

ent, even if elastic deformations are involved too. Ref.
[38] uses a neo-Hookean energy to study the elastic deformations of a growing circular film moderately adhered
to a rigid substrate and subject to anisotropic growth.
Tracking bifurcations in families of analytical solutions
as the anisotropy degree increases, they predict the appearance of contour undulations, delamination, buckling
on the scale of the sample after delamination and, finally,
a periodic distribution of folds. As Ref. [38] points out,
such buckling patterns are not experimentally observed
in B. subtilis biofilms. However, the analysis may be useful to understand delamination and folding phenomena.
Those models do not consider the microscopic processes
occurring in a biofilm. The complex interaction with the
substratum is reduced to attachment using a collection

of springs. On the other hand, neither energy nor linear
stability approaches answer the question of how different
patterns emerge and evolve from one to another. Here
we aim to compute the development of wrinkled structures as the biofilm expands horizontally, starting from
an almost flat initial state. We will solve time dependent equations coupling the film to the substratum. The
residual stresses will be computed numerically averaging
information from growth and water absorption processes.
This allows to observe how wrinkles develop and how
they respond to localized variations in the microstructure. We recall below some experimental observations to
bear in mind in the sequel.
During biofilm expansion, B. subtilis populations differentiate in several types in response to local environments created by growth, waste production, nutrient consumption and cell-cell communication [14]. Cells produce
a signaling molecule, ComX. When a threshold concentration is reached, a percentage of the population of cells
expresses some genes that induce a change in their phenotype, becoming surfactin producers. Surfactin may signal
other cells (that do not make surfactin) to produce extracellular matrix. As the biofilm thickens, starving cells
in the top become inert spores.
Initially, part of the cells are motile and express flagella allowing to swarm on the surface. As the production
of ECM increases, most cells lose their individual motility [14]. Flagella are downregulated and biofilm spread
is influenced by ECM production [36]. In early stages
of the biofilm evolution, dividing cells interact with their
neighbors and push them. The biofilm becomes thicker
and the edges spread slowly on the surface. Later increase in the exopolysaccharide concentration raises the
osmotic pressure, causing swelling of the biofilm due to
water intake from the agar gel [36]. Cells are pushed
from the bulk outwards, speeding up horizontal growth
and increasing nutrient intake from the agar surface.
The origin of the wrinkles seems to be controlled by
the mechanical properties of the biofilm, which are in
part governed by the production of extracellular matrix.
In early stages of the evolution of the central biofilm
core, localized cell death takes place at high density regions due to biochemical stress. Cell death is usually
followed by cell shrinkage and resorption. Lateral mechanical stresses built up during growth are relieved at
those sites through vertical biofilm buckling, leading to
wrinkle formation [17]. Wrinkles are filled with water
extracted from agar, as in Figure 3, forming a network
of channels that enhances nutrient and waste transport
driven by surface evaporation [37]. The emergence of the
outer radial wrinkles shown in Fig. 1(a) or successive
wrinkle branching in Fig. 2(a) is less understood.
Recent developments in the study of the wrinkling of
gels and thin films on viscoelastic substrata might have
a counterpart in biofilm growth. A difference with cellular films though, is that there is no feedback between
mechanical stresses, rates of swelling and growth and cellular differentiation. Swelling of the outer biofilm corona

4
might produce radial wrinkles provided the center of the
biofilm was stiffer and swelled less than the corona. This
“corona instability” is commonly observed in swelling
gels when they are radially graded [39]. Such gels do
not grow but swell by absorbing water while their elastic
modulus diminishes. Contact of a film with a viscoelastic substratum may also induce wrinkles, and select the
dynamics that form them [40, 41]. Wrinkle patterns that
switch smoothly from an intricate core to branching radial wrinkles have been observed in thin films on a viscoelastic substratum due to solvent diffusion in the film,
which creates residual stresses and stiffness gradients [42].
Based on the previous observations we propose a hybrid biofilm description, combining a stochastic treatment of cellular processes coupled to the continuum concentration fields and a continuum description of deformation mechanisms informed by cellular activities and
the interaction with the substratum. Biofilm growth and
physiology rely on the diffusion and transport of nutrients, waste, and signaling molecules, facilitated by water. The elastic deformation of the biofilm is described
by Föppl-Von Kármán equations with residual stresses
generated by growth and swelling [43–45], formulated for
a thin biofilm expanding on a substratum [40, 42] containing water and nutrients. We introduce a strategy to
estimate residual stresses, as well as spatial variations
in the elastic parameters of the biofilm, averaging and
smoothing stochastic information on cell type distribution, cell division and water absorption. We are able
to reproduce qualitatively patterns and trends observed
in experiments, gaining insight on the way biofilms are
shaped. We argue that stiffness gradients due to growth
and swelling may cause wrinkle branching and wrinkled
coronae. We identify governing parameters and study
their influence on the wrinkled structure. The substratum properties should be carefully measured since they
largely affect the time scales for biofilm deformation.
Variations in the values of its viscosity and Poisson ratio
may change the wrinkling time scales from minutes to
days, as argued in Section IV A. Experimental observations show time variations too, compare Figures 1(a) in
Refs. [14] and [37] after four and one days, respectively.
The influence of the agar substratum on the dynamics
of biofilms and bacterial communities has already been
noticed in different contexts. Ref. [46] shows the relevance of the agarose concentration in the transition from
planar to three dimensional behavior during the invasion
of a three dimensional agar matrix by E. coli. Ref. [47]
observes that the water content of the agar substratum
affects the motility of Pseudomonas strains.
Section II describes the basic structure of the hybrid
model. Cellular processes are considered in Section III.
Stochastic division, death, differentiation and EPS production mechanisms are introduced. Section IV discusses
film deformation according to Föppl-Von Kármán equations and presents water absorption strategies, together
with procedures to estimate residual stresses and spatial
variations in the elastic constants. The coupling between

stochastic and continuous descriptions is detailed in Section V. Simulations of biofilm evolution activating single
or a few mechanisms are presented throughout the paper. Section VI explores the coupling between processes
through a few selected tests. Finally, Section VII summarizes our conclusions.

II.

HYBRID MODEL

To investigate the influence of processes at bacterium
level, cells (or small clusters of similar cells) are represented by discrete ‘agents’. Different modeling frameworks describe those ‘agents’ and their evolution in diverse ways. Cellular automata distribute them over the
sites of a regular lattice [48]. The ‘agents’ have internal state variables, that change according to a set of
rules, stochastic or deterministic. Standard cellular automata for biofilms in flows and in porous media allocate
biomass (cells and EPS), fluids and solids over the lattice
sites [32, 33]. The dynamics of the biomass in each tile
is governed by rate equations coupled to concentrations
and fluid equations. Whenever a threshold is surpassed,
a neighboring tile is occupied, pushing biomass further
in the direction of minimal mechanical resistance. Below a threshold, dead occurs with a certain probability.
Biomass fragments can detach due to erosion by the flow.
Refs. [33, 49] use this approach to predict local diffusion
coefficients, permeability coefficients and Young modulus
variations taking into account the microstructure.
Cellular Potts approaches (in particular, the GlazierGraner-Hogeweg variant) have been mostly applied to
describe aggregation and migration of cells and tissue
growth, see Ref. [50] for a review of applications. These
models use energy based Monte-Carlo updating and are
able to account for cell volume and shape. This is important when describing interactions strongly dependent on
cell geometry [48]. Effective (not physical) energies typically include terms representing contact between neighboring cells, a volume constraint on cells, plus chemotaxis terms [50]. Liquids and other substances are represented as additional cells. According to Ref. [48], the
DAH (differential adhesion hypothesis) guarantees that
final shapes correspond to the minima of effective energies. This hypothesis assumes that an aggregate of cells
behaves as a mixture of immiscible fluids [48].
Individual-based models developed for biofilms in
aquatic media consider cells as particles (usually spheres)
distributed in a three dimensional space, whose volume
and mass grow due to nutrient consumption, see Refs.
[35, 51] for a survey of applications. Cell division and
death occur when specified size thresholds are reached.
Daughter cells are distributed randomly and dead cells
are removed. The EPS matrix may be represented as
a fluid continuum, particulates and/or capsular EPS.
Biomass is eroded according to a law depending on shear.
Agent growth, division, death and shrinking cause agent
movement, via shoving algorithms and a pressure field.

5
in the system is the diffusion produced by the presence
of chemical concentration gradients of the chemical compounds (oxygen, nutrients, waste products and autoinducers) between the biofilm and the other phases (agar,
water and air). Cellular processes inform inner mechanical stresses that shape the biofilm.

FIG. 3. (Color online) Schematic representation of a biofilm.
(a) Biofilm without water network, (b) Biofilm with water
channels. For computational purposes, space is partitioned
in a grid of tiles of size a, a being the average length of a
bacterium. Each tile may be filled with air, water, agar, or
biofilm biomass (either a bacterium or ECM). This grid is
used to discretize the continuum concentration and displacement fields, and to track the status of individual bacteria,
which constitute a fraction of the total biofilm biomass.

Biomass is advected following a Darcy’s law involving the
pressure and the dynamic viscosity of the biofilm, which
is therefore assimilated to a fluid [35]. To investigate the
effect of the shape of bacteria on the alignment of microbial communities expanding on a surface, rod-spring
and sphere-spring representations have been recently implemented [51]. Each bacterial rod or sphere is characterized by its mass, velocity and position. The EPS matrix is represented by springs that join the rods together,
and to the substratum. Cells divide when they reach a
threshold mass due to nutrient consumption. New cells
and springs must be created in the network. Then, the
system relaxes to a new equilibrium following Newton’s
laws. A similar strategy is applied in Ref. [46] to describe
the influence of the shape of bacteria in the invasion of a
three dimensional agar matrix by E. coli.
We are interested here in understanding the elastic deformations caused by cell division, death, EPS production, swelling, and the interaction with the substratum.
A framework facilitating the coupling of the relevant microscopic and macroscopic phenomena is advisable. We
resort to a cellular automata based hybrid description.
Hybrid models combine stochastic representations of cellular processes with continuous descriptions of other relevant fields, in our case, concentrations and deformations.
This allows to take into account the inherent randomness
of individual bacterial behaviors observed in the experiments [14, 52]. It also permits to consider local interactions around each cell to describe differentiation processes.
In this model, cells are regarded as creatures living in
a grid, that reproduce, differentiate or die with certain
probability, informed by the status of the concentration
fields nearby. In a biofilm, cells are immersed in extracellular matrix. The dominating mass transport mechanism

We consider a B. subtilis biofilm patch (subdomain Ω3
in Figure 3(a)) attached to an agar-gel surface (subdomain Ω1 ) and exposed to the atmosphere (subdomain
Ω2 ). Eventually, the biofilm may contain channels carrying water (subdomain Ω4 ) dragged from the agar substratum, as in Figure 3(b). To perform their metabolic
activities, the biofilm obtains nutrients and other substances from the gel-water substratum, and from the atmosphere. All the subdomains are divided in a grid of
cubic tiles. The spatial step a chosen for this description
was the size of one bacterium (around 3-5 µm) to be able
to consider individual interactions among bacteria. Each
tile can be filled with either agar, air, fluid or biofilm
biomass (either cells or ECM). Partition in tiles allows
to track the status of individual bacteria, which represent a fraction of the total biomass, and discretize the
equations governing the evolution of continuum fields.

FIG. 4. (Color online) Flow chart of the hybrid model.

The computational evolution of a biofilm in our model
is schematized in Figure 4. First, we update the cellular
status, detecting dividing, dead or differentiated cells and
allocating newborn cells and water. Then we deform the
biofilm according to its internal stresses and revise the
concentration fields and the cellular status. The next
sections describe how we take into account cellular behavior and mechanical processes.

6
III.

DESCRIPTION OF CELLULAR
PROCESSES

It is commonly accepted that biofilms are able to generate molecular signals as cell-cell communication mechanisms to activate gene expressions that unleash different survival strategies adapted to the environmental conditions [12, 14]. The basic approach relies on the idea
that the same organism that is sensible to certain chemical inducers is also responsible of producing those compounds, creating a self-feeding loop which regulates both
the genetic expression and the generation of autoinducer.
Quorum sensing mechanisms provide a way for bacteria
to count their population prior to unleashing different
behaviors such as differentiation, virulence or spreading
[53–56].
Differentiation is a mechanism through which some
bacteria inside a population display physiological alterations, developing different phenotypes without a change
in their genotype. These modifications lead to the development of specialized cells with certain characteristics
which perform specific tasks.

and generate ComX. They are sensible to all autoinducers and may be deactivated due to a lack of nutrients or
oxygen. They may turn into surfactin generators or cells
expressing matrix genes when threshold concentrations
of ComX or surfactin are reached.
• Surfactin producers. They generate surfactin and do
not reproduce. Proliferation of these cells may be inhibited by the presence of EPS producers in their neighborhood.
• EPS matrix producers. They secrete EPS matrix, and
are able to reproduce at lower rate than normal cells
because their metabolism also spends resources on generating EPS.
• Inert cells, or spores. These cells do not perform any
metabolic activities, neither reproduction, nor differentiation. EPS producers become spores when there is a
severe lack of nutrients in the local environment of the
cell. Spores may activate again when the environmental
conditions improve.
As time progresses, a fraction of cells expresses surfactin
genes. Later on, an increasing number of cells secretes
EPS matrix. Cells may also die as a result of biochemical stresses [17]. This has been shown to occur at the
interface agar-biofilm as a result of biochemical stresses
at localized high density regions. Eventually, sporulation
starts and few normal cells remain. Spores are usually
located in upper regions of the biofilm, whereas normal
cells are restricted to the bottom edges [14].
We describe below the rules for cell differentiation,
death and reproduction.

A.

Cellular division, deactivation and death

When there is an excess of oxygen, the concentration
of nutrients cn becomes the limiting concentration that
restricts biofilm growth inside the biofilm Ω3 :
cn,t − Dn,b ∆cn = −kn

cn
.
cn + Kn

(1)

Nutrient uptake is simply described by a Monod law.
Inside the agar substratum Ω1 :
FIG. 5. (Color online) Directional signaling in B. subtilis.
When a threshold concentration of ComX is reached, a percentage of the population of cells expresses genes that induce
a change in their phenotype, becoming surfactin producers.
Surfactin may signal other cells to produce extracellular matrix. Starving cells become inert spores.

Differentiation processes have been observed to depend
on the local conditions around each cell, in particular, the
state of the neighbours and the local chemical composition found around them [52, 57]. B. subtilis provides a
well known example, where initial biofilm cells may differentiate in four well defined cell types. Two autoinducers,
ComX and surfactin, relate the four types of differentiated cells [14], see Figure 5. The different cell types are:
• Normal cells. They perform all metabolic activities

cn,t − Dn,a ∆cn = 0.

(2)

In the water phase Ω4 (if present):
cn,t − Dn,l ∆cn + v · ∇cn = 0.

(3)

Here, Dn,b , Dn,a and Dn,l are diffusion constants in the
biofilm, agar and water, respectively, Kn is the Monod
half-saturation coefficient, and kn (x) is the uptake rate of
the nutrient at the particular location. It will be set equal
to kn in tiles occupied by alive cells and equal to zero
elsewhere. v is the transport velocity in the water channels. On the interfaces agar-biofilm and water-biofilm
(if present) we impose transmission boundary conditions
(continuity of concentrations and fluxes). On the interface biofilm-air, the interface agar-air and the edges of

7
the agar substratum, we have zero flux conditions. Initially, the nutrient concentration is usually taken to be
constant cn = C in agar.
Tiles occupied by alive cells C are assumed to divide
with probability [31]:
cn (C)
,
(4)
cn (C) + Kn
cn being the limiting concentration. Initially, we reallocate newborn cells inside biofilm by pushing existing
cells in the direction of minimum mechanical resistance,
that is, the shortest distance to the biofilm-air interface
[31, 33].
Figure 6 illustrates the expansion of a biofilm seed.
The initial round cluster grows in size in a radial way.
Brick-like colonies are formed. Their border may advance
in a wavy way depending on the velocity, as usual when a
free boundary expands outwards [58]. This spread mechanism may change as the biofilm develops and water is
absorbed, as explained later.
Pd (C) =

Cells may suffer a shortage of nutrients, triggering a
sporulation mechanism to preserve bacteria in a “deactivated” state until the environmental conditions improve.
To reflect this, cells with a local limiting concentration
below a certain threshold will become spores in our simulations. We deactivate cells C with probability 1 − Pd (C)
whenever Pd (C) < γd for a certain threshold γd > 0.
These cells may activate again when the conditions improve.
As mentioned before, cells may also die due to biochemical stress in high density regions where waste products and toxins accumulate but nutrients deplete. Taking
for instance the concentration of waste cw at a location
as an indicator of death, a cell C is scheduled to die with
probability:
Pw (C) =

cw (C)
,
cw (C) + Kw

(5)

whenever Pw (C) > γw for a certain threshold γw > 0.
The concentration of waste is governed by
X
cw,t − Dw,b ∆cw = kw
δi,w ,
(6)
i

inside the biofilm Ω3 . δi,w (x) equals 1 in regions occupied
by alive cells Ci and vanishes otherwise. On agar-biofilm
and air-biofilm interfaces we impose no flux boundary
conditions. If a fluid phase Ω4 is present, we impose
transmission boundary conditions at the interface and
include a diffusion-convection equation similar to Eq. (3)
for waste transport in the liquid. Dw,b , Dw,l are the
diffusion constants, and kw the production rate of waste
and toxins at the particular location.

B.

FIG. 6. (Color online) Expansion of a circular biofilm seed
driven only by nutrient consumption. The initial seed is
formed by two layers of cells with a diameter of 40 cells.
Only division and spread mechanisms are involved. Snapshots
taken every 100 steps. The initial nutrient concentration in
a2
= 8.
the substratum is C = 3Kn and the ratio DknnK
n

The constants Kn affecting the probability laws are
numeric constants that should be calibrated with experimental data to have a real description in the simulations
and do not have to match with saturation constants used
in the source terms of the reaction-diffusion equations for
the concentrations, which are related with a chemical saturation limit. To simplify, they have been chosen to agree
with the values for saturation constants.

Surfactin and EPS production

Normal cells may turn into surfactin generators when
a threshold concentration of ComX is reached. ComX
is a molecule related with quorum sensing mechanisms
in B. subtilis [14]. It is produced by all the cells in the
biofilm, except those which are not metabolically active.
The concentration ccx of ComX inside the biofilm Ω3 is
governed by:

X
ccx
ccx,t − Dcx,b ∆ccx = kcx 1 −
δi,cx , (7)
ccx + Kcx
i
with no flux boundary condition on agar-biofilm and airbiofilm interfaces. kcx is the production rate, and Dcx,b
the diffusivity. δi,cx (x) equals 1 if cell Ci produces ComX
and vanishes otherwise. kcx is multiplied by an inhibition
factor for large concentrations. A guess for Kcx may be
the half-saturation constant of ComX. If a liquid phase
Ω4 is present we impose transmission boundary conditions at the interface and include a convection-diffusion
equation similar to Eq. (3) for ComX transport in the
liquid. Normal cells C are assumed to become surfactin

8
producers with probability:
Ps (C) =

ccx (C)
,
ccx (C) + Kcx

(8)

whenever Ps (C) > γs . The threshold γs reflects that differentiation should start when a minimum background
concentration of ComX is reached.
When EPS producers are present, they act as incx
hibitors. We may set Ps = Pinhib ccxc+K
with Pinhib
cx
the ratio of neighbors producing EPS to total number
of neighbors. If a cell is surrounded by EPS producers,
there is no any chance of differentiation into a surfactin
generator. A similar effect is obtained setting a much
lower threshold for differentiation into a surfactin producer compared to EPS producers, as we usually do in
our simulations.
Surfactin acts as an autoinducer in normal bacteria,
changing their phenotype to become EPS producers [36].
The concentration cs of surfactin inside the biofilm is
governed by:

X
cs
cs,t − Ds,b ∆cs = ks 1 −
δi,s ,
(9)
cs + Ks
i
with no flux boundary condition on agar-biofilm and airbiofilm interfaces. ks is the production rate, Ds,b the diffusivity and Ks the half-saturation of surfactin. δi,s (x)
equals 1 if cell Ci produces surfactin and vanishes otherwise. When a liquid phase Ω4 is present transmission boundary conditions hold at the interface and a
convection-diffusion equation similar to Eq. (3) governs
surfactin transport in the liquid. We assume that active cells C not secreting surfactin become EPS producers
with probability:



cn (C)
cs (C)
Pe (C) = 1 −
, (10)
cn (C) + Kn
cs (C) + Ks
cs (C)
> γe1 , which means that a minimum
whenever cs (C)+K
s
concentration of surfactin is required. The probability
increases with the availability of surfactin and the scarceness of nutrients. This is consistent with measurements
reported in Ref. [59]. If we want to enforce a level of
nutrient depletion to allow differentiation into EPS procn (C)
ducers we may further impose cn (C)+K
< γe2 . This may
n
forbid differentiation below a certain height.
Figure 7 illustrates the distribution of cells when we activate the differentiation processes, in combination with
standard growth and spread. As the size of the biofilm
increases, the concentration of ComX raises until the
threshold γs is reached. At this point bacteria start to
differentiate and secrete surfactin. This triggers differentiation of cells into EPS producers when the surfactin
threshold γe1 is reached. As the number of EPS cells
increases, the rate of differentiation into surfactin generators stabilizes and may even decay due to an inhibition mechanism induced by the EPS cells [14]. Relative
proportions for each type of cell were adjusted by fitting

FIG. 7. (Color online) Slices of a biofilm showing the cell type
distribution during early stages of the differentiation process.
All the slices correspond to the same biofilm and are taken
at the same time. The evolution started from an initial seed
with a diameter of 60 cells and variable thickness, represented
by three small peaks. Dead cells appear first where the initial
peaks where located. In later stages, inert cells proliferate at
the top whereas normal cells are restricted to the bottom and
the edges. Each colored box is one cell. Parameter values:
2
a2
a2
cx a
= 0.01, DkwwK
= 0.001, Dkcx
= 0.01,
C = Kn , DknnK
Kcx
n
w
ks a2
Ds Ks

= 0.8, γw = 0.005, γd = 0.00001, γs = 0.001, γe1 =
0.00001,γe2 = 0.2.

parameters, but there should be an experimental calibration to improve these values. Normal cells are found in
the edges and near the interface biofilm-agar. EPS producers appear once surfactin is generated and a certain
thickness is reached so that the nutrient concentration
depletes. Dead cells concentrate on the bottom surface
at inhomogeneity peaks when the initial seed has variable
height, due to higher waste concentration. As the biofilm
increases its thickness, scarcity of nutrients is felt in the
upper part due to the high resistance to mass transfer
across the increasing thickness. This effect induces the
appearance of spores in the upper part, slowing down the
growth of the biofilm. The geometric distribution of each
type of cell seems to follow qualitatively trends reported
in Refs. [14, 17, 59].
Implementing the differentiation strategy described

9
above requires measuring a number of kinetic constants
for different concentrations. Since these values are currently unknown, we have scaled the parameters to obtain
the expected behaviors in small clusters of cells, lowering the computational cost. For Gram negative Vibrio
harveyi, quorum sensing processes triggering bioluminescence have been modeled in terms of feedback loops [56]
and applying information theory to the quorum sensing
circuit [60], which may reduce the number of parameters
involved. Signaling parameters have been deduced from
in vivo data for V. harveyi [61].
For simplicity, the biofilm in Figure 7 does not include
the ECM phase, only cells. We might include it following
the procedure described below. Once EPS production
starts, a new concentration ce diffuses in the environment:

X
ce
ce,t − De,b ∆ce = ke 1 −
δi,e . (11)
ce + Ke
i
ke is the production rate, De,b the diffusivity and Ke the
half-saturation of EPS. δi,e (x) equals 1 if cell Ci is an EPS
producer and vanishes otherwise. Initially, these substances are just compounds diffusing in the environment.
As the concentration increases they become a polymeric
envelop for the cells. This description can be improved
taking into account the presence of molecules of different
size. Monomers diffuse, but longer molecules stay where
they are produced. The concentration of momoners is
governed by a diffusion equation coupled to the concentration of larger molecules, whereas the latter is governed
by rate equations, that substitute Eq. (11).
The volume fraction of biofilm occupied by extracellular substances varies largely depending on the type
of biofilm. Images in Ref. [13] show biofilms in flows,
formed by scattered cells embedded in a dominant EPS
phase. On the contrary, imaging biofilms on air-semisolid
interfaces at hight resolution shows a structure of densely
packed cells glued by EPS, see references [36], [14] and
[17]. Space is mostly occupied by cells. This suggests
skipping the creation of an EPS phase and thinking of it
as a virtual glue that keeps cells together and modifies
the mechanical properties of the biofilm, in particular, its
elastic constants and the osmotic pressure. If we choose
to create an EPS phase, we may exploit the concentration ce of EPS to generate new biofilm tiles filled with it.
At any tile, we set
ce (C)
Pm (C) =
.
ce (C) + Ke

Individual-based models for biofilms on agar surfaces
represent the EPS as springs joining the cells [51]. For
biofilms in flows, expressing larger fractions of EPS, each
‘individual’ contains cellular mass and capsular EPS,
that vary according to user defined rate equations. Additional EPS particulates may be created as EPS production increases following user defined rules [35]. Refs.
[22, 62] study EPS dynamics in a quorum sensing framework, defining competing strains: EPS producers, EPS
non producers, strains that downregulate EPS production for large cell densities. This is not the reported quorum sensing circuit for B. subtilis, see Ref. [14]. Cellular automata models for biofilms in flows distribute cellular mass and EPS in each lattice site following phenomenological rate equations [32, 33]. Spread to neighboring sites occurs as a threshold mass is surpassed. In
both frameworks, cells are scheduled to die when their
mass or volume falls below a threshold. No memory of
their former presence, relevant for elastic deformations,
is kept. Neither the relevance of waste accumulation for
cell death, pointed out in Ref. [17], nor the currently
known quorum sensing circuits for EPS production are
incorporated in those models. Dynamic energy budget
descriptions of cell dynamics [63] might provide a sophisphicated framework to describe the evolution of individual cells taking into account their mass, volume, maintenance, substance secretion and the presence of nutrients,
oxygen and toxicants. However, extensions to biofilms
are yet to be devised.
C.

Nondimensionalization of the concentration
equations

Nondimensionalization of the equations for the concentrations listed above reveals a key governing paramka2
eter for each concentration: F = KD
, where k is the
b
uptake or production rate, a the bacterium size, K the
half-saturation constant and Db the diffusivity inside the
biofilm. Setting ĉ = Kc and x̂ = xa , the equations for
concentrations become:
 ĉ 
− ∆x̂ ĉ = F f
,
(13)
ĉ + 1
inside the biofilm, where f represents the production or
consumption terms, and
− ∆x̂ ĉ + v̂ · ∇x̂ ĉ = 0,

(12)

If this value is larger that a threshold γm , we create an
EPS tile at that location and shift biomass around in the
direction of least mechanical resistance. γm should be
calibrated so that the fractions of biomass corresponding
to cells and EPS fit the experimental observations. The
true cells are a fraction of the total amount of tiles occupied by biomass. They divide and differentiate according
to the same probabilistic rules we have already described.

(14)

in the water channels, where v̂ = vDa` . We have suppressed the time dependence because diffusion of chemical species is faster than the cellular processes considered.
For each biofilm configuration, we solve these nondimensionalized stationary equations with the corresponding
boundary conditions by a relaxation technique. Then
we compute all the probabilities for division, death and
differentiation, detect the different types of cells and allocate newborn cells. This generates a new biofilm configuration for which the procedure is repeated. A complete

10
reproductive cycle of a bacterium was set as the basic
time step for the cellular processes in the model (which
is typically in the order of 26-45 minutes depending on
nutrient and temperature). This choice implies that our
system is discrete in space and time [31].

IV.

DESCRIPTION OF MECHANICAL
PROCESSES

Differentiated cells produce chemicals, which may induce further differentiation of other cells or trigger mechanical processes that alter the biofilm structure, improving its chances of spread and survival. EPS production increases the stiffness of the biofilm [17], which may
be identified with a material undergoing macroscopic deformations caused by growth [16] over a substratum. The
spatial distribution of dead and inert cells, together with
water absorption, may induce additional stiffness gradients. This motivates allowing our biofilm to move along
the tiles according to microscopically informed continuum descriptions of the underlying mechanical processes.

A.

Out-of-plane deformations and wrinkle
formation

Due to the interaction of components in the extracellular matrix, dissipative phenomena take place inside soft
tissues during deformation processes and the mechanical response of tissues if often viscoelastic. Nevertheless,
growth induced deformations on time scales much larger
than those of relaxation may be regarded as purely elastic [45]. Since the height of real biofilms is about 10-100
times smaller than their radius and they are initially thin
and flat, we may use Föppl-von Kármán [43] equations
for thin elastic plates to study their elastic deformation
reducing dimensionality [16]. Residual stresses due to
growth are incorporated in the description in terms of
the growth tensor, see Refs. [44, 45]. The shape of the
body is then determined by both growth and elastic deformation. The equilibrium deformation of a growing tissue is described by a variant of the Föppl-Von Kármán
equations [45]:


∂
∂ξ
D(∆2 ξ − ∆CM ) − h
σα,β
= P, (15)
∂xβ
∂xα
∂σα,β
= 0, (16)
∂xβ
where α, β stand for x, y and summation over repeated
indexes is intended. The first equation describes out-ofplane bending ξ(x, y) and the second one in-plane stretching for the displacements u = (ux (x, y), uy (x, y)). (x, y)
vary along the 2D projection of the 3D biofilm structure.
Eh3
The bending stiffness is D = 12(1−ν
2 ) , and h the initial
plate height. P is the external pressure at the border of
∂(gzy +gyz )
+gxz )
the sample. CM = ∂(gzx∂x
+
is a residual
∂y

growth term. The components of the tensor g are the
growth rates, that is, the rate of volume supply per unit
volume. Defining consistently a growth tensor g is a non
trivial issue. A possibility is to set g = ∇w [64], w being
the vector field of displacement of growing biomass in the
biofilm w, which is determined by the cellular division
and spread mechanism and water absorption processes.
Stresses σ and strains ε are defined in terms of in-plane
displacements u = (ux , uy ) [39, 45] by:


1 ∂uα
∂uβ
∂ξ ∂ξ
εα,β =
+
+
+ ε0α,β , (17)
2 ∂xβ
∂xα
∂xα ∂xβ
E
E
σxx =
(εxx + νεyy ), σxy =
εxy , (18)
2
1−ν
1+ν
E
(εyy + νεxx ).
σyy =
1 − ν2
The Poisson ratio of different tissues has been measured
to be about 0.49999 [65]. We will set the Poisson ratio of
the biofilm ν = 21 (incompressibility) [45]. The average
elastic modulus E of a wild type B. subtilis biofilm has
been measured to be about 25 kP a [17]. When the residual strains ε0α,β are due to growth, they are expressed in
terms of the growth tensor as:
1
ε0α,β = − (gαβ + gβα + gzα gzβ ) .
2

(19)

A growing biofilm is in a state of compression due to cell
division and, eventually, water absorption. Alternatively,
this may be represented by a residual strain
ε0α,β (x, t) = −ε0 (x, t)δα,β ,

ε0 > 0.

(20)

If we assume that cells do not grow at expense of their
neighbors, δα,β is a diagonal unit tensor in polar coordinates in a circular film.
For a biofilm growing on a surface no external loads act
on the edges, therefore, P = 0. However, the interaction
with the surface affects the deformation process and has
to be included in the description. A correction to Eqs.
(15)-(16) applicable to thin elastic films growing on a
viscoelastic substratum is proposed in Ref. [40]:
"
∂ξ
1 − 2νv hv
=
D(−∆2 ξ + ∆CM )
∂t
2(1 − νv ) ηv

#
∂
∂ξ
µv
+h
σα,β (u)
−
ξ,
(21)
∂xβ
∂xα
ηv
∂u
hv h
µv
=
∇ · σ(u) −
u,
∂t
ηv
ηv

(22)

where hv is the thickness of the viscoelastic substratum
and µv , νv , ηv its rubbery modulus, Poisson ratio, and
viscosity, respectively.
The equilibrium equations describe possible equilibrium configurations, and yield information on their stability or changes of stability. To describe the dynamics of wrinkle formation and the finally selected pattern
we must solve the time dependent equations. Equations

11
(21)-(22) were derived for the interface between the thin
film and the substratum. This interface moves vertically
following the displacement field ξ. This shifts all the tiles
in the three dimensional biofilm-substratum system vertically.
Choosing new dimensionless variables:
x̂ =

x
,
L

û =

u
,
L

ξ
ξˆ = ,
h

σ̂ =

σ
,
E

t̂ =

t
,
T

and setting L = γh, the dimensionless equations read:
"
!
∂ ξˆ
∂ ξˆ
2 2 ∂
= 12(1 − ν )γ
σ̂α,β (û)
∂ x̂β
∂ x̂α
∂ t̂
#
µv ˆ
+ (−∆2x̂ ξˆ + ∆x̂ ĈM ) − T ξ,
(23)
ηv
µv
∂ û
= τ ∇x̂ · σ̂(û) − T û,
ηv
∂ t̂

(24)

with
2(1 − νv ) ηv h 12(1 − ν 2 )γ 4
,
1 − 2νv hv
E
(1 − νv )
τ = 24
(1 − ν 2 )γ 2 .
(1 − 2νv )

T =

(25)

We set L equal to the maximum averaged radius of the
biofilm in study. Common experimental values for the
parameters defining the spatial scales are h ∼ 100µm,
hv ∼ 100h. The size of the biofilm may vary with the
nutrients and the agar gel nature. Figure 1(a) in Ref.
[14] shows a wrinkled biofilm with L ∼ 50h grown in
four days on a 1.5% agar surface. Figure 1 (a) in Ref.
[37] reproduces wrinkled biofilms with L ∼ 50h within
one day.
The linear terms T µηvv û and T µηvv ξˆ are just damping
contributions from the substratum slowing down the evolution. We will neglect them in our preliminary studies. Wrinkling behavior is observed when the coefficient
12(1 − ν 2 )γ 2 is large enough, so that the contribution
of nonlinear effects and residual stresses in Eq. (23) becomes relevant and drives the plate out of the flat equilibrium state, see Figure 8.
The factor τ in Eq. (24) separates the time scales for
the evolution of u and ξ. The closer to 0.5 the Poisson
ratio νv is, the larger this separation is. The in-plane displacements u may reach a quasistatic situation in which
their evolution is driven by slower changes in the residual stresses created by growth, swelling, and off-plane
displacements.
The constitutive parameters for an agar gel may vary
depending on the agar source, its content of agar and
other products, in particular, water. When an hydrogel is fully swollen, its mechanical behavior is similar to
those of rubber-like materials [66], which have a Poisson
ratio of about 0.5. For some agar gelatines the Young
modulus is measured to be 0.4999, with an elastic modulus about 27 kPa [65]. In other agar gels these numbers

FIG. 8. (Color online) Connected network of wrinkles switching from an intricate core to radial branches, formed in a homogeneous circular film when a circular front of residual compression stresses of magnitude ε0 = 0.1 expands at constant
velocity. Parameter values: ν = 0.5, E = 25 kP a, νv = 0.45,
µv = 0 and γ = 16. dx = 0.1 h, where h is the film thickness
before wrinkling.

go down to νv = 0.32 with an elastic modulus Ev = 52
kPa [67]. This modulus increases with the agar concentration from ∼ 30 kPa in 0.5% samples up to 700 kPa in
5% samples. The viscosity ηv of agar gels is reported in
the range of 100 cp = 0.1 Pa·s for 1.5% samples, see Ref.
[68]. As the agarose concentration increases to 8%, the
viscosity raises to 1 − 1.5 Pa·s [69]. These values increase
as the temperature diminishes. According to Ref. [69],
no measurements can be obtained below 36o C. Standard
experiments are carried out at room temperature, usually below that threshold. Effective values for viscosities
in a MPa·s range are adjusted in Ref. [70].
A large variability in the time scales may arise due
to uncertainty in the experimental values of νv and ηv .
Setting for instance νv = 0.4999, ηv = 0.1 Pa·s, we find
T ∼ 31 hours. This value varies enormously depending
on νv , that changes with the water content. Switching to
νv = 0.45 and ηv = 1 Pa·s, we find T ∼ 2480 s ∼ 40 m.
The time scale scale for u is T 0 = Tτ ranges from 10−3 s
in the first case to 10−2 s in the second one. If ηv enters
the range of kPa·s or MPa·s, this value increases by a
factor 103 − 106 .

B.

Water absorption and water channels

As mentioned earlier, variations in the osmotic pressure extract water from the agar substratum. In Ref.
[36], a macroscopic model for water migration from the
agar substratum into the biofilm is proposed in terms
of the volume fractions of water and biofilm at each location. The biofilm is formed by cells and extracellular
matrix, which is often considered a gel with ability to
swell. As observed in Ref. [37], flat regions of the biofilm
are very resistant to flow. Water cannot be driven inside
without fracturing the biofilm or delaminating it from
the substratum. By contrast, water flows beneath the
wrinkles, forming an intricate network of channels [37].
Wrinkles origin in the core of the biofilm associated with
dead areas [17]. Water flows along the channels driven

12
by surface evaporation [37].
These observations suggest a strategy to incorporate
water into our biofilm description. Water absorption
by the biofilm increases the volume of the cells and the
EPS phase. Enlarging the size of the tiles to reflect that
fact is unpractical. We resort instead to inserting water
tiles in the biofilm, representing water absorption by the
biomass. In that way, the biofilm contains a volume fraction of adsorbed water that changes its volume. A low
cost strategy, easy to implement in our hybrid framework
is the following. As in Ref. [36], we propose for the osmotic pressure a law of the form π = Πφ, but replacing
the volume fraction φ of biomass by our information of
the biomass available at biofilm columns
π=Π

N
,
Nmax

(26)

where N is the number of tiles occupied by biomass in
a column and Nmax is the total number of tiles in the
column, including water. Water tiles are created with
probability:
Pl (C) =

π(C)
,
π(C) + E(C)

(27)

where E(C) is the Young modulus at tile C and the height
of the columns in Eq. (26) is updated as we create water tiles. The status of neighboring tiles is shifted in the
direction of minimal mechanical resistance, except when
water occupies a dead cell. More water will be absorbed
in the columns containing a larger fraction of biomass,
and in softer regions. Scattered inner tiles do not constitute a separate phase, but are considered to be part of
the swollen biomass.
We compute E(C) modulating the measured reference
value of the Young modulus of the biofilm with an average of weights representing status of the neighboring
tiles. Weights range from zero for water, a small positive value for dead cells, a larger value for normal cells,
up to one for EPS producers. Alive cells attached to the
substratum contribute much larger weights than the rest.
E(C) will be small wherever we have dead cells. As Figure 9 shows, those regions fill with water in successive
steps, becoming a water phase that expands following
the wrinkles. Combining water transport through those
channels, with the cellular processes described in Section
III, we see that cell death due to waste accumulation is
reduced and the colony is able to expand in a sustained
way. In early stages we do not allow newborn cells into
this water phase due to the pressure gradients that drift
water from the agar gel into the biofilm. As the water
content of the agar gel diminishes we might allow cell
expansion around the channels, as observed in Ref. [37].
This would keep water inside the biofilm.
In Figure 9, we have distributed dead cells above the
substratum, in the wrinkled regions. The value of Π is
chosen small enough to avoid water proliferation inside
the biofilm, about E/20. These simple probability laws
produce compression residual stresses that vary with the

FIG. 9. (Color online) (a) Biofilm-substratum system deformed following out-of-plane displacements ξ predicted by
Eqs. (21)-(22) for residual stresses expanding as a radial compression front. (b) Bottom slice of (a) displaying the arrangement of biofilm and substratum. (c) Intemediate slice of (a)
showing the allocation of dead cells. (d) and (e) Accumulation of absorbed water in slice (c) triggered by the presence
of weakened dead areas after 1 and 40 steps of the water absorption process, respectively.

biofilm height, as shown in Figure 10, where Π = E/3.
Values in the range Π ∼ E are suggested in Ref. [15].
A time scale for water absorption processes may be
inferred from the analysis in Ref. [36], where a thin film
description of biofilm spread due to swelling and growth
is proposed. For radial biofilms and small departures
from osmotic balance, a similarity approximation for the
height h and the radius R of the biofilm yields a time
scale 1/q for the spread process, where q is the rate of
biomass production.
We cannot directly couple the model in Ref. [36] to a
cellular automata description of cell division, death and
differentiation to describe biofilm spread due to swelling.
The main reason is that it already includes a source representing growth. An alternative model of fluid transport
in the biofilm would be necessary for a better description
of the water absorption process and biofilm spread in our

13
framework.
Once water channels have been carved in the biofilm,
we might couple our cellular automata description to the
hydrodynamics of the flow as done for biofilms in porous
media [33]. This assumes that the deformation of the
biomass and the extracellular fluid flow can be computed
in a sequential manner, which happens when the biomass
behaves as an elastic material or the flow induced deformation of the biomass matrix is negligible [71]. Using order-of-magnitude analysis, Ref. [72] establishes domains of validity of different models for liquid transport
in a fluid-solid system depending on the volume fraction
and viscosity of the fluid, the volume fraction, elastic constants and density of the solid, the hydraulic permeability
of the system, the characteristic times for displacement
of the solid, and the characteristic macroscopic length of
the system.

C.

Growth tensor and elastic constants

The components of the tensor g entering Eqs. (23)-(24)
are the growth rates, that is, the rate of volume supply
per unit volume. New tiles may add to our biofilm due to
cell division, EPS creation or water adsorption. Wherever they are created, they shift another tile in the direction of minimal mechanical resistance. The growth tensor at each grid location (ix, iy, iz) is computed by keeping track of all the new tiles inserted and the direction
in which their predecessors where shifted. We define a
vector w = (w1 (ix, iy, iz), w2 (ix, iy, iz), w3 (ix, iy, iz))a.
w1 (ix, iy, iz) is determined by cumulatively adding ±1
for each tile shifted in the x direction in the positive or
negative sense, respectively. w2 and w3 are evaluated in
a similar way, along the y and z directions. The final
vector is normalized to have norm a. Then, we compute ∇w, where the derivatives are approximated by finite differences that use the known grid values. To estimate g(ix, iy) we consider all the contributions from
∇w(ix, iy, iz) for varying iz.
The resulting tensor usually presents abrupt oscillations due to stochasticity, constrained motion along a
restricted set of directions in a cubic grid and varying
biofilm thickness. Such oscillations in the grid scale may
destabilize numerical solutions of Eq. (23). Averaging
and smoothing these tensors to avoid numerical instabilities, we obtain residual stresses that serve as a basis for
the numerical tests, see Figure 10. Averaging rapidly oscillating coefficients and sources is a standard practice to
study macroscopic deformations of materials.
The reference Young modulus of the biofilm is estimated from experimental measurements [17]. The knowledge of its microstructure gained from our simulations allows to introduce spatial modulations. At each location,
we may regulate the reference value multiplying it by the
sum of weights describing the status of its neighboring
tiles, as we did in section IV B. A possible qualitative
choice for those weights are zero for air, a small fraction

FIG. 10. (Color online) Residual stresses ε0xx for the biofilm
seeds depicted in (a), (b) and (c). (d), (e) and (f) represent
their values after one step of the stochastic division and spread
a2
process, with C = 2Kn and DknnK
= 0.01. Spatial variations
n
related to thickness are identifiable in (g), (h), (i), obtained
averaging a few trials of the stochastic procedure. These fields
approach their average values (about −0.1). A single trial
already gives the average value used in rough approximations
by constants. (j), (k), and (l) show the effect of including dead
spots in the biofilm seed. Localized depressions are observed.
(m), (n), (o) reproduce the residual stresses generated by the
water absorption scheme when Π = E/3. The average values
are about −0.2. ε0yy resembles ε0xx in all cases. ε0xy is about
3-2 times smaller.

of one for dead cells, a larger fraction for normal cells
and one for cells producing EPS. The biofilm becomes
softer where it swells easily. In this way, we obtain spatially dependent elastic moduli that allow to investigate
variations in the macroscopic deformation of the biofilm
in response to changes in its microstructure.

14
V.

COUPLING OF CELLULAR AND
MECHANICAL PROCESSES

The interaction between the previous descriptions of
cellular and mechanical processes is visualized in Figure
4. The scheme below details a practical implementation.
1. Initialization. A matrix is created to indicate the
status of the tiles in the computational grid of step
a. At first, we usually set S(ix, iy, iz) = 2 in the
regions occupied by a biofilm seed, assuming that it
is formed by undifferentiated cells stuck together.
As tiles (ix, iy, iz) are filled with differentiated cells,
EPS or water in the next steps, S will take different
positive integer values. Sections occupied by air or
substratum correspond to zero or negative values.
This grid is used to keep track of cellular processes
and also to discretize continuum equations. As the
biofilm enlarges, we might resort to a coarser grid
for the latter purpose. Initially, the concentration
of nutrients is set equal to a constant C in the substratum and zero elsewhere. The concentrations of
waste, ComX, surfactin and EPS are set equal to
zero everywhere.
2. Cellular processes.
(a) Concentration update. The concentrations of
nutrients, waste and ComX are evaluated solving
Eqs. (1)-(3), (6) and (7) with the specified boundary and initial conditions. Whenever surfactin or
EPS producers are present, Eqs. (9) and (11) are
solved too. All the equations are nondimensionalized as indicated in expressions (13)-(14). The solutions of the time dependent diffusion problems for
these chemicals relax to their stationary states in a
short time, compared to the typical time scales for
cellular processes. Explicit finite difference schemes
provide a low cost approximation to the stationary
concentrations after a number of steps. Those approximations are stored and used in the next stages
to evaluate behavioral probabilities.
(b) Probabilities for cell activities. They are only
computed at tiles (ix, iy, iz) occupied by cells. Cells
that are not already dead are killed with probability Pw whenever the concentration of waste surpasses a threshold γw . We evaluate expression
(5) and generate a random number r ∈ [0, 1]. If
max(r, γw ) < Pw , we kill the cell. Alive cells deactivate with probability 1 − Pd , Pd given by formula (4), as long as the nutrient concentration is
low enough. Active cells become surfactin producers with probability Ps defined in formula (8) if the
concentration of ComX surpasses a threshold. Active cells not releasing surfactin become EPS producers with probability Pe given by formula (10)
when a minimum surfactin level is reached and the
nutrient concentration is depleted.

(c) Cellular division and spread. Active cells not
secreting surfactin divide with probability Pd . The
newborn cells are placed in neighboring tiles in the
direction of minimal mechanical resistance. In early
stages, this may be taken to be the shortest distance to the biofilm-air interface.
(d) EPS phase. Accumulation of EPS may prompt
the creation of an EPS phase according to Eq. (12).
(e) Growth tensor and elastic parameters. As EPS
production increases, the biofilm acquires consistency. We have used in our simulations average
measured values of the Young modulus. Information on the spatial distribution of different types of
cells allows to spatially modulate that value. Computing the out-of-plane deformations in the next
stage requires the previous derivation of a growth
tensor from the biomass growth process. This is
done as indicated in subsection IV C.
3. Mechanical processes.
(a) Water absorption and water phase. EPS production changes the osmotic pressure and prompts
water migration from the substratum towards the
biofilm. Water absorption by the biomass may be
accounted for by means of formula (27). Dead
zones near the surface will easily fill with water,
which may expand along the wrinkles between the
biomass and the substratum. A water phase is created. As the volume fraction of water increases and
water channels develop, a description of liquid flow
in the system might be necessary.
(b) Growth tensor and elastic parameters. Information on the spatial distribution of absorbed water allows to spatially modulate the average Young
modulus, decreasing it in swollen regions. The
growth tensor is updated to reflect the volume supply due to water absorption. This is done as indicated in subsection IV C.
(c) Out-of-plane displacements. Vertical displacements due to internal stresses are estimated solving
Eqs. (21)-(22). The equations are nondimensionalized following Eqs. (23)-(24). Basic explicit difference schemes provide low cost approximations.
Alternatively, faster spectral methods may be used
[40, 42]. As the biofilm becomes more heterogenous we might need to solve a three dimensional
elasticity problem or include lower order terms in
the Von-Kármán equations.
(d) Biofilm deformation. Tiles (ix, iy, iz) at the
interface biofilm-substratum are shifted vertically
a number of tiles equal to the integer part of
ξ(ix, iy)/a, pushing their neighbors in the three dimensional biofilm. This is done shifting the status
of such tiles in the matrix S(ix, iy, iz). Relative
status of neighbors in the vertical direction is preserved.

15
4. Iteration. The biofilm evolution is calculated alternating the computation of cellular processes up
to a time tC (estimated from the doubling time),
with steps of the water absorption processes in a
time scale tW ∼ tC (estimated from biomass production) and steps of the deformation processes in a
time scale tD (which requires precise measurements
of the substratum parameters).
Summarizing, the mechanical processes change the geometry of the biofilm. The equations for the different concentrations must be solved in the new geometry,
which affects the cellular processes altering the probabilities for the different behaviors. The cellular processes alter the elastic parameters and the pressure in the biofilm,
contributing residual stresses for its deformation due to
growth, death and fluid migration.

VI.

SIMULATION RESULTS

Series of simulations were performed to illustrate the
behavior of the model and its limitations, choosing single mechanisms or combinations of a few of them. The
results show wrinkled patterns and cell distributions in
qualitative agreement with recent experimental observations. They provide insight on the influence of parameters, cellular activities and mechanical processes on the
biofilm shape and structure.
Basic growth and spread mechanisms do not produce
wrinkled shapes. Even if we activate water absorption
processes, the biofilm will spread faster, but no wrinkles
appear. When elastic deformation mechanisms are incorporated, wrinkles begin to form. We revisit the simulation described in Figure 7 for the same parameter values
and a similar initial biofilm seed containing five peaks,
see Figure 11(a). During the third step of the growth,
spread and differentiation processes, EPS producers appear. At the fourth step, we consider that enough matrix
has been produced to regard the biofilm as an elastic film
with Young modulus E. During the 10-th step, dead cells
appear at the bottom of the initial peaks. Dead areas expand during the 11-th step. In the 12-th step, growth in
the central region has slowed down due to depleted nutrient levels and increased waste presence.
Figures 11(b)-(f) illustrate the spatial structure of the
corresponding growth tensor. Initial peaks diffuse as the
biofilm grows and become depressions when dead cells appear. Once growth in the core is depleted, compression is
higher in the border regions. A randomly perturbed initial biofilm deforms according to Eqs. (23)-(24) generating small wrinkles that coarsen as time evolves. Figures
11(g)-(k) represent the out-of-plane deformation of the
film at selected steps of the growth, spread and differentiation processes. After each step, the average radius of
the biofilm increases about one cell. The deformation of
τ
the biofilm is then calculated for a time 24
s. As wrinkles develop, the growth processes must be implemented

FIG. 11. (Color online) (a) Initial biofilm seed. (b), (c), (d),
(e), (f) Residual stresses ε0xx averaged after 100 trials of the
stochastic processes at steps 4, 8, 10, 11, 12. The average
compression is −0.132, −0.1425, −0.146, −0.1437, −0.124.
respectively. ε0yy has a similar structure and average. ε0xy
takes smaller values and is neglected. (g), (h), (i), (j), (k)
Vertical displacements. The height mark dx corresponds to
one cell. Parameter values are γ = 8, ν = 0.5, E = 25 kP a,
νv = 0.45 and µv = 0.

in biofilms with a wavy bottom, contributing additional
spatial variations to the growth tensor (higher compression in the valleys, lower compression in the peaks).
Unless we activate the water absorption mechanism, as
in Figure 9, a necrotic region will develop in the biofilm
core. Water absorption facilitates nutrient diffusion and
waste removal, maintaining the cell normal functions.
In the computations, we have approximated the residual stresses ε0xx and ε0yy by their constant average, modified by peaks or depressions that represent increased or

16
decreased compression in certain areas. More accurate
smooth approximations can be automatically produced
using denoising strategies borrowed from image processing [73]. As time evolves, singularities may develop due
to the presence of ‘hanging’ cells in the border. Such cells
are poorly connected to the rest of the biofilm. This artifact is solved by discarding such cells when computing
deformations. For the selected parameter values, biofilms
are roundish. Therefore, we may alternatively smooth
the biofilm border using the averaged support obtained
when averaging trials of the stochastic processes to identify spatial variations of the growth tensor. Wavy borders
like the ones observed in Figure 6 are usually found for
a2
. This number depends on the nutrilarge values of DknnK
n
ent source and the bacterial strain, but tends to be small
( << 1) in practice.
What causes the successive wrinkle branching and the
radial branching observed in Figures 1(a) and 2(a)? As
we have noticed, EPS production gives the cellular aggregate a certain cohesion. As shown by Figures 10 and
11, an expanding biofilm is under compression due to cell
division, EPS production and water absorption. The development of wrinkles in Figure 11 is limited by size considerations. The radius of the biofilm increases from 60
to 80 cells, it thickness is about 10 cells and γ = 8. Doubling the biofilms maximum radius, and consequently γ,
it appears that a simple round compression front expanding at a certain speed may produce wrinkle branching,
structured differently depending on the front speed and
the compression magnitude.
Motivated by previous observations, the residual
stresses ε0 (x, t) are assumed to behave like a radial front
ε0 (r −vt) expanding at a certain speed v, r being the distance to the seed center. This allows to lower the computational cost. Figures 2(b) and 8 are generated deforming
circular biofilm seeds according to Eqs. (23)-(24) for such
residual stresses. The evolution starts from a configuration with small random vertical displacements. Figure 8
takes ε0 (r) = −0.1 constant in the central region. Then,
it decreases sharply. The front advances one tile every
14/τ s. Figure 12 shows the time evolution of the wrinkled area. Small wrinkles similar to those in Figure 11
form that coarsen as shown in those images. Figure 8 is a
three dimensional view of the two dimensional projection
depicted in Figure 12(d). The biofilm contains scattered
dead spots where the residual stresses decrease by a certain factor, affecting the way wrinkles nucleate. Once
the wrinkled area attains a certain extension, the height
of the wrinkles decreases unless we vary the compression
magnitude. If we wish to increase the wrinkle branching
rate, while maintaining or enhancing their height as the
wrinkled region expands, the magnitude of the compression has to increase radially. Figure 2(b) was computed
raising the speed to one tile every 1.4/τ s and increasing
the compression magnitude by r/80 as the radius of the
compressed region grows. When the compression front
expands too slowly, rings may form around the wrinkled
area. If it expands too fast, we may see different types

FIG. 12. (Color online) Snapshots of the formation of wrinkles for ε0 = 0.1. (a), (b), (c), (d) images taken at times
280 Tτ , 560 Tτ , 840 Tτ , 1120 Tτ . An initial random state coarsens
to produce a connected wrinkle network that opens up into
radial branches as the compressed region spreads. The biofilm
has Poisson ratio ν = 0.5 and Young modulus E = 25 kP a.
The Poisson ratio and rubbery modulus of the substratum are
νv = 0.45 and µv = 0. T and τ are defined in Eq. (25). The
ratio of the in-plane spatial scale to the out-of-plane spatial
scale is set to γ = 16. The equations are nondimensionalized
so that the dimensionless biofilm thickness becomes ĥ = 1.
dx2 . The spatial step is dx = 0.1ĥ.
The time step is dt = 0.14
τ

of geometric shapes. In between, the network of wrinkles
opens up radially as it expands. The outer branches are
connected to the inner network and interact with it.
So far, we have discussed branching of wrinkles. What
produces the wrinkled corona in Figure 1(a)? A sudden stop of an advancing compression front may arrange
branching wrinkles in a corona type structure temporarily. The whole network changes its structure later. A uniformly compressed film whose elastic modulus decreases
in an outer corona develops stable radial wrinkles, as in
Figure 1(b). The Young modulus E has been decreased
by a factor 0.5 in the outer corona. Radial residual compression of constant magnitude −0.1 is applied everywhere, for the same parameter values as in Figures 8
and 12. Now, there is no advancing front. The biofilm
boundary remains fixed and the residual stresses are constant everywhere. Radial decrease of the Young modulus
might be due to larger water absorption rates in the outer
regions, presumably softer, due to the larger presence of
normal cells.
Too sharp a decrease in the elastic modulus, for the selected parameters, combined with smaller values of Poisson’s ratio, may result in fast coarsening and disappearance of the central wrinkles, as in Figure 13(a). The
compression factor is kept constant in a central core but
increases radially in an outer corona. The inner network
of wrinkles vanishes with time, but a corona of increas-

17
ing radial wrinkles is formed. Both the Young modulus
E and the Poisson ratio ν affect the time scales. Wrinkles
coarsen faster in regions with higher Young modulus or
lower Poisson ratio. Central wrinkles, however, are anchored by the presence of a couple of dead spots in Figure 13(b). Decreasing the Poisson ratio enhances height.
Lowering the Poisson’s ratio to 0.3, the outer wrinkles
not only maintain their heights, but also may increase it
for increasing radial compression. Unlike Figure 1(b) or
Figure 8, a radially increasing compression factor ε0 produces an inner network of wrinkles that opens up forming branches whose height can be kept uniform over the
biofilm, see Figure 13(c). Notice also that γ is decreased
by a half. Radial increase of the compression might be
due to larger growth rates in the outer regions caused by
increasing availability of nutrients.

VII.

CONCLUSIONS

Replicating cell populations create three dimensional
organisms of diverse shapes. Elucidating how those different geometries arise is an intriguing question that has
motivated many theories. Small cellular systems, such as
bacterial biofilms, seem to develop from the interplay between cellular and mechanical processes. Studying the interaction of those two mechanisms from an experimental
point of view requires concurrent measurement of both
processes, posing a major challenge. Developing mathematical and computational frameworks able to incorporate the increasing amount of experimental observations
in their governing rules may provide insight on the feedback between microscopic cell behavior and macroscopic
continuum processes. We have proposed a hybrid model
to describe the growth dynamics of a small cluster of
biofilm on an air-agar interface. We are able to transfer information from a stochastic description of cellular
processes into a continuum model for the deformation
of the film, and use these deformations as a feedback
for the cell activities. We have shown that mechanical
processes change the geometry of the biofilm. The relevant concentrations must be computed in a new geometry. This fact influences the cellular processes, modifying
the probabilities for the cell behaviors. In turn, the cellular processes modulate the elastic parameters and the
pressure in the biofilm, and generate residual stresses due
to death, growth, and fluid migration. This microscopic
feedback determines the subsequent mechanical processes
and so on. We have observed that the properties of the
substratum together with the mechanical properties of
the biofilm and residual stresses due to death, growth
and swelling seem to control wrinkled biofilm shapes.
Our in silico biofilms agree qualitatively with some experimental observations, in the sense that their shape
and the spatial distribution of the different types of differentiated cells is similar. Biomass, air, water and agar
distribute through the tiles of a computational grid. We
confer tiles occupied by alive cells the ability to change

FIG. 13. (Color online) Wrinkled structures obtained varying the residual stresses and the elastic moduli for a smaller
film with lower Poisson’s ratio. (a) Transition from a harder
central region with larger Young modulus to a softer outer
corona: radial branches in the corona are separated from the
core by rings. (b) Uniform residual compression in the central region with localized sinks due to dead spots plus radially
increasing compression in the outer corona: small wrinkles anchored by the dead spots in the center merge with larger radial wrinkles in the outer corona. (c) Residual compression increasing slowly with distance to the center: labyrinths formed
in the center become radial branches in the outer corona. Parameter values: Same as previous figures except ν = 0.3 and
γ = 8. dx is the spatial step.

their status according to probability laws informed by a
cascade of concentration fields: nutrients, waste, ComX
and surfactin. Local inhomogeneities trigger cell death at
the bottom of biofilm peaks. Nutrient depletion deactivates cells at the top. When a threshold level of ComX is
reached, surfactin producers appear. When a threshold
level of surfactin is achieved, EPS producers proliferate.
Once EPS release activates, we consider the biofilm an
elastic film, whose elastic parameters are modulated by
its microstructure. We also launch a mechanism for water absorption triggered by variations in osmotic pressure

18
caused by EPS production. Weighting at each biofilm location the average values of elastic moduli taken from
experiments according to the status of the neighboring
tiles, we may produce spatially varying parameters taking into account the microstructure. The biofilm weakens due to the presence dead cells. It also softens in
swollen regions, due to water absorption. Biofilm expansion is quantified by means of a growth tensor computed
from the stochastic growth, death and water absorption
processes. In this way, we estimate the residual stresses
caused by these mechanisms. The compression residual
stresses and the spatially varying moduli used in the numerical tests presented here are motivated by those computations. We study biofilm deformation in response to
those stresses by means of a Föppl-Von Kármán approximation, obtaining intricate wrinkled cores that split in
radial branches. Water erodes the regions were cells die,
expanding along the wrinkles. This improves transport
of waste and nutrients, hindering cell death and favoring
growth.

outer corona, also enhance the outer radial wrinkles.
Quantitative comparison with experiments should require careful calibration of several parameters, in particular, regarding substratum properties and heuristic
probability laws. Substratum parameters such as its
Poisson ratio, thickness, viscosity and rubbery modulus
should be accurately measured since they affect the time
scales for the biofilm dynamics. Uptake rates, production rates, saturation constants and diffusivities of the
involved chemical compounds should be determined too,
since they influence the extend of growth, death and differentiation processes. As the biofilm thickens and its
spatial heterogeneity increases, the Föppl-Von Kármán
approximation should likely be replaced by a fully three
dimensional elasticity model. The spread mechanism and
the dynamics of water in the system should be revised
too.

Our simulations show that wrinkling seems to be associated with stiffness fluctuations. Variations in inner
residual stresses and elastic constants due to growth,
swelling and death seem to govern wrinkle nucleation and
branching. Compression stresses expanding radially due
to swelling and growth produce wrinkled cores that split
in radial wrinkles. The presence of dead regions alters
the way the core wrinkles are nucleated. It also favors
wrinkle formation and persistence around dead areas as
the compression rate is reduced or time increases. Successive wrinkle branching may occur depending on the
expansion velocity. Radially graded compression stresses
may enhance the outer radial wrinkles. Spatially dependent elastic moduli, harder at the center and softer in the

A. Carpio and D.R. Espeso thank M.P. Brenner for
hospitality while visiting Harvard University. D. R. Espeso and A. Carpio were supported by Comunidad de
Madrid and the spanish MICINN through grants No.
S2009/DPI-1572, No. FIS2011-28838-C02-02 and No.
FIS2010-22438-E. A. Carpio was also supported by a mobility grant of Fundación Caja Madrid. B. Einarsson was
supported by the NILS Mobility project (European economic area-EEA grant) and MICINN grant No. FIS200804921-C02-01. Part of the computations of this work
were performed in EOLO, the HPC of Climate Change
of the International Campus of Excellence of Moncloa,
funded by MECD and MICINN. This is a contribution
to CEI Moncloa.

[1] R.D. Monds and G.A. O’Toole, Trends Microbiol. 17, 73
(2009).
[2] H.C. Flemming and J. Wingender, Nature Rev. Microbiol. 8, 623 (2010).
[3] N. Hoiby, T. Bjarnsholt, M. Givskov, S. Molin and O.
Ciofu, Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 35, 322 (2010).
[4] J.W. Costerton, P.S. Stewart and E.P. Greenberg, Science 284, 1318 (1999).
[5] R.O. Darouiche, Clin. Infect. Dis. 33, 1567 (2001).
[6] C.C. de Carvalho, Recent Pat. Biotechnol. 1, 49 (2007).
[7] E. Eguia, A. Trueba, B. Ro-Calonge, A. Giron, C. Bielva,
Int. Biodeter. Biodeg. 62, 79 (2008).
[8] Y. Xiong, Y. Liu, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 86, 825
(2010).
[9] R. Singh, D. Paul and R.K. Jain, Trends Microbiol. 14,
389 (2006).
[10] B. Schachter, Nature Biotechnol. 21, 361 (2003).
[11] S. Wuertz, P.L. Bishop and P.A. Wilderer, Biofilms
in wastewater treatment: An interdisciplinary approach
(IWA Publishing, 2003).

[12] B. Purevdorj, J.W. Costerton and P. Stoodley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68, 4457 (2002).
[13] K. Drescher, Y. Shen, B.L. Bassler and H.A. Stone, Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sc. 110, 4345 (2013).
[14] L. Chai, H. Vlamakis and R. Kolter, MRS Bulletin 36,
374 (2011).
[15] J.N. Wilking, T.E. Angelini, A. Seminara, M.P. Brenner
and D.A. Weitz, MRS Bulletin 36, 38 (2011).
[16] M. Trejo, C. Douarche, V. Bailleux, C. Poulard, S. Mariot, C. Regeard and E. Raspaud, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sc.
110, 2011 (2013).
[17] M. Asally, M. Kittisopikul, P. Rué, Y. Du, Z. Hu, T.
Çağatay, A.B. Robinson, H. Lu, J. Garcia-Ojalvo and
G.M. Süel, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sc. 109, 18891 (2012).
[18] E. Coen, A.G. Rolland-Lagan, M. Matthews, J.A. Bangham and P. Prusinkiewicz, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101,
4728 (2004).
[19] T. Mammoto and D.E. Ingber, Development 137, 1407
(2010).
[20] O. Wanner, H. Eberl, E. Morgenroth, D. Noguera, C.
Picioreanu, B. Rittmann, and M.C.M. van Loosdrecht,

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

19

[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]

Mathematical modeling of biofilms (IWA Publishing, London UK, 2006).
I. Klapper and J. Dockery, SIAM Rev. 52, 221 (2011).
J.B. Xavier and K.R. Foster, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sc. 104,
876 (2007).
J.B. Xavier, E. Martinez-Garcia, and K.R. Foster, The
American Naturalist 174, 1 (2009).
D. Rodriguez, B. Einarsson and A. Carpio, Phys. Rev. E
86, 061914 (2012).
E. Alpkvist, C. Picioreanu, M.C.M. Loosdrecht and A.
Heyden, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 94, 961 (2006).
T. Shaw, M. Winston, C.J. Rupp, I. Klapper and P.
Stoodley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 098102 (2004).
N.G. Cogan and R.D. Guy, HFSP J. 4, 11 (2010).
H.J. Dupin and P.K. Kitanidis, P.L. McCarty, Water Res.
37, 2965 (2001).
D. Taherzadeh, C. Picioreanu, U. Küttler, A. Simone,
W.A. Wall and H. Horn, Biotech. Bioeng. 105, 600
(2009).
N. Autrusson, L. Guglielmini, S. Lecuyer, R. Rusconi,
and H.A. Stone, Phys. Fluids 23, 063602 (2011).
S.W. Hermanowicz, Math. Biosci. 169, 1 (2001).
C.S. Laspidou and B.E. Rittmann, Water Res. 38, 3349
(2004).
G.E. Kapellos, T.S. Alexiou and A.C. Payatakes, Adv.
Water Resour. 30, 1648 (2007).
N.J. Poplawski, A. Shirinifard, S. Macie and J.A. Glazier,
Math. Biosc. Eng. 5, 355 (2008).
L.A. Lardon, B.V. Merkey, S. Martins, A. Dötsch, C. Picioreanu, J.U. Kreft and B.F. Smets, Environ. Microbiol.
13, 2416 (2011).
A. Seminara, T.E. Angelini, J.N. Wilking, H. Vlamakis,
S. Ebrahim, R. Kolter, D.A. Weitz and M.P. Brenner,
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sc. 109, 1116 (2012).
J.N. Wilking, V. Zaburdaev, M. De Volder, R. Losick,
M.P. Brenner and D.A. Weitz, Proc. Nac. Acad. Sc. 110,
848 (2013).
M. Ben Amar and M. Wu, EPL 108, 38003 (2014).
T. Mora and A. Boudaoud, Eur. Phys. J. E 20, 119
(2006).
R. Huang and S.H. Im, Phys. Rev. E 74, 026214 (2006).
Z. Liu, S. Swaddiwudhipongc and W. Hongd, Soft Matter
9, 577 (2013).
Y. Ni, D. Yang and L. He, Phys. Rev. E 86, 031604
(2012).
L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifschitz, Theory of elasticity
(Pergamon Press, 1986).
J. Dervaux and M. Ben Amar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101,
068101 (2008).
J. Dervaux, P. Ciarletta and M. Ben Amar, J. Mech.
Phys. Solids 57, 458 (2009).
M.A.A. Grant, B. Waclaw, R.J. Allen and P. Cicuta, J.R.
Soc. Interface 11, 20140400 (2014).
A. Dechesne, G. Wang, G. Gülez, D. Or and B.F. Smets,
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sc. 107, 14369 (2010).
M.S. Alber, M.A. Kiskowski, J.A. Glazier and Y. Jiang,
in Mathematical Systems Theory in Biology, Communi-

[49]
[50]

[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]
[58]
[59]

[60]
[61]
[62]
[63]
[64]
[65]
[66]
[67]
[68]
[69]

[70]
[71]
[72]
[73]

cations, Computation, and Finance, 2003, The IMA Volumes in Mathematics and its Applications, Vol. 134, p.1.
C.S. Laspidou, L.A. Spyrou, N. Aravas and B.E.
Rittmann, Math. Biosci. 251, 11 (2014).
M.H. Swat, G.L. Thomas, J.M. Belmonte, A. Shirinifard,
D. Hmeljak and J.A. Glazier, Methods Cell Biol. 110,
325 (2012).
T. Storck, C. Picioreanu, B. Virdis and D.J. Batstone,
Biophys. J. 106, 2037 (2014).
P. Mehta, R. Mukhopadhyay and N.S. Wingreen, Phys.
Biol. 5, 026005 (2008).
W.C. Fuqua, S.C. Winans and E.P. Greenberg, J. Bacteriol. 176, 269 (1994).
B.A. Hense, C. Kuttler, J. Müller, M. Rothballer, A.
Hartmann and J.U. Kreft, Nature Rev. Microbiol. 5, 231
(2007).
T. Long, K.C. Tu, Y. Wang, P. Mehta, N.P. Ong, B.L.
Bassler and N.S. Wingreen, PLOS Biol. 7, e1000068
(2009).
S.W. Teng, J.N. Schaffer, K.C. Tu, P. Mehta, W. Lu,
N.P. Ong, B.L. Bassler and N.S. Wingreen, Mol. Syst.
Biol. 7, 491 (2011).
P.S. Stewart and M.J. Franklin, Nature Rev. Microbiol.
6, 199 (2008).
T.Y. Hou, Acta Numerica 4, 335 (1995).
W. Zhang, A. Seminara, M. Suaris, M.P. Brenner, D.A.
Weitz and T.E. Angelini, New J. Phys. 16, 015028
(2014).
P. Mehta, S. Goyal, T. Long, B.L. Bassler and N.S.
Wingreen, Mol. Syst. Biol. 5, 325 (2009).
L.R. Swem, D.L. Swem, N.S. Wingreen and B.L. Bassler,
Cell 134, 461 (2008).
C.D. Nadell, J.B. Xavier, S.A. Levin and K.R. Foster,
PLOS Biol. 6, e14 (2008).
M. Hendrata and B. Birnir, Phys. Rev. E 81, 061902
(2010).
Z. Hejnowicz and J.A. Romberger, J. Theor. Biol. 110,
93 (1984).
T. Glozman, H. Azhari, J. Ultrasound Med. 29, 387
(2010).
K.S. Anseth, C.N. Bowman and L Brannon-Peppas, Biomaterials 17, 1647 (1996).
K.A. Ross and M.G. Scanlon, J. Texture Stud. 30, 17
(1999).
S. Istini, M. Ohno and H. Kusunose, Bull. Mar. Sci. Fish.
Kochi Univ. 14, 49 (1994).
E. Fernandez, D. Lopez, C. Mijangos, M. DuskovaSmrckova, M. Ilavsky and K. Duseck, J. Polym Sci: Part
B: Polym. Phys. 46, 322 (2008).
M. Ahearne, Y. Yang, A.J. El Haj, K. Then and K.K.
Liu, J. R. Soc. Interface 2, 455 (2005).
G.E. Kapellos, T.S. Alexiou and A.C. Payatakes, Math.
Biosci. 225, 83 (2010).
G.E. Kapellos, T.S. Alexiou and A.C. Payatakes, Int. J.
Eng. Sc. 51, 241 (2012).
A. Torres, A. Marquina, J.A. Font, J.M. Ibáñez, Phys.
Rev. D 90, 084029 (2014).

