Role of dynamic capsomere supply for viral capsid self-assembly
Marvin A. Boettcher,∗ Heinrich C. R. Klein,∗ and Ulrich S. Schwarz
Institute for Theoretical Physics and BioQuant,

arXiv:1502.00155v1 [q-bio.SC] 31 Jan 2015

Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany

Abstract
Many viruses rely on the self-assembly of their capsids to protect and transport their genomic
material. For many viral systems, in particular for human viruses like hepatitis B, adeno or human
immunodeficiency virus, that lead to persistent infections, capsomeres are continuously produced
in the cytoplasm of the host cell while completed capsids exit the cell for a new round of infection.
Here we use coarse-grained Brownian dynamics simulations of a generic patchy particle model to
elucidate the role of the dynamic supply of capsomeres for the reversible self-assembly of empty
T1 icosahedral virus capsids. We find that for high rates of capsomere influx only a narrow range
of bond strengths exists for which a steady state of continuous capsid production is possible. For
bond strengths smaller and larger than this optimal value, the reaction volume becomes crowded
by small and large intermediates, respectively. For lower rates of capsomere influx a broader range
of bond strengths exists for which a steady state of continuous capsid production is established,
although now the production rate of capsids is smaller. Thus our simulations suggest that the
importance of an optimal bond strength for viral capsid assembly typical for in vitro conditions
can be reduced by the dynamic influx of capsomeres in a cellular environment.

∗

These authors contributed equally.

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Viruses are experts on the inner working of cells and their investigation has contributed
strongly to our understanding of the physical principles at work in biological systems. In particular, the study of viruses has demonstrated the amazing power of biological self-assembly
in an experimentally and theoretically accessible system. In their physiological context,
viruses rely on the molecular machinery of their host to reproduce both their genomic material and the protein capsid usually encapsulating it [1, 2]. Typically the capsid is assembled
from many copies of only a few different capsid proteins and shows icosahedral or helical
symmetry [3–7]. The elementary assembly blocks for the assembly of a capsid are termed
capsomeres. They can either consist of single capsid proteins or of preassembled sets of
capsid proteins. For many viruses the formation of the capsid can be reproduced in vitro
[8, 9]. The dynamics of in vitro assembly has been analyzed using light and small-angle
X-ray scattering techniques [10–13]. While capsid assembly of viruses with single-stranded
genomic material often requires the presence of the genomic material as an ’electrostatic
glue’ [1, 14], this is typically not possible for double-stranded genomic material due to its
larger bending stiffness. These viruses typically assemble their capsid without the genomic
material, which is then inserted into the capsid by a motor [1, 15].
Despite the plethora of known capsid structures [16], the dynamic assembly process of
the virus shell is still far from being fully understood. As experimental possibilities for detailed monitoring of the assembly dynamics are limited, modeling can significantly help to
increase our understanding of the mechanisms that govern the assembly process. In the past
various techniques ranging from coarse-grained molecular dynamics or Brownian dynamics
simulations [17–25] through Monte Carlo simulations [26–28] and discrete stochastic approaches [29–33] to thermodynamic descriptions [10, 34–36] have been used to elucidate different aspects of the assembly process. For example, the influence of capsomere shape [19, 24]
or the emergence of polymorphic structures [37–39] have been investigated with such theoretical approaches. The different techniques used to study virus capsid assembly have been
recently reviewed by Hagan [40].
Several studies have shown that the successful assembly of complete capsids starting
from a fixed number of assembly subunits requires intermediate (or even optimal) bond
strengths [20, 22, 23, 25, 28, 35, 36, 41, 42]. At low bond strengths (or high temperature)
2

the formation of large clusters is suppressed. At high bond strengths (or low temperature),
by contrast, the simultaneous formation of stable assembly intermediates, which cannot
recombine into complete capsids, or the formation of large, misassembled structures with
non-native binding interactions can prevent the formation of complete capsids. In this case
the system becomes kinetically trapped.
While in vitro studies and computer simulations usually work with a finite initial number
of capsomeres that are increasingly used up during the capsid assembly process, in the
physiological context of the cell the capsomeres are produced in a continuous fashion. In
a recent stochastic simulation study, it has been shown for the case of genome-stabilized
capsids (as for example for the bacteriophage MS2) that this ’protein ramp’ can make virus
assembly very robust against kinetic trapping [43]. While bacteriophages typically kill the
host cell to start a new round of infection, many animal and plant viruses tend to follow
strategies that keep the host cell alive at least for a certain period of time. This is especially
true for human viruses such as hepatitis B virus (HBV), human adeno virus (HAdV) or
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which lead to persistent infections. Recently the
role of dynamic protein supply for viral capsid assembly has been studied from a systems
level perspective using a kinetic gene expression model with exponential protein production
and a master equation for capsid assembly [44]. However, the effect of continuous protein
production has not been studied yet in a spatial model. For empty capsid assembly, it has
been shown earlier with Brownian dynamics that steady states exist in which the removal of
large clusters is balanced by the reinsertion of the corresponding monomers [42]. However,
the effect of the capsomere supply rate on these steady states has not been studied yet.
Inspired by the notion of continuous virus production, we use coarse-grained Brownian
dynamics simulations to investigate the assembly of empty T1 capsids in the presence of
a dynamic capsomere supply. In order to avoid crowding of the reaction volume by large
clusters and motivated by the exit of completed virions from the cell by budding or exocytosis [45–48], capsids are removed from the simulation in the moment that they are completed.
Our simulations suggest that there exists a certain range of bond strengths in which the influx of new capsomeres is balanced by capsid removal. This steady-state region is surrounded
by parameter regions in which successful capsid assembly is prohibited by crowding of the
reaction volume; depending on influx rate and bond strength, crowding is observed either
with small or large intermediates. Our main result is that the favorable region for continuous
3

full capsid

single capsomer
in ux

out ux

FIG. 1. Schematic illustration of our simulations. Capsomeres are randomly inserted into the
simulation volume with a rate ki while completed capsids are removed immediately (including
the intermediates they might contain inside). This simple model mimics the situation in human
cells with persistent infections in which capsomeres are continuously produced by translation and
completed capsids leave by budding or exocytosis.

virus production becomes larger for lower influx rates. Our work identifies essential limits
of viral self-assembly in a dynamic context and suggests that bond strength has to be less
fine-tuned in a cellular context than in in vitro experiments.

II.

METHODS

To investigate the effect of a continuous influx of capsomeres on virus assembly, we use
an efficient coarse-grained Brownian dynamics approach, which has previously been used to
study the effect of reactivity switching during the assembly process [25]. Here we consider a
T1 capsid which is composed of 60 identical capsomeres [7]. Each capsomere is described by
a hard sphere which is equipped with spherical patches (see Fig. 1). The spatial arrangement
of the patches reflects the capsid geometry according to the local rules scheme developed by
Berger et al. [17, 49]. All assembly intermediates formed during the assembly process are
treated as rigid objects and are propagated according to their translational and rotational
diffusive properties [50, 51], which are evaluated on-the-fly upon their formation [51, 52].
4

If an overlap between two complementary patches is realized by diffusion, a bond is formed
with the probability Preact = ka ∆t ≪ 1. This bond can be established either between two
unconnected clusters (inter-bond) or in an already connected cluster (intra-bond). Otherwise
we only consider one type of bond to keep the number of parameters small. We assume that
bond formation is achieved by strong local forces such that this process is very fast on
the time scale of our simulations. Therefore upon formation of an inter-bond, the clusters
instantaneously assume the correct relative position and orientation for the assembly of the
capsid unless the necessary reorientation results in a steric overlap either between the two
merging clusters or with other clusters. We note that our approach based on patchy particles
and local rules does not allow us to study the formation of aberrant cluster with non-native
interactions [20, 22, 42]. Because we do not consider any forces, our approach also does
not allow us to investigate strained capsids, as possible in molecular dynamics or Brownian
dynamics simulations with potentials.
In order to study reversible dynamics, every existing bond can also dissociate with the
probability Pdissoc = kd ∆t ≪ 1. If bond dissociation results in two unconnected clusters,
they are positioned relative to each other according to a computational scheme which ensures
detailed balance in order to prevent additional, non-physical driving forces for the selfassembly [53].
Intra-bond formation in an already connected cluster leads to an additional stabilization
of the cluster as closed loops are formed, in which every capsomere is connected to at least
two neighboring capsomeres. For such a loop structure to break apart it is necessary that
all bonds have to be in the open state simultaneously. The formation/dissociation of an
intra-bond does not affect the structure of the complex. The energy gain by bond formation
is related to the microscopy rates by E = −kB T ln(ka /kd ), where kB is the Boltzmann
constant [53].
To study the effect of a continuous supply of capsomeres on the assembly dynamics, we
introduce the influx rate ki . We place a new capsomere in the simulation volume in each time
step with the probability pin = ki ∆t ≪ 1. Position and orientation of the new capsomere
are randomly chosen with the constraint that no steric overlap with existing clusters is
created. Inspired by virus exit strategies like budding or exocytosis, which in principle
can lead to a steady state of virus production, complete capsids are removed immediately
upon formation together with all intermediates inside the capsid (compare Fig. 1). This
5

removal rule is based on the assumption that complete capsids are much more stable than
partially assembled capsids and that cellular mechanisms exist that are exploited by the
virus to leave the cell. We note that our model does neither incorporate any details of
the production mechanism nor any details of the exit mechanism, but is kept as simple as
possible in order to investigate the underlying physical principles of the assembly process in
such a dynamic setup. For the same reason we focus on the assembly of T1 virus capsids
and assume all bonds to be identical.
For the following it is helpful to introduce the concept of dimensionless bond strength
ks , which is defined by the ratio of the microscopic association rate ka and the microscopic
dissociation rate kd :
ks = ka /kd .

(1)

Note that bond strength is similar to, but different from the equilibrium association constant
Keq for a bimolecular reaction, because it is defined by the ratio of microscopic rates (with
the physical dimension 1/s) rather than by the ratio of a macroscopic association rate
constant kon (with physical dimension 1/(sM)) and a macroscopic dissociation rate koff
(with physical dimension 1/s). For the reaction between two clusters (without any closed
loops) Keq = V ⋆ ks is related to ks by the encounter volume V ⋆ (with physical dimension
m3 ) which is defined by all two-particle configurations of the two clusters with an overlap of
complementary patches [53]. For the case of virus assembly investigated here, ks is not only
a measure for the strength of inter cluster bonds, but also for the stability of closed loops.
In order to avoid the need to exhaustively scan parameter space and motivated by previous
results quantifying the success of assembly as a function of ka and kd [25], we use a linear
relation between dissociation and association rate kd = mka + c with c = 0.0111 ns−1 and
m = −0.0011 to explore the parameter space ranging from very strong to very weak bond
strength. When varying ks from 102 to 105 we explore association and dissociation rates in
the range of ka ∈ [1 ns−1 , 10 ns−1 ] and kd ∈ [1 × 10−4 ns−1 , 0.01 ns−1 ], respectively.
All simulations have been performed at a time resolution of ∆t = 0.01 ns using periodic
boundary conditions. Capsomeres are modeled as hard spheres of radius Rsteric = 1 nm.
Each capsomere is equipped with three distinct spherical patches reflecting the geometry
of the T1 capsid. Each patch has a radius of rpatch = 0.3 nm with the center of the patch
being located on the surface of the hard sphere. A bond can only be established between
6

complementary patches according to the local rules. The diffusive properties of all intermediates are represented by their mobility matrices which are evaluated at room temperature
T = 293 K using the viscosity of aqueous medium η = 1 mPa s.
Given the typical time and length scales l0 = 1 nm and t0 = 1 ns of our simulations, we
define the dimensionless length parameter λ = l/l0 and the dimensionless time parameter
τ = t/t0 in order to simplify the notation. Furthermore, we introduce the dimensionless
box volume Λ = Vbox /l03 , the dimensionless particle concentration ρ = N/Λ, where N is
the number of capsomeres in the simulation volume, and the normalized influx rate κi =
ki t0 106 /Λ. κi can be understood as the rate of concentration increase due to the influx
of capsomeres. Using the normalized influx rate κi instead of ki allows us to compare the
assembly process for different sizes of the simulation volume. Our simulation volume has a
typical linear extension of 30 to 50 nanometers, leading to reasonable computing times for
complete capsid assembly.
Considering particles which are equipped with only one spherical patch we can relate the
values of ks used here to Keq and estimate the speed of the reaction dynamics for this case.
In contrast to the capsomeres these particles can only form dimers. The encounter volume
for this reaction is V ⋆ ≈ 0.11nm3 (compare reference [53] for details on the calculation) and
the equilibrium association constants Keq range from 6.6M −1 to 6.6 × 103 M −1 for the values
of bond strength used here (102 ≤ ks ≤ 105 ). Thus our simulations proceed at a relatively
high concentration in the mM-range.
In order to estimate the influence of the patch size for the speed of the reaction, we use an
algorithm developed by Zhou and coworkers [54, 55] with which the diffusive association rate
constant kD can be estimated based on the survival probability of two clusters starting in
an encounter [53]. For the dimerization we estimate kD ≈ 6.25 × 108 M −1 s−1 . The diffusive
dissociation rate constant then follows as kD,b = kD /V ⋆ . Depending on the values of the
microscopic reaction rate ka the macroscopic association rate constant k+ = kD ka /(ka +
kD,b ) is in the range of 6.0 × 107 M −1 s−1 to 3.21 × 108 M −1 s−1 . For lower values of k+
the reaction can be considered as reaction-limited (ka < kD,b) while for higher values of
k+ the assembly is equally influenced by reaction and diffusion (ka ≈ kD,b ) [56]. Although
bimolecular reactions in this range of macroscopic association rate constants k+ are typically
considered diffusion-limited [57], the relatively large patch sizes used here allow for rapid
formation of the diffusive encounter so that the reactions in our simulations are at least
7

partly reaction-limited according to the classification scheme by Eigen [56]. The macroscopic
dissociation rate k− = kD,bkd /(ka + kD,b ) ranges from 4.8 × 104 s−1 to 9.0 × 106 s−1 , which is
approximately the same range as for the microscopic dissociation rate.
It is instructive to compare the reaction rate constants and equilibrium constants for
dimerization used in our simulations to the rates inferred by Xie at al. [58] with a non-spatial
model from published light-scattering data of the in vitro assembly of hepatitis B virus
(HBV) virus [10], cowpea chlorotic mottle virus (CCMV) [11] and human papillomavirus
(HPV) [12]. We first note that Xie et al. consider closed loops as being infinitely stable
which allows for capsid assembly at lower concentrations than in our case. Nevertheless
we find that for HBV and CCMV, our equilibrium association constants are well within
the range reported by Xie at al., while our association rate constants are larger by two
orders of magnitude. In this context, we note that the use of high concentrations and
enhanced assembly dynamics is a common limitation of particle-based simulations of capsid
assembly [20, 23, 25, 59, 60].
In our setup, concentrations are not fixed, but arise from the dynamic influx. In practice,
capsomere and capsid production rates can vary widely for different viruses and different
host systems. For influenza virus, for example, a production rate of 104 virions over 10
hours has been reported after start of viral protein translation [61]. For HIV, in contrast,
only 800 virions are produced over 8 h after start of viral protein translation [62]. Similar
variations also exist for the transcription and translation rates. As we will see below, our
capsid production rate is of the order of 108 virions per hour in a small reaction volume
because we consider a small generic virus with only 60 identical components, relatively high
influx rates and accelerated dynamics.

III.

RESULTS

First we qualitatively characterize typical responses of our simulation setup at different
bond strengths. For this purpose the time course of the total number of capsomeres placed
inside and removed from the simulation volume is shown in Fig. 2 for two different values
of ks and a normalized influx rate of κi = 2.593 (a movie for the inital stages of capsid
assembly is provided as supplementary movie S1). The number of capsomeres placed inside
the simulation volume (black, solid line) shows the expected linear increase defined by the
8

10

N/103

8

inflow
steady-state
crowding

6
4
2

2

4

1.

1.

1

6
0.

8

4
0.

0.

2
0.

0

0

τ /105

FIG. 2. Evolution of the total number of capsomeres placed inside and removed from the simulation
volume. The black, solid line depicts the number of capsomeres placed inside the simulation volume
with κi = 2.593. The red, dashed lines show individual trajectories of the number of capsomeres
which are removed from the simulation volume due to capsid completion for a bond strength of
ks = 1179, resulting in a steady state. The blue, dotted lines show individual trajectories of
removed capsomeres for a bond strength of ks = 8483 at which crowding occurs.

influx rate. For the low bond strength of ks = 1179 (red, dashed lines) two individual
trajectories are shown. For these trajectories we see that after an initial lag phase without
capsid completion (the length of the lag phase depends strongly on the rate of capsomere
influx and the established concentration in the simulation volume (0.5−2.0×104 ns)) a steady
state with constant capsomere concentration is established in which capsomere influx and
capsid removal balance each other (a movie for the steady state is provided as supplementary
movie S2).
For the higher bond strength of ks = 8483 (blue, dotted lines) the trajectories behave very
differently. After the initial lag phase the rate of capsomere removal due to capsid completion
is almost compensating the capsomere influx for a certain period of time until the rate of
capsid completion drastically slows down. The time point at which this slow-down in capsid
production is observed strongly varies between different trajectories. Once capsid completion
has started to slow down, the concentration in the simulation volume quickly increases due
to the influx of further capsomeres and the simulation volume eventually becomes crowded.
If the volume fraction of the simulation which is occupied by capsomeres is too large, further
assembly is prohibited. For the following we therefore introduce a crowding-threshold. This
9

κi
3.333 (a)
2.593
1.852
1.111
0.370

ρ
(b)

3.333 (c)
2.593
1.852
1.111
0.370
102

0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0

ϕ

(d)

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

103

104

105

102

103

104

105

ks

ks

FIG. 3. Phase diagrams with the different assembly regimes for different simulation volumes. (a)
and (b) show the averaged capsomere concentration ρ as a function of influx rate κi and bond
strength ks for a simulation volume of Λ1 = 27000 and Λ2 = 42875, respectively. (c) and (d) show
the fraction of trajectories which became crowded during the simulation time as a function of κi
and ks for a simulation volume of Λ1 and Λ2 , respectively. Each data point is obtained from 16
independent trajectories using a simulation time of τsim = 106 .

threshold is reached when 35% of the simulation volume is occupied by capsomeres and
trajectories reaching this threshold are aborted. The chosen threshold is much larger than the
highest steady-state concentration established in our simulations and a trajectory reaching
this high concentration will certainly lead to a full stop of assembly.
We now systematically investigate the assembly process as a function of bond strength
ks and normalized influx rate κi . In our dynamic setup the rate of capsid production is prescribed by the influx of capsomeres and hence cannot be used as a measure for the quality of
the assembly process. Instead we measure the ability of the assembly process to compensate
the influx of new capsomeres. As can be seen for the case of a steady state in Fig. 2 the concentration in the simulation volume linearly increases until a steady concentration is reached
at which the assembly of full capsids compensates the influx of new monomers. Thus, for a
driven system with a continuous influx of capsomeres the concentration established in the
simulation volume for a given κi is a measure for the efficiency of the assembly process: the
lower the established concentration, the higher the efficiency (ability of the assembly process
to compensate the influx).
In Fig. 3 (a) and (b) the average capsomere concentration ρ during our simulations
10

is shown for two different simulation volumes, respectively. Here only those parameter
combinations are shown for which a steady state is established in all trajectories during the
simulation time. If no steady state is established (X), the average concentration does not
provide a valid measure for the efficiency of the assembly process as the concentration in
trajectories showing crowding rapidly increases until they are finally aborted. Hence for
parameter combinations where at least one trajectory shows crowding we instead quantify
the ability of the assembly process to compensate the influx of new capsomeres by the
fraction of crowded trajectories ϕ: the higher the crowding fraction is the smaller the ability
of the assembly process to compensate the influx of new capsomeres. This is shown in
Fig. 3(c) and (d) for the two different simulation volumes, respectively.
In general, we see from Fig. 3 (a) and (b) that for every value of κi used here the
lowest concentration is found at intermediate bond strengths of ks ≈ 103 . This is similar to
assembly under static conditions where intermediate bond strengths show the largest yield
of full capsids. Moreover, a minimum bond strength of around 2 × 102 is necessary for any
assembly to occur. Below this threshold in bond strength the simulation volume becomes
crowded almost independent of the normalized influx rate κi .
For high normalized influx rates we see that only a narrow range of intermediate bond
strengths exists for which a steady state is established in our simulations in all trajectories,
and the steady-state concentration even at optimal ks is very high. Here the simulation
volume does not only become crowded for very small ks , but a distinct crowding regime
exists at high ks . Thus, in the case of a high forcing of the system due to a rapid influx
of capsomeres (corresponding to a fast production of capsids) establishing a steady state
requires an optimal bond strength.
By decreasing the normalized influx rate of capsomeres (lower forcing of the system)
the average concentration established in the simulation volume also decreases (Fig. 3 (a)
and (b)) as there is more time for the assembly to proceed in between the addition of
new capsomeres. Interestingly, the crowding regime at high bond strengths shrinks with
decreasing κi (Fig. 3(c) and (d)), and for κi = 1.111 a broad range of ks (also extending to
very high ks ) exists for which a steady state of capsid production is observed. This is a clear
difference between the dynamically driven system analyzed here and static systems with a
fixed capsomere concentration. While in the static case kinetic trapping would prevent any
capsid assembly at high values of ks , the continuous influx of new capsomeres reduces the
11

requirement for an optimal bond strength and successful assembly is possible even at very
high ks .
As κi has been normalized by the simulation volume and can be understood as the rate
of increase in concentration due to the influx of capsomeres, one expects our findings to
be independent of the system size. Comparing the average concentration ρ in the smaller
simulation volume (Fig. 3(a)) and in the larger volume (Fig. 3(b)) we indeed see that the
average concentrations are almost identical in both cases if the rate of capsomere influx
is appropriately scaled. This allows for a volume independent comparison of the effect of
a dynamic influx of capsomeres on the assembly process. On the contrary, the crowding
tendency especially at high bond strengths and high values of κi is reduced in the larger
simulation volume (Fig. 3d) when compared to the smaller simulation volume (Fig. 3c). Thus
the crowding tendency depends on the system size in a non-trivial manner and reflects the
stochastic nature of the crowding process with fluctuations being reduced in larger systems
as will be discussed in detail below.
In order to further characterize the different regimes, individual trajectories of the time
evolution of the capsomere concentration ρ for three different bond strengths with κi = 2.592
and Λ = 27000 are shown in Fig. 4 (a)-(c) (the lower row shows corresponding simulation
snapshots). Fig. 4(a) shows the evolution of ρ of independent trajectories for intermediate
bond strength ks = 1179. Here no crowding of the simulation volume occurs and a steady
state is established in all simulations. After an initial phase with an increase in ρ a constant
concentration is established in all simulations and individual trajectories stochastically fluctuate around this constant concentration. Thus, the average concentration in this case can
indeed be used to characterize the system.
In Fig. 4(b) the time evolution of ρ for low bond strength ks = 164 is shown. In this case
the bond strength is below the minimum ks needed for assembly of larger clusters, and the
concentration in all trajectories linearly increases with simulation time leading to an almost
deterministic abortion of the simulations due to crowding.
In Fig. 4(c) the evolution of concentration is shown for high bond strength ks = 8483.
This case corresponds to crowding of the simulation volume at high bond strengths ks and
high normalized influx rate κi . Compared to the almost deterministic crowding process at
very low bond strengths (Fig. 4(b)), we see that the crowding characteristic for this case is
fundamentally different as now crowding of the simulation volume occurs stochastically. In
12

ρ/10−2

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

(a)

(b)

crowding limit
average

(c)

1

2

3

4

5

high bond strength

low bond strength

intermediate bond strength
0

0

1

2

τ /104

τ /105

3

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

τ /105

FIG. 4. Time evolution of the capsomere concentration for different assembly regimes (κi = 2.592,
Λ = 27000). For each of the different regimes one representative snapshot is shown in the lower
row, with size-dependent color coding. Simulation data for (a) assembly without crowding at
intermediate bond strength ks = 1179, (b) assembly with crowding at low bond strength ks = 164,
and (c) assembly with crowding at high bond strength ks = 8483. The dashed black line represents
the crowding limit at which trajectories are aborted.

all trajectories shown in Fig. 4(c) a very high, quasi-constant concentration is established for
a certain period of time until the system stochastically reaches an unfavorable configuration.
Once such a configuration is reached, the formation of further capsids is hindered. This leads
to an increase in concentration, which further slows down capsid production presumably due
to steric collisions during the reaction process, and the system then quickly becomes crowded
with large capsid intermediates due to the addition of new capsomeres.
A similar crowding characteristic is observed at high κi for bond strengths (ks ≈ 268.0)
which are slightly above the threshold in ks necessary for any capsid assembly. In this case
again capsid completion can balance capsomere influx for a certain period of time until the
simulation volume quickly becomes crowded albeit in this case with a high fraction of small
clusters.
13

9

439.0 ≤ ks ≤ 1931.0
8483.0 ≤ ks ≤ 100000.0
100.0 ≤ ks ≤ 164.0
log10 (pk )

−1

−2

−3

0

10

20

30

40

50

Cluster size

FIG. 5. Relative population of different cluster sizes pk for κi = 2.593 and different values of ks
as a function of the cluster size. The red, solid lines correspond to bond strengths without any
crowding of the simulation volume (439 ≤ ks ≤ 1931). The blue, dashed and dotted lines and the
green, dashed lines correspond to bond strengths where all trajectories showed crowding at high
(ks ≥ 8483) or at low bond strengths (ks = 100 and ks = 164), respectively.

In general, stochastic crowding of the simulation volume requires a very high concentration of capsomeres. In this case the realization of an unfavorable configuration hinders
capsid assembly for a certain time and the influx of new capsomeres leads to a further increase in concentration which in turn hinders further assembly due to steric collisions. Thus,
once a certain concentration is surpassed in our simulations the simulation volume inevitably
becomes crowded as the assembly process cannot compensate the influx of new capsomeres.
The observation that the crowding process is triggered stochastically by the realization of
an unfavorable configuration of the system agrees well with the previous observation that
the stochastic crowding tendency decreases with system size (compare Fig. 3 (c) and (d)).
For a larger system the relative fluctuations in concentration decrease and the probability
that an unfavorable configuration of the whole system is realized is reduced.
In order to further analyze the mechanisms leading to crowding we compare the relative
population of cluster sizes pk = fk × k/N for different cases. Here fk is the number of
clusters of size k and N the total number of capsomeres in our simulation volume. Thus pk
is the probability that an arbitrarily chosen capsomere is part of a k-sized intermediate. In
Fig. 5 pk is shown for different bond strengths and a normalized influx rate of κi = 2.593
on a logarithmic scale. Here pk has been first averaged over the whole simulation time of a
trajectory and subsequently over 16 independent trajectories.
14

For the intermediate bond strengths for which no crowding is observed (red, solid lines)
small and large cluster sizes dominate. This is in agreement with previous observations characterizing successful assembly from a fixed concentration of capsomeres [19, 34] and indicates
that in this regime successful assembly proceeds by the addition of small clusters to only
a few larger, stable assembly intermediates. For crowded runs at very low bond strengths
(green, dashed lines) only small cluster sizes are populated and no capsid completion is observed. This explains the quasi-deterministic increase in concentration shown in Fig. 4(b).
For crowded runs at very high bond strengths (blue, dashed and dotted lines) the relative
population at large cluster sizes strongly resembles the relative population without crowding. In contrast the population of small cluster sizes is strongly reduced for the crowded
runs while the population of intermediate cluster sizes (k ≈ 10) is increased. This shows
that in this case new capsomeres are quickly absorbed by existing clusters and the system
becomes eventually crowded with intermediate and large capsid fragments. Interestingly
the quick depletion of single capsomeres has previously been identified as characteristic for
kinetic trapping during capsid assembly [25, 35, 36, 41]. This shows that kinetic trapping
and box crowding at high bond strengths are strongly connected phenomena.
As we have seen, crowding effects are essential to understand capsid assembly, but until
now we only have considered self-crowding by viral components. In the cell, crowding will be
established also by other crowders and therefore lower (more physiological) concentrations
of viral components are expected to be sufficient to result in similar effects as described
here. In order to test the validity of our findings in the presence of additional, non-specific
macromolecular crowders, we have used our dynamic simulation setup with non-reactive
crowders. To this end we place a total of 600 spherical crowders inside a simulations volume
of size Λ1 = 27000. These crowders have the same radius as the capsomeres, however, they
do not participate in any reactions (no patches). In the simulation volume we now have a
total concentration of ρtotal = ρ + ρcrowder with the concentration of crowders ρcrowder being
kept constant throughout the simulations. This implies that any crowder found inside a
complete capsid is placed back into the simulation volume. The upper (red) histogram in
Fig. 6 shows the dependence of the average concentration ρ observed during our simulations
on the bond strength ks for a normalized influx rate of κi = 0.185. Again ρ is only shown for
those values of ks for which a steady-state was established in all trajectories during the simulation time. The lower (blue) histogram depicts the fraction of crowded runs ϕ for different
15

FIG. 6. Averaged capsomere concentration ρ and fraction of crowded trajectories ϕ as a function of
bond strength ks for a normalized capsomere influx rate of κi = 0.185 when placing 600 additional,
non-specific crowders inside a simulation volume of size Λ1 = 27000. Each data point is obtained
from 16 independent trajectories using a total simulation time of τsim = 6 × 105 . On the right a
representative simulation snapshot is shown for ks = 1179 and with size-dependent color coding of
the capsid fragments. The additional crowders are colored in gray.

bond strengths. In addition a representative snapshot of the assembly system including the
additional crowding agents is shown in Fig. 6. Comparing the dependence of ρ on the bond
strength ks , we see the same qualitative behavior with additional crowders (Fig. 6) and
without crowders (Fig. 3). In both cases assembly is most efficient at intermediate bond
strengths. Furthermore in Fig. 6 we again observe two regions (at very low and very high
bond strength) in which the simulation volume becomes too crowded for a steady state to
be established in all trajectories. This is similar to the two self-crowding regions observed in
Fig. 3 at high normalized rates of capsomere influx. However, the normalized influx rate of
capsomeres used in Fig. 6 is smaller than those used in Fig. 3. This suggests that, although
the qualitative dependence remains the same, it is more difficult to establish a steady-state
virus production in already pre-crowded environments and lower rates of influx are required
in this case.
After having analyzed the different mechanisms which prevent a steady state from being
established, we now focus on small normalized influx rates. As can be seen in Fig. 3(a) and
16

κi = 0.08
κi = 0.24
const.

16
14
12

yield

10
8
6
4
2

0.
44
0.
72
1.
18
1.
93
3.
16
5.
18
8.
48
13
.9
22
.8
37
.3
61
.1
10
0

0

ks /103

FIG. 7. Comparison of capsid yield for a fixed initial capsomere concentration and for a continuous
influx of capsomeres. Here the yield of complete capsids in a simulation volume of Λ = 125000
is shown as a function of the bond strength ks after a simulation time of τsim = 107 . The blue
histogram shows the yield when initially placing 1000 capsomeres in the simulation volume. The
red histograms on the other hand show the yield of capsids when gradually increasing the number
of capsomeres from zero with a rate of κi = 0.24 (light red) and κi = 0.08 (dark red), respectively,
until a total of 1000 capsomeres is reached. The yield has been averaged over 16 different runs.

(b) a steady state with continuous capsid production is established even for very high bond
strengths if the normalized influx rate is small enough. This suggests that a gradual influx
of capsomeres can prevent or at least reduce kinetic trapping.
In order to verify that dynamic capsomere influx indeed reduces the requirement of an
optimal bond strength we compare the yield of capsids for two different setups: a static
setup initially starting with N0 = 1000 capsomeres and a dynamic setup in which a total
of 1000 capsomeres is placed in the simulation volume with a certain rate. In both cases
complete capsids are considered to be stable and are taken out of the simulation volume. In
Fig. 7 the yield of full capsids after a simulation time of τsim = 107 is shown as a function
of the bond strength ks . The blue histogram shows the yield in the static case while the
red histograms show the yield when gradually placing new monomers into the simulation
volume with a normalized influx rate of κi = 0.24 (light red) and κi = 0.08 (dark red).
At low bond strengths (ks ≤ 720) the yield in the static case is slightly higher than
in the dynamic case. Thus, for small bond strengths it is beneficial if a larger number of
capsomeres is available throughout the whole simulation time. In the case of optimal bond
17

strengths (ks = 1179 − 1931) no difference between the two setups is observed as assembly
at these bond strengths proceeds quickly, and almost all simulations show the maximum
yield of 16 capsids within the simulation time.
When further increasing the bond strength we see, however, that the yield in the static
case quickly drops and no complete capsids are observed above ks = 8483. In this case
kinetic trapping completely prevents the formation of capsids. For the dynamic case, in
contrast, we still observe considerable yield of capsids above ks = 8483 with the yield being
higher for the lower normalized influx rate used. This indeed shows that a dynamic setup
with a gradual supply of capsomeres reduces the selectivity for an optimal bond strength
and makes the assembly process more robust and less vulnerable against kinetic trapping.

IV.

CONCLUSION

The assembly of the viral protein shell, the capsid, from elementary assembly units (capsomeres) is a key step during the replication of most viruses. The assembly process needs to
be sufficiently robust to guarantee the successful formation of the capsid in the dynamic environment of the host cell. While for test tube experiments on capsid assembly the material
available for the assembly process remains constant, in the cellular environment the elementary building blocks for the assembly process are continuously produced by the biomolecular
machinery of the cell [43].
Here we have investigated the role of a dynamic supply of capsomeres and the removal
of complete capsids for the assembly of empty T1 virus capsids by using a minimal spatial
model based on coarse-grained Brownian dynamics simulations. It has been shown earlier
that such a setup can result in a steady state with capsomere influx being balanced by
capsid completion [42]. Our simulations reveal that for very high rates of capsomere influx
the assembly process is only able to compensate the influx of new capsomeres in a narrow
range of intermediate bond strengths while outside this range the simulation volume becomes crowded. At lower bond strengths the formation of larger clusters is prohibited and
the simulation volume becomes crowded almost deterministically with small clusters. At
higher bond strengths, in contrast, the simulation volume becomes crowded with large, incompatible assembly intermediates. This crowding process is triggered stochastically by the
formation of an unfavorable configuration of the system. While crowding of the simulation
18

volume at very low bond strengths is nearly independent of the influx rate of capsomeres, the
crowding regime at high bond strengths vanishes for a slower influx of capsomeres. Thus,
for smaller rates of capsomere influx a steady state with continuous capsid production is
established even for very high bond strengths.
Recently Smith et al. [63] combined a Gillespie type of approach with Green’s function
reaction dynamics simulations to infer the effect of additional macromolecular crowders on
virus capsid assembly. Here we have consider this important aspect in a fully spatial context.
When placing non-reactive macromolecular crowding agents inside our simulation volume,
we observe the same trends with regard to bond strength (optimal assembly at intermediate
bond strength and crowding of our simulation volume at high and low bond strength). In the
case of extra crowding, our simulations require the use of lower rates of capsomere influx in
order to establish a continuous production of complete capsids, thus bringing our simulations
closer to the physiological situation.
Comparing the yield of complete capsids under static conditions with a fixed concentration to the yield of complete capsids when gradually increasing the concentration, we demonstrated that the vulnerability of the assembly process to kinetic trapping can be significantly
reduced if the concentration of capsomeres is dynamically increased. This conclusion agrees
with the recent finding of a discrete stochastic simulation for genome-stabilized virus assembly that a linear increase in protein concentration dramatically increases the robustness
against kinetic trapping [43].
To rationalize these results, it is helpful to think of assembly in terms of a free energy
landscape (similar to transition networks in protein folding [64, 65]). In the picture of
the free energy landscape a kinetically trapped assembly process has reached a stable local
minimum that prevents the formation of the desired minimum energy configuration. At high
bond strengths and high concentrations the free energy landscape of the assembly process
is very rough, and trapping in a local minimum is thus very likely. The gradual influx of
new assembly material can be understood as a tilting of the free energy landscape. Thus,
by continuously providing new capsomeres the assembly process can be guided towards the
global minimum corresponding to the formation of full capsids and the dynamic capsomere
supply prevents the system from becoming trapped in a local minimum configuration.
As discussed before in our simulations we use enhanced assembly dynamics and relatively
large influx rates to achieve reasonable computing times for our particle-based simulations of
19

empty capsid assembly. Thus our simulations include the full effect of diffusional encounters
and excluded volume interactions. Our simulations suggest that qualitatively similar results
are to be expected for lower rates of capsomere influx, which we use when accounting for the
presence of additional macromolecular crowders. However, further progress in this direction
needs algorithmic advances, including the use of GPU-code and analytical or resampling
techniques to speed up simulation times [66–69]. Such advances then would allow us to
also address more complicated virus architectures with different bond types, virus misfits,
genome-assisted assembly and the interplay between virus assembly and gene expression.
Although our simulations are performed with enhanced assembly dynamics and high rates
of capsomeres influx, we believe that our findings have strong implications for the assembly
process of virus shells under (dynamic) in vivo conditions. In particular our simulations
suggest that kinetic trapping, which is often thought of as a major limitation preventing
the successful assembly of complete capsids under (static) in vitro conditions, might only
play a minor role in vivo if the supply of new capsomeres by the host cell is slow enough.
Although assembly is still most efficient at intermediate bond strength, a dynamic supply of
capsomeres should allow for robust self-assembly in a wide range of bond strengths without
the need for additional helper proteins or scaffolds. This finding is compatible with the
results by Dykeman et al. [43] and Hagan et al. [42] using different setups. Moreover,
our dynamic, particle-based simulations show that self-crowding of the simulation volume
can prevent steady-steady capsid assembly at high rates of capsomere influx and high bond
strengths.
Our simulations suggest that in the presence of other macromolecular crowders the effect
of self-crowding due to the continuous production of capsomeres might occur for much lower
rates of capsomere influx (and also lower capsomer concentrations). Here further investigations are necessary to clarify the relevance of this regime for in vivo capsid assembly. One
way to test our predictions is to use in vitro experiments. The setup studied in our simulations could be experimentally realized using a microfluidic device that allows to control
capsomere influx. At the same time, the bond strength might be controlled by changing temperature or ionic conditions. Capsid removal could be implemented simply by sedimentation
[42], by filtering or by boundaries that are sticky to completed capsids. For such a setup,
we expect that the yield of full capsids at high bond strengths (low temperatures) depends
on the rate of concentration increase. In particular, decreasing the rate of capsomere influx
20

should result in a higher yield of full capsids.
As the assembly of a simple icosahedral capsid can be considered as a paradigm for protein
assemblies [70] or artificial assembly systems in general [71, 72], our findings also apply for
other complex assembly structures. While recent advances in the design of artificial assembly
from colloidal particles have aimed at a dynamic control of the inter-particle interactions [73,
74] to increase the yield of the desired target structure, our simulations strongly suggest
that a dynamic control of the material available for the assembly process can further help
to increase the yield of the desired structure in artificial self-assembly systems. In these
systems the effect of self-crowding discussed in our manuscript might also play an important
role, depending on the rate of supply of new assembly material and the accessible assembly
volume.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

HCRK was supported by a fellowship from the Cusanuswerk. USS is member of the CellNetworks cluster of excellence and of the collaborative research center SFB 1129 (Integrative
analysis of pathogen replication and spread) at Heidelberg.

[1] W. H. Roos, R. Bruinsma and G. J. L. Wuite. Physical virology. Nature Physics, 6(10):733
(2010).
[2] A. Cann. Principles of Molecular Virology, vol. 1. Academic Press (2001).
[3] M. G. Rossmann and J. E. Johnson. Icosahedral RNA Virus Structure. Annual Review of
Biochemistry, 58(1):533 (1989).
[4] D. L. D. Caspar. Structure of Bushy Stunt Virus. Nature, 177(4506):475 (1956).
[5] R. E. Franklin. Structure of Tobacco Mosaic Virus. Nature, 175(4452):379 (1955).
[6] F. H. C. Crick and J. D. Watson. Structure of Small Viruses. Nature, 177(4506):473 (1956).
[7] D. L. D. Caspar and A. Klug. Physical principles in the construction of regular viruses. Cold
Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, 27:1 (1962).
[8] H. Fraenkel-Conrat and R. C. Williams. Reconstruction of Active Tobacco Mosaic Virus from
its Inactive Protein and Nucleic Acid Components. Biochemistry, 41 (1955).

21

[9] J. T. T. Finch and J. B. B. Bancroft. Structure of the Reaggregated Protein Shells of Two
Spherical Viruses. Nature, 220(5169):815 (1968).
[10] A. Zlotnick, J. M. Johnson, P. W. Wingfield, S. J. Stahl and D. Endres. A Theoretical
Model Successfully Identifies Features of Hepatitis B Virus Capsid Assembly. Biochemistry,
38(44):14644 (1999).
[11] A. Zlotnick, R. Aldrich, J. M. Johnson, P. Ceres and M. J. Young. Mechanism of Capsid
Assembly for an Icosahedral Plant Virus. Virology, 277(2):450 (2000).
[12] G. L. Casini, D. Graham, D. Heine, R. L. Garcea and D. T. Wu. In vitro papillomavirus
capsid assembly analyzed by light scattering. Virology, 325(2):320 (2004).
[13] S. Kler, R. Asor, C. Li, A. Ginsburg, D. Harries, A. Oppenheim, A. Zlotnick and U. Raviv.
RNA Encapsidation by SV40-Derived Nanoparticles Follows a Rapid Two-State Mechanism.
Journal of the American Chemical Society, 134(21):8823 (2012).
[14] R. F. Bruinsma. Physics of RNA and viral assembly. The European Physical Journal E: Soft
Matter and Biological Physics, 19(3):303 (2006).
[15] S. Sun, V. B. Rao and M. G. Rossmann. Genome packaging in viruses. Current Opinion in
Structural Biology, 20(1):114 (2010).
[16] M. Carrillo-Tripp, C. M. Shepherd, I. A. Borelli, S. Venkataraman, G. Lander, P. Natarajan,
J. E. Johnson, C. L. Brooks III and V. S. Reddy. VIPERdb2: an enhanced and web API
enabled relational database for structural virology. Nucleic Acids Research, 37(suppl 1):D436
(2009).
[17] R. Schwartz, P. W. Shor, P. E. Prevelige and B. Berger. Local Rules Simulation of the Kinetics
of Virus Capsid Self-Assembly. Biophysical Journal, 75(6):2626 (1998).
[18] D. C. Rapaport, J. E. Johnson and J. Skolnick. Supramolecular self-assembly: molecular
dynamics modeling of polyhedral shell formation. Computer Physics Communications, 121122:231 (1999).
[19] D. C. Rapaport. Self-assembly of polyhedral shells: A molecular dynamics study. Physical
Review E, 70(5):051905 (2004).
[20] M. F. Hagan and D. Chandler. Dynamic Pathways for Viral Capsid Assembly. Biophysical
Journal, 91(1):42 (2006).
[21] P. L. Freddolino, A. S. Arkhipov, S. B. Larson, A. McPherson and K. Schulten. Molecular
Dynamics Simulations of the Complete Satellite Tobacco Mosaic Virus. Structure, 14(3):437

22

(2006).
[22] H. D. Nguyen, V. S. Reddy and C. L. Brooks III. Deciphering the Kinetic Mechanism of
Spontaneous Self-Assembly of Icosahedral Capsids. Nano Letters, 7(2):338 (2007).
[23] D. C. Rapaport. Role of Reversibility in Viral Capsid Growth: A Paradigm for Self-Assembly.
Physical Review Letters, 101(18):186101 (2008).
[24] D. C. Rapaport. Molecular dynamics simulation of reversibly self-assembling shells in solution
using trapezoidal particles. Physical Review E, 86(5):051917 (2012).
[25] J. E. Baschek, H. C. R. Klein and U. S. Schwarz. Stochastic dynamics of virus capsid formation:
direct versus hierarchical self-assembly. BMC Biophysics, 5(1):22 (2012).
[26] A. W. Wilber, J. P. K. Doye, A. A. Louis, E. G. Noya, M. A. Miller and P. Wong. Reversible self-assembly of patchy particles into monodisperse icosahedral clusters. The Journal
of Chemical Physics, 127(8):085106 (2007).
[27] A. W. Wilber, J. P. K. Doye and A. A. Louis. Self-assembly of monodisperse clusters: Dependence on target geometry. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 131(17):175101 (2009).
[28] I. G. Johnston, A. A. Louis and J. P. K. Doye. Modelling the self-assembly of virus capsids.
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, 22(10):104101 (2010).
[29] T. Zhang, R. Rohlfs and R. Schwartz. Implementation of a Discrete Event Simulator for
Biological Self-Assembly Systems. In Proceedings of the 2005 Winter Simulation Conference,
2231. IEEE (2005).
[30] T. Zhang and R. Schwartz. Simulation Study of the Contribution of Oligomer/Oligomer
Binding to Capsid Assembly Kinetics. Biophysical Journal, 90(1):57 (2006).
[31] M. Hemberg, S. N. Yaliraki and M. Barahona. Stochastic Kinetics of Viral Capsid Assembly
Based on Detailed Protein Structures. Biophysical Journal, 90(9):3029 (2006).
[32] T. Keef, C. Micheletti and R. Twarock. Master equation approach to the assembly of viral
capsids. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 242(3):713 (2006).
[33] B. Sweeney, T. Zhang and R. Schwartz. Exploring the Parameter Space of Complex SelfAssembly through Virus Capsid Models. Biophysical Journal, 94(3):772 (2008).
[34] A. Zlotnick. To Build a Virus Capsid. An Equilibrium Model of the Self Assembly of Polyhedral
Protein Complexes. Journal of Molecular Biology, 241(1):59 (1994).
[35] D. Endres and A. Zlotnick. Model-Based Analysis of Assembly Kinetics for Virus Capsids or
Other Spherical Polymers. Biophysical Journal, 83(2):1217 (2002).

23

[36] S. Katen and A. Zlotnick. The Thermodynamics of Virus Capsid Assembly. Methods in
Enzymology, 455(08):395 (2009).
[37] H. D. Nguyen and C. L. Brooks III. Generalized Structural Polymorphism in Self-Assembled
Viral Particles. Nano Letters, 8(12):4574 (2008).
[38] O. M. Elrad and M. F. Hagan. Mechanisms of Size Control and Polymorphism in Viral Capsid
Assembly. Nano Letters, 8(11):3850 (2008).
[39] H. D. Nguyen, V. S. Reddy and C. L. Brooks III. Invariant Polymorphism in Virus Capsid
Assembly. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 131(7):2606 (2009).
[40] M. F. Hagan. Modeling viral capsid assembly. Advances in Chemical Physics: Volume 155,
1–68 (2014).
[41] A. Zlotnick and S. Mukhopadhyay. Virus assembly, allostery and antivirals. Trends in Microbiology, 19(1):14 (2011).
[42] M. F. Hagan, O. M. Elrad and R. L. Jack. Mechanisms of kinetic trapping in self-assembly
and phase transformation. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 135(10):104115 (2011).
[43] E. C. Dykeman, P. G. Stockley and R. Twarock. Solving a Levinthal’s paradox for virus assembly identifies a unique antiviral strategy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
111(14):5361 (2014).
[44] V. P. Zhdanov. Viral capsids: Kinetics of assembly under transient conditions and kinetics of
disassembly. Physical Review E, 90:042721 (2014).
[45] E. O. Freed. Mechanisms of enveloped virus release. Virus Research, 106(2):85 (2004).
[46] E. Morita and W. I. Sundquist. Retrovirus Budding. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol., 20:395
(2004).
[47] M. M. Saksena, H. Wakisaka, B. Tijono, R. A. Boadle, F. Rixon, H. Takahashi and A. L.
Cunningham. Herpes simplex virus type 1 accumulation, envelopment, and exit in growth
cones and varicosities in mid-distal regions of axons. Journal of Virology, 80(7):3592 (2006).
[48] S. Mukhopadhyay, R. J. Kuhn and M. G. Rossmann. A Structural Perspective of the Flavivirus
Life Cycle. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 3(1):13 (2005).
[49] B. Berger, P. W. Shor, L. Tucker-Kellogg and J. King. Local rule-based theory of virus shell
assembly. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 91(16):7732 (1994).
[50] J. Schluttig, D. Alamanova, V. Helms and U. S. Schwarz. Dynamics of protein-protein encounter: A Langevin equation approach with reaction patches. The Journal of chemical physics,

24

129(15):155106 (2008).
[51] J. Schluttig.

Stochastic dynamics of protein assembly.

Ph.D. thesis, Ruprecht-Karls-

Universität Heidelberg (2009).
[52] B. Carrasco and J. G. de la Torre. Improved hydrodynamic interaction in macromolecular
bead models. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 111(10):4817 (1999).
[53] H. C. R. Klein and U. S. Schwarz. Studying protein assembly with reversible Brownian dynamics of patchy particles. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 140(18):184112 (2014).
[54] H. X. Zhou. Kinetics of Diffusion-Influenced Reactions Studied by Brownian Dynamics. Journal of Physical Chemistry, 94(25):8794 (1990).
[55] H.-X. Zhou and A. Szabo. Theory and Simulation of the Time-Dependent Rate Coefficients
of Diffusion-Influenced Reactions. Biophysical Journal, 71(5):2440 (1996).
[56] M. Eigen. Diffusion Control in Biochemical Reactions. In Quantum Statistcal Mechanics in
the Natural Sciences, vol. 4 of Studies in the Natural Sciences. Plenum Press, New York and
London (1974).
[57] G. Schreiber, G. Haran and H.-X. Zhou. Fundamental aspects of protein- protein association
kinetics. Chemical Reviews, 109(3):839 (2009).
[58] L. Xie, G. R. Smith, X. Feng and R. Schwartz. Surveying Capsid Assembly Pathways through
Simulation-Based Data Fitting. Biophysical Journal, 103(7):1545 (2012).
[59] K. Guo, J. Shillcock and R. Lipowsky. Self-assembly of actin monomers into long filaments:
Brownian dynamics simulations. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 131(1):015102 (2009).
[60] D. C. Rapaport.

Modeling capsid self-assembly: design and analysis.

Physical Biology,

7(4):045001 (2010).
[61] F. S. Heldt, T. Frensing and U. Reichl. Modeling the intracellular dynamics of influenza virus
replication to understand the control of viral RNA synthesis. Journal of Virology, 86(15):7806
(2012).
[62] B. Reddy and J. Yin. Quantitative intracellular Kinetics of HIV Type 1. AIDS Research and
Human Retroviruses, 15(3):273 (1999).
[63] G. R. Smith, L. Xie, B. Lee and R. Schwartz. Applying Molecular Crowding Models to Simulations of Virus Capsid Assembly In Vitro. Biophysical Journal, 106(1):310 (2014).
[64] F. Noé, I. Horenko, C. Schütte and J. C. Smith. Hierarchical analysis of conformational
dynamics in biomolecules: Transition networks of metastable states. The Journal of Chemical

25

Physics, 126(15):155102 (2007).
[65] F. Noé and S. Fischer. Transition networks for modeling the kinetics of conformational change
in macromolecules. Current Opinion in Structural Biology, 18(2):154 (2008).
[66] J. S. van Zon and P. R. ten Wolde. Green’s-function reaction dynamics: A particle-based
approach for simulating biochemical networks in time and space. The Journal of Chemical
Physics, 123:234910 (2005).
[67] J. S. van Zon and P. R. ten Wolde. Simulating Biochemical Networks at the Particle Level and
in Time and Space: Green’s Function Reaction Dynamics. Physical Review Letters, 94:128103
(2005).
[68] K. Takahashi, S. Tănase-Nicola and P. R. ten Wolde. Spatio-temporal correlations can drastically change the response of a MAPK pathway. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 107(6):2473 (2010).
[69] M. E. Johnson and G. Hummer. Free-Propagator Reweighting Integrator for Single-Particle
Dynamics in Reaction-Diffusion Models of Heterogeneous Protein-Protein Interaction Systems. Physical Review X, 4:031037 (2014).
[70] J. E. Johnson and J. A. Speir. Quasi-equivalent Viruses: A Paradigm for Protein Assemblies.
Journal of Molecular Biology, 269(5):665 (1997).
[71] S. Zhang. Fabrication of novel biomaterials through molecular self-assembly. Nature Biotechnology, 21(10):1171 (2003).
[72] A. J. Olson, Y. H. E. Hu and E. Keinan. Chemical mimicry of viral capsid self-assembly.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(52):20731 (2007).
[73] M. E. Leunissen, R. Dreyfus, F. C. Cheong, D. G. Grier, R. Sha, N. C. Seeman and P. M.
Chaikin. Switchable self-protected attractions in DNA-functionalized colloids. Nature Materials, 8(7):590 (2009).
[74] L. di Michele, F. Varrato, J. Kotar, S. H. Nathan, G. Foffi and E. Eiser. Multistep kinetic
self-assembly of DNA-coated colloids. Nature Communications, 4:2007 (2013).

26

