Synthetic circuit designs for Earth terraformation
Ricard V. Solé ∗ ,1, 2, 3 Raúl Montañez,1, 2 and Salvador Duran-Nebreda1, 2
1

ICREA-Complex Systems Lab, Universitat Pompeu Fabra (GRIB), Dr Aiguader 80, 08003 Barcelona, Spain
Institut de Biologia Evolutiva, CSIC-UPF, Pg Maritim de la Barceloneta 37, 08003 Barcelona, Spain
3
Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe NM 87501, USA
2

Background Mounting evidence indicates that our planet might experience runaway effects associated to rising temperatures and ecosystem overexploitation, leading to catastrophic shifts on
short time scales. Remediation scenarios capable of counterbalancing these effects involve geoengineering, sustainable practices and carbon sequestration, among others. None of these scenarios
seems powerful enough to achieve the desired restoration of safe boundaries.

arXiv:1503.05043v1 [q-bio.QM] 17 Mar 2015

Hypothesis We hypothesise that synthetic organisms with the appropriate engineering design
could be used to safely prevent declines in some stressed ecosystems and help improving carbon
sequestration. Such schemes would include engineering mutualistic dependencies preventing undesired evolutionary processes. We hypothesise that some particular design principles introduce
unescapable constraints to the engineered organisms that act as effective firewalls.
Implications Testing this designed organisms can be achieved by using controlled bioreactor
models and accurate computational models including different scales (from genetic constructs
and metabolic pathways to population dynamics). Our hypothesis heads towards a future anthropogenic action that should effectively act as Terraforming agents. It also implies a major
challenge in the existing biosafety policies, since we suggest release of modified organisms as
potentially necessary strategy for success.

Keywords: Synthetic Biology, Ecological Engineering, climate change, catastrophic shifts, mutualism

The future cannot be predicted,
but futures can be invented
Dennis Gabor

I. BACKGROUND

Climate change, along with a rapid depletion of natural resources and biodiversity declines is driving the biosphere towards unstable states. Widespread evidence indicates that increasing rise of average temperatures is
leading to local, regional and global modifications of extant habitats, seriously endangering the future of our
planet [1,2]. Given the large scale of the problem, suggested scenarios based on human intervention might fail
to properly address the ongoing changes. Additionally,
the time evolution of these changes can rapidly accelerate
due to runaway effects associated to the nonlinear nature
of these phenomena. In other words, current continuous
changes might end up in so called catastrophic shifts [3-5].
Are we going to be capable to avoid them?
Along with a better understanding of these changes,
scientists and engineers have also come up with potential
remediation scenarios to ameliorate and even stop the
current trends. Different strategies involving mitigation
[6] geoengineering [7-9] or adaptation [10] have been proposed. Mitigation implies measures that slowdown ongoing emission rates or provide ways for limiting emissions

∗ Corresponding

author

while geoengineering explicitly requires directed change.
Geoengineering has been questioned due to staggering
costs, unknown outcomes and limited impact (particularly in relation with CO2 ) which make unclear their
potential for counterbalancing current trends [7,11,12].
Adaptation scenarios place us in a future world where we
will need to cope with new environmental and economic
constraints. None of these suggested solutions might be
a definite solution, but clearly the price for inaction will
be much larger than any of the previous possibilities.
It has been recently suggested that an alternative possibility would involve actively acting on the biosphere
through the use of synthetic biology [13]. This approach
could be used, among other things, as a way to curtain
the accumulation of greenhouse gases, enhance nitrogen
fixation or slow down degradation in arid and semiarid
ecosystems. The key point of this proposal is that engineering living systems allows to reach large scales thanks
to the intrinsic growth of the synthetic organisms. This
makes a big difference in relation to standard engineering schemes, where artefacts need to be fully constructed
from scratch. Instead, once a designed population is released, appropriate conditions will allow the living machines to make copies of themselves and expand to the
desired spatial and temporal scales.
This approach, which is an effective way of “Terraforming” the biosphere, needs to consider potential scenarios
that guarantee an efficient result as well as a limited
evolutionary potential. Designed microbes capable of
functioning only under specific conditions have been constructed and strategies to incorporate genetic safeguards
explored [16]. One avenue, to be used in biomedical ap-

2
plications, is to force the need for xenobiotic (unnatural)
molecules that need to be supplied along with the genetically modified bacteria [17]. In this context, target
habitats for designed organisms should be chosen as an
additional, ecological-level containment strategy. Moreover, limits to the impact of synthetic organisms can be
obtained using ecological interactions that are based on
either cooperative loops or habitat constraints that are
specially well met by different classes of anthropogenicmodified scenarios. In this paper we consider four possible engineering motifs that can cope with these two
constraints. We do not consider explicit case studies (i.
e. detailed genetic constructs or designed organisms) but
instead the logic design schemes.

II. PRESENTATION OF THE HYPOTHESIS

The obvious criticism to the scenario presented in [15]
has to do with the unknown consequences of ecological
and evolutionary dynamics on the engineered ecosystems.
Actually, it can be argued that well known cases of exotic species introduced in some ecosystems caused largescale disasters [18,19]. The list includes the introduction
of different kinds of species into a novel habitat where
they have benefited from a higher efficiency to exploit
available resources. This situation corresponds (at least
transiently) to a population positive feedback loop that
involves an accelerated expansion (typically exponential
in its first phase). Is there a rational strategy that can
minimise the impact of an engineered species?
One way of preventing undesired explosive growth is to
use a modified version of an extant organism that exhibits
a strict relationship with another species associated to
the target habitat. This means engineering a strong ecological link that makes spread limited. That would result
in population dynamical processes preventing undesired
growth of the modified organism. Moreover, using the
appropriate context, strong habitat constraints can act
in synergy as ecological firewalls.
Here we suggest that two main avenues can be followed.
One is engineering mutualistic relationships with resident
organisms through the modification of already extant microorganisms or fungi. Recent experimental studies indicate that such designed mutualistic link can be created
by artificially forcing a strong metabolic dependence and
also with the help of genetic engineering. These studies have shown that the end product can be a physically
interacting, stable pairwise relationship.
Another possibility is to use a modified organism that
grows on a given waste-related substrate that can be preferentially (or exclusively) used, and may be degraded,
by the synthetic organism. Such substrate can be plastic garbage, sewage and other sources of human-created
waste. Additionally, some special habitats might be ideal
to grow strains of engineered microbes capable of performing a given functional task and unable to survive
outside their restricted environment.

In the next section, we consider a list of candidate
engineering designs (and their variants) that could fit the
previous description. We will define their basic logic and
outline potential scenarios for their implementation, as
well as potential drawbacks.

III. SYNTHETIC TERRAFORMATION MOTIFS

In this paper we introduce four potential bioengineering schemes. Hereafter, H and SYN indicate the target
host and a synthetic microbe, respectively. Here SYN
might have been obtained from some existing wild type
strain (WT). Similarly, R is used to indicate some sort
of resource, while W stands for water. The basic designs
are intended to represent the logical organisation of our
proposed constructs, and not the specific genetic designs.
For this reason, since they are introduced as logic graphs,
we choose to call them Terraformation motifs (TMS) to
indicate this logic nature.
The first two motifs deal with the engineering of cooperative interactions, either directly or indirectly. The
third incorporates a design principle grounded in a tight
dependence of the engineered microbes with a specific
class of available resource or physical support. The fourth
involves the use of an existing, human-generated waste
habitats as the substrate of engineered microbes, will be
controlled through some class of lethality outside their
niche.

A. Engineered mutualism

In this case, an engineered candidate organism is used
to modify ecological systems through an engineered mutualistic relation in such a way that it will spread only
if associated to its mutualistic partner. Mutualism requires a double positive feedback where the synthetic
species benefits -and is benefited by- its host. Ideally,
failure should end in the disappearance of the modified
species. In figure 1a we display the TM associated to
this approach. Here the host and the synthetic organism have been designed to enhance each other’s growth.
Moreover, the synthetic species has been derived from
an existing wild type strain and it can thus mutate into
WT. This will be the case if the engineered part is not
enough advantageous and instead becomes a burden for
the microorganism.
This scenario is tied to the symbiotic relationships that
characterise several types of natural associations, such
as nitrogen-fixing bacteria living in plant root nodules
(fig 1b). Several experimental approaches have shown
that such mutualistic relationship can be enforced by coevolving plants and bacteria under strong selection together with genetic engineering. Engineering mutualistic
symbiosis is already a reality. Proper manipulation of
free-living species allow to force them to become obligate
mutualists. This includes synthetic cooperative strains

3

FIG. 1 Terraformation motifs involving closed cooperation among players. Two main classes of potential engineered synthetic
microbes (SYN) interacting with their hosts (H) are indicated. Assuming that the engineered species has been obtained from
an existing one in the same environment, the wild type (here indicated as WT) can be obtained from SYN if the engineered
construct is lost by mutation (here indicated as a fray arrow, and as a rate µ) In (a) we display a logic diagram of positive
interactions among both partners defining a mutual dependency. In (b) such cooperative interaction is mediated through some
class of physical factor, such as water (W). These two classes correspond, for example, to exclusive mutualistic interactions
displayed by plant cells within root nodules (c) where nitrogen-fixing bacteria are physically embedded (image from wikipedia
commons). On the other hand, the need for survival under stressful conditions, as those common in arid ecosystems, makes
water a major player and limiting resource. An engineered microbe capable of improving moisture retention can have a very
strong effect on the underlying plant species, expanding their populations. In soil crusts (d) a whole range of species exist,
adapted to water-poor conditions (drawing adapted from Belnap et al 2001). Here we indicate (1) mosses (2,3) lichens, (4,5,7,9)
cyanobacteria, (6) fungi and (8) green algae.

[20] evolving a plant pathogen into a legume symbiont
[21,22], fungal-plant mycorrhizal symbiosis [23] yeastalga and fungi-alga associations created through a forced
environmental change [24] or by means of long-term selection experiments enforcing metabolic dependencies [25]
among others.

B. Indirect cooperation

Cooperation can also arise from an interfaced interaction where one of the species modifies the existing
medium in such a way that the partner can thrive and
create more growth opportunities for the first. The
canonical example can be a species of microbe that has
been engineered to excrete a molecule capable of enhancing water retention in arid conditions (Figure 1c). Here
a microbe that exists in the chosen context can be engineered in order to release some kind of protein capable
of enhancing water retention. Potential candidates would
be engineered cyanobacteria that are known to produce
extracellular polysaccharides [27,28]. Enhanced produc-

tion of these molecules by synthetic strains could easily
improve dry land soils and yield. The soil crust in particular (figure 1d) involves a rich ecosystem composed
by lichens, mosses and cyanobacteria [29, 30] and constitute a crucial regulator of soil respiration in dryland
ecosystems. Strategies oriented to soil rehabilitation and
carbon sequestration could be implemented through the
engineering of soil crust [31,32].
In an arid ecosystem, plants can improve their growth
thus expanding their population and providing further
opportunities for microbial populations also to grow. In
arid and semiarid habitats, plants typically develop local
interactions involving so called facilitation: the presence
of neighbouring plants favours the establishment of others and the preservation of a healthy soil [33]. Given
the constraints imposed by water shortage and overgrazing, patchy distributions of plants are the common pattern [34-37]. Mounting evidence suggests that the conditions allowing these ecosystems to survive and the nonlinear nature of facilitation implies the existence of breakpoints and catastrophes: once reduced water availability
or grazing pressure cross a given threshold, a rapid transi-

4

a

a

+
SYN

R

µ

+

WT

SYN

R

-

-

+

+

µ

+
WT

-

-

b
+

b
+

SYN

R

R

+

c

d

FIG. 2 Function-and-die Terraformation motif. Here a given
substrate R is being generated at a given rate and provides
physical substrate to the synthetic population. The TM motif in (a) is based on the modification of an extant species,
whereas in (b) we just assume that the engineered species has
been improved to attach efficiently to the substrate. in both
cases, the engineered species could perform a function while
degrading the waste material. Candidate examples are plastic ocean debris, where many species are known to live (c) or
concrete cracks (d). Figures (c) and (d) have been adapted
from [43] and [44], respectively.

tion to the desert state should be expected. Modified organisms capable of building the indirect co-operative loop
outlined above would easily increase facilitation. The increasing role of arid and semi-arid ecosystems as carbon
sinks [38] makes them a specially relevant target for our
terraformation proposal.

C. “Function and die” design

An engineered microbe performing a given functionality (such as carbon sequestration) can be coupled to the
degradation of a given resource, such as plastic garbage
or other long-living byproducts of human activities. This
scenario is strongly tied to the problem of bioremediation [39-40] Here a non-living resource (R) is produced
from anthropogenic actions and it provides the physical
substrate where individuals can attach. In figure 2a we

c

SYN

d

FIG. 3 Sewage-based terraformation motif. In (a) we consider a situation where an artificial environment is created as
a byproduct of human activities producing waste. Our two
strains are both sustained by available nutrients and physical conditions but now all of them are removed (burned or
released) at a given rate. A simpler alternative (b) does not
require engineering of extant species. A typical scenario would
be sewage-related infrastructures (c) where a rich microbial
community (d) is known to exist.

consider a TM that follows our previous scheme (again,
a synthetic strain is derived form an existing one). In
this case, however, no mutualistic loop is at work. Instead, both SYN and WT would attach to the substrate
R and thus their populations deepen on such potential
for adhesion, which could be improved in the designed
strain.
A good candidate could be plastic garbage in the ocean
[41,42] which is known to be colonised by many different
species, including several microbial genus, such as Vibrio
[43]. In this context, it is worth noting that, despite the
rapid increase in plastic waste dumped in the ocean, the
observed amount of plastic in open waters is much less
than expected [44] suggesting (among other possibilities)
that some microbial species capable to attach to plastic polymers are also degrading them. This observation
indicates that evolutionary forces might have favoured
plastic-eating strains which could be used as engineering
targets. If the only goal of the SYN is degrade the waste
material, we could use a modified organism that might

5
not be normally attached to this substrate (figure 2b).
Different species, both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, are
known to persist in plastic (figure 2c). Since removal of
plastic debris might actually part of the goal, it might
be unnecessary to use existing species associated to this
substrate. Instead, it could be more efficient to simply
design or evolve a highly-efficient species capable of attaching to the plastic surface and to over-compete other
species.
A different scenario that can be represented by our motif is provided by engineered bacteria that can be used
to repair concrete cracks (figure 2d). The alkaline environment makes difficult for most species to thrive but
some species can be used to this purpose [45]. Here the
designed bacteria would enter, grow and replenish cracks
with calcium carbonate until the task is finished. Several
strategies have been used to this end and major improvements have been obtained [46,47]. A major advantage
of this problem is that anaerobic bacteria are not going
to survive outside the crack and thus selection immediately acts once the task is finished. Once again, the right
combination of genetic design and ecological constraints
create a powerful safeguard against undesired evolution.

D. Sewage synthetic microbiome

Urban centres are the largest human structures and as
such they also incorporate massive infrastructures associated to treatment of waste as an end part of the city
metabolism. Sewage systems and landfills offer a specially interesting opportunity to apply our approach. It
is known that sewage systems involve their own micro
biomes [48] and that some evolved microbes are currently
causing damage to the concrete [49]. On the other hand,
the sewage-based scenario is specially useful in our context, since microbes are eventually removed once they
reach the open sea due to osmotic shock. If the same
basic scheme is used, namely engineering an existing
species, the TM can be summarised in figure 3a. Here a
constant removal of both waste waters and microbes is
represented by the arrows ending as → ∅.
Here too it might be less relevant to preserve the existing species of microbes, thus making unnecessary to
engineer from wild type (figure 3b). Being part of the
human infrastructures of developed countries (figure 3c)
the sewage TM is also relevant to asses the potential dynamical responses of bioengineered ecosystems. The existing sewage and urban microbiomes (figure 3d) provide
a rich repertoire of candidate species, although we just
start to grasp their richness [50]. An interesting connection between these potential engineered strains and
the gut microbiome has been pointed in [13]. The later
defines an enormously rich microbial ecosystem that has
coevolved with our species through our long evolutionary
history. Ongoing biomedical research starts to be oriented towards intervening in the microbiome by means
of both drugs but also microbial strains that might act

like exotic invaders aimed to restore lost functionalities
[51-53].

IV. DISCUSSION

The three major classes of TMs presented above provide a framework to design synthetic biology alternatives to existing strategies aimed to fight against climate
change and its consequences. A main departure from
geo-engineering is the fact that designed living machines
are by definition capable of self-replication. From an
engineering perspective, that implies that the designed
biomachines will be capable of making new replicas and
thus scale up the problem. The synthetic organisms associated to the TMs act as ecosystem engineers, capable of modifying the flows of energy and matter through
the ecosystem [54,55]. This is actually an approach to
restoration ecology that is based in the existence of multiple alternative states in complex ecosystems [56,57].
A major objection to developing this framework in the
real natural habitats is the potential for evolving undesirable (or unexpected) traits. This could be labelled as
the ”Jurassic Park Effect”: even designed systems aimed
to population control can eventually escape from genetic
firewalls [58]. This is a claim that is supported by the
unescapable potential of microbial systems for evolution.
However, two important points need to be made. One is
that microbes are being constantly dispersed on a global
scale without special impact on extant ecosystems. As it
occurs with most invaders, they either fail to survive or
simply become part of the receptor habitats, where they
are over competed by resident species. Secondly, the design principles proposed in this paper consider engineering extant organisms under a cooperation-based framework (thus enhancing mutualistic loops) or taking advantage of human-generated waste that can act as an
artificial substrate to support the synthetic organisms.
In all cases, a synergetic interaction between design and
niche context is at work.
Redesigning our ecosystems requires a modification of
nature, and deal with ecosystem complexity face to face
[59]. But we should not forget that most biomes in our
planet have already been deeply transformed by human
activities [60]. Far from what we could expect, they can
be diverse, robust and more efficient in terms of nutrient cycling and other components of ecosystem services
[61]. Despite the long, sustained and profound anthropogenic impact on many of these novel ecosystems, they
can display a richness and resilience that reminds us the
potential of nature to reconstruct itself. It is time to decide what we want and why is our role in the future of
nature. If we want humans to be part of the biosphere,
we need to foresee the future impact of climate change on
our planet. Here too slow response can trigger shifts. In
this case, social collapse [62]. Synthetic biology can play
a major role, along with all other strategies, to modify
ongoing trends. That means redesign nature, but per-

6
haps too to safely exit the Anthropocene with a renewed
relationship with ecological systems.
Authors contributions
RS conceived the original idea. All authors contributed
to develop it, made a literature research and designed the
final figures. RS, in close collaboration with SDN and
RM, wrote the manuscript, which was approved by all
authors .
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the members of the Complex Systems Lab for useful discussions. This study was supported by an European Research Council Advanced
Grant, the Botin Foundation, by Banco Santander
through its Santander Universities Global Division and
by the Santa Fe Institute, where most of the work was
done.

V. REFERENCES

11. Keith DW (2000) Geoengineering the climate: history and prospect. Annu Rev Energy Environ. 25:
245-284.
12. Rogeij J, McCollum DL, Reisinger A et al (2014)
Probabilistic cost estimates for climate change mitigation. Nature 493: 79-83.
13. Solé R (2015) Bioengineering the biosphere? Ecol.
Complexity, in press.
14. Khalil AS and Collins JJ (2010) Synthetic biology:
applications come of age. Nature Rev Genetics 11:
367-379.
15. Weber W and Fussenegger M (2012) Emerging
biomedical applications of synthetic biology. Nature rev Genet 13: 21-35.
16. Renda BA, Hammerling MJ and Barrick JE (2014)
Engineering reduced evolutionary potential for synthetic biology. Mol. Biosys. 10: 1668-1878.

1. Barnovsky AD et al (2012) Approaching a state of
shift in Earths biosphere. Nature 486: 52-58.

17. Mandell DJ, Lajoie MJ, Mee MT et al (2015) Biocontainment of genetically modified organisms by
synthetic protein design. Nature 518: 55-60.

2. Hughes TP et al (2013) Multiscale regime shifts
and planetary boundaries. Trends Ecol. Evol. 28:
389-395.

18. Simberloff D and Rejmánek M (eds.) (2011) Encyclopedia of biological invasions. University of california Press. Berkeley CA.

3. Scheffer M, Carpenter S, Foley JA et al (2001)
Catastrophic shifts in ecosystems. Nature 413:
591-596.

19. Sax DF, Stachowicz JJ, Brown JH et al (2007) Ecological and evolutionary insights from species invasions. Trends Ecol Evol 22: 465-471.

4. Scheffer M (2009) Critical transitions in nature and
society (Princeton U. Press, Princeton)

20. Shou W, Ram S and Vilar JMG (2007) Synthetic
cooperation in engineered yeast populations. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 104: 1877-1882.

5. Lenton, T.M. et al. (2008) Tipping elements in the
Earths climate system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 105: 1786-1793

21. Marchetti M, Cappella D, Glew M et al. (2010)
Experimental evolution of a plant pathogen into a
legume symbiont. PLoS Biology 8: e1000280.

6. Edenhofer O, Pichs?Madruga R, Sokona Y et al,
editors (2011) IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
New York.

22. Guan SH, Gris C, Cruveiller A et al (2013) Experimental evolution of nodule intracellular infection
in legume symbionts. ISME J 7: 1367-1377.

7. Schneider SH (2008) Geoengineering: could we or
should we make it work? Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A
366: 3843-3862.
8. Vaughan NE and Lenton TM (2011) A review of
climate geoengineering proposals. Climatic change
109: 745-790.
9. Caldeira K, Bala G and Cao L (2013) The science
of geoengineering. Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci.
41: 231-256.
10. Glavovic BC and Smith GP (2014) Adaptating to
climate change. Springer, Dortrech.

23. Kiers ET, Duhamet M, Beesetty Y et al (2011) Reciprocal rewards stabilize cooperation in the mycrorrizal symbiosis. Science 333: 880-882.
24. Hom EFY and Murray AW (2014) Niche engineering demonstrates a latent capacity for fungal-algal
mutualism. Science 345: 94-98.
25. Hillesland KL, Sujun L, Flowers JJ et al. (2014)
Erosion of functional independence early in the evolution of a microbial mutualism. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 111: 14822-12827.
26. Pointing SB and Belnap J (2012) Microbial colonization and controls in dryland ecosystems. Nature Rev Microbiol 10: 551-562.

7
27. Mager DM and Thomas AD (2011) Extracellular
polysaccharides from cyanobacterial soil crusts: A
review of their role in dryland soil processes. J Arid
Env 75: 91-97.
28. Park C, Li X, Liang Jia R, Hur J-S: Effects of superabsorbent polymer on cyanobacterial biological
soil crust formation in laboratory. Arid Land Research and Management 2015, 29: 5571.
29. Belnap J and Lange OL (eds) (2003) Biological
soil crusts: Structure, function and management.
Springer, Berlin.
30. Belnap J (2003) The world at your feet: desert biological soil crusts. Front Ecol Environ 1: 181?189.
31. Bowker MA (2007) Biological Soil Crust Rehabilitation in Theory and Practice: An Underexploited
Opportunity. Restoration Ecology 15: 13-23.
32. Bowker MA, Mau RL, Maestre FT et al (2011)
Functional profiles reveal unique ecological roles of
various biological soil crust organisms. Functional
Ecology 25: 787-795.
33. Brooker RW, Maestre FT, Callaway RM et al
(2008) Facilitation in plant communities: the past,
the present, and the future. J. Ecol. 96: 18-34
34. Kéfi, S. et al. (2007) Spatial vegetation patterns
and imminent desertification in Mediterranean arid
ecosystems. Nature 449: 213-217.
35. Scanlon, T. M., Caylor, K. K., Levin, S. A. and
Rodriguez-Iturbe, I. (2007) Positive feedbacks promote power-law clustering of Kalahari vegetation.
Nature 449: 209-212.
36. Solé R (2007) Scaling laws in the drier. Nature 449:
151-153.
37. Rietkerk M and Van de Koppe J (2008) Regular
pattern formation in real ecosystems. Trends Ecol
Evol 23: 169-175.
38. Poulter B, et al (2014) Contribution of semi-arid
ecosystems to interannual variability of the global
carbon cycle. Nature 509: 600?603.
39. Cases I and de Lorenzo V (2005) Genetically modified organisms for the environment: stories of success and failure and what we have learnt from them.
Intl. Microb. 8: 213-222.

42. Barnes DKA (2002) Invasions by marine life on
plastic debris. Nature 416: 808-809.
43. Zettler ER, Mincer TJ and Amaral-Zettler LA
(2013) Life in the Plastisphere: Microbial communities on plastic marine debris. Env. Sci. Tech. 47:
7127-7146.
44. Kara Lavender Law K, Morét-Ferguson S, Maximenko NA et al (2010) Plastic accumulation in the
North Atlantic subtropical gyre. Science 329: 11851188.
45. BacillaFilla:
Fixing Cracks in
http://2010.igem.org/Team:Newcastle

Concrete.

46. Jonkers HM et al (2010) Application of bacteria as
self-healing agent for the development of sustainable concrete. Ecol Eng 36: 230-235.
47. Rao MVS, Reddy VS, Hafsa Met al (2013) Bioengineered Concrete - A Sustainable Self-Healing
Construction Material. Res J Eng Sci 2: 45-51.
48. Newton RJ, McLellan SL, Dila DK et al (2015)
Sewage Reflects the Microbiomes of Human Populations. mBio 6: e02574-14.
49. Afshinnekoo E, Meydan C, Chowdhury S et al
(2015) Geospatial Resolution of Human and Bacterial Diversity with City-Scale Metagenomics. Cell
Syst 1: 1-15.
50. Cho I and Blaser MJ (2012) The human micro
biome: at the interface of health and disease. Nature Rev Genet 13: 260-270.
51. Costello EK (2012) The application of ecological
theory toward an understanding of the human microbiome. Science 336: 1255-1262.
52. Pepper JW and Rosenfeld S (2012) The emerging
medical ecology of the human gut micro biome.
Trends Ecol Evol 27: 381-384.
53. Huttenhower C et al (2012) Structure, function and
diversity of the healthy human microbiome. Nature
486: 207-214.
54. Jones CG, Lawton JCG and Shachak M (1994) Organisms as ecosystem engineers. Oikos 69: 373-386.
55. Jones CG, Lawton JCG and Shachak M (1997) Positive and negate effects of organisms as physical
ecosystem engineers. Ecology 78 : 1946-1957.

40. de Lorenzo V (2008) Systems biology approaches
to bioremediation. Curr Opin. Biotechnol. 19:
579-589.

56. Seastedt TR, Hobbs RJ and Suding KN (2008)
Management of novel ecosystems: are novel approaches required? Front Ecol Environ 6: 547-553.

41. Gregory MR (2009) Environmental implications of
plastic debris in marine setting. Phil. Trans. R
Soc London B 364: 2013-2025.

57. Suding KN, Gross KL and Houseman GR (2004)
Alternative states and positive feedbacks in restoration ecology. Trends Ecol Evol 19: 46-53.

8
58. Crichton M (2012) Jurassic Park.
Books, New York.

Ballantine

59. Levin SA (2002) The biosphere as a complex adaptive system. Ecosystems 1: 431-436.
60. Ellis EC, Kaplan JO, Fuller DQ et al (2013) Used
planet: A global history. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
110: 7978-7985.

61. Marris E (2011) Rambunctious garden. Saving nature in a post-wild world (Bloombsbury, New York).
62. Scheffer M, Westley F and Brock W. (2003) Slow
response of societies to new problems: causes and
costs. Ecosystems 6: 493-502.

