Effects of spike-triggered negative feedback on receptive-field
properties
Eugenio Urdapilleta1, ∗ and Inés Samengo2

arXiv:1503.02901v1 [q-bio.NC] 10 Mar 2015

1

División de Fı́sica Estadı́stica e Interdisciplinaria,

Centro Atómico Bariloche, Avenida E. Bustillo Km 9.500,
S. C. de Bariloche (8400), Rı́o Negro, Argentina
Present address: Cognitive Neuroscience,
SISSA, via Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy
2

División de Fı́sica Estadı́stica e Interdisciplinaria & Instituto Balseiro,
Centro Atómico Bariloche, Avenida E. Bustillo Km 9.500,
S. C. de Bariloche (8400), Rı́o Negro, Argentina
(Dated: Received: date / Accepted: date)

1

Abstract
Sensory neurons are often described in terms of a receptive field, that is, a linear kernel through
which stimuli are filtered before they are further processed. If information transmission is assumed
to proceed in a feedforward cascade, the receptive field may be interpreted as the external stimulus’
profile maximizing neuronal output. The nervous system, however, contains many feedback loops,
and sensory neurons filter more currents than the ones representing the transduced external stimulus. Some of the additional currents are generated by the output activity of the neuron itself, and
therefore constitute feedback signals. By means of a time-frequency analysis of the input/output
transformation, here we show how feedback modifies the receptive field. The model is applicable
to various types of feedback processes, from spike-triggered intrinsic conductances to inhibitory
synaptic inputs from nearby neurons. We distinguish between the intrinsic receptive field (filtering
all input currents) and the effective receptive field (filtering only external stimuli). Whereas the
intrinsic receptive field summarizes the biophysical properties of the neuron associated to subthreshold integration and spike generation, only the effective receptive field can be interpreted as
the external stimulus’ profile maximizing neuronal output. We demonstrate that spike-triggered
feedback shifts low-pass filtering towards band-pass processing, transforming integrator neurons
into resonators. For strong feedback, a sharp resonance in the spectral neuronal selectivity may
appear. Our results provide a unified framework to interpret a collection of previous experimental studies where specific feedback mechanisms were shown to modify the filtering properties of
neurons.

∗

eugenio.urdapilleta@cab.cnea.gov.ar

2

I.

INTRODUCTION

Sensory areas are exposed to large variations in the physical magnitudes they encode
[Dong and Atick 1995, Schwartz and Simoncelli 2001, Geisler 2008, Theunissen et al. 2000].
The dynamic range of input signals can often span several orders of magnitude during
the course of a single behaviorally relevant time interval. For example, in the visual system, mean luminosity changes drastically when the gaze is displaced from a spot that is
directly illuminated by the sun, to a shadowy corner. Neural systems have therefore developed adaptive mechanisms, modifying the neural code according to the sensory context
[Ulanovsky et al. 2003, Mante et al. 2005].
Several types of adaptive mechanisms exist, as for example, synaptic plasticity
[Atwood and Karunanithi 2002,
Feldman 2009],
Shu et al. 2003,

feedback

Xu-Friedman and Regehr 2004,

through

Eytan et al. 2003,

recurrent

Sjöström et al. 2008,

connectivity

[Douglas et al. 1995,

Buonomano and Maass 2009],

feedback

through

adaptation currents [Wang 1998, Sanchez-Vives et al. 2000, Prescott and Sejnowski 2008,
Peron and Gabbiani 2009], and intrinsic non-linear effects [Borst et al. 2005].

Different

mechanisms operate on different timescales; whereas non-linear mechanisms emerge in a
matter of milliseconds, synaptic plasticity usually develops in one or a few seconds. Changes
in the intermediate range (hundreds of milliseconds) are mostly due to adaptation currents
and recurrent connectivity.

At these time scales, adaptivity arises from the dynamics

associated to certain processes at cellular and network levels, without the profound
reorganization entailed by learning and plasticity.
Adaptive phenomena mediated by intrinsic currents and feedback network connectivity are based on history-dependent spike-evoked activity.

They exert their feed-

back influence mainly by reducing neuronal gain [Felsen et al. 2002, Benda and Herz 2003,
Ayaz and Chance 2009, Benda et al. 2010], and thereby, by modifying the input/output relation of the cell, that is, the relation between spiking rate and mean stimulus strength.
However, adaptation phenomena go far beyond a mere reduction in firing rates, often involving a dramatic reshaping of the selectivity to time-dependent inputs, and of the statistics of neuronal output. For example, in the olfactory bulb, feedback has been shown to
amplify input fluctuations of a specific frequency, and thereby to induce strong oscillations in the output activity [Freeman 1972a, Freeman 1972b, Freeman 1972b], giving rise to
3

complex (often chaotic) dynamic behavior [Freeman 1987, David and Friston 2003]. Similar conclusions have been reached in theoretical explorations of interacting neural populations [Wilson and Cowan 1972, Coombes and Laing 2009, Buice et al. 2010, Bressloff 2012,
Amit and Brunel 1997, Ledoux and Brunel 2011]. Therefore, although adaptation is usually
claimed to have evolved in order to increase the dynamic range of sensory encoding, its effect
on the temporal properties of the neural code should not be overlooked: Feedback alters the
basic properties of neuronal selectivity (as explored below), and also the temporal evolution
of the output, the amount of temporal correlations, the precision and the reliability of neural
responses [Ladenbauer et al. 2014, Urdapilleta 2011, Butts et al. 2011].
In the context of spike-evoked feedback, adaptation processes have been shown
to modify the selectivity to transient stimulus temporal profiles, enhancing the representation of high-frequency components [Benda and Herz 2003, Gigante et al. 2007,
Benda and Hennig 2008, Benda et al. 2010]. Such changes become evident when computing the receptive field, or the relevant stimulus directions, by means of reverse correlation
techniques
Several
ing

[Dayan and Abbott 2001,

previous

rates

may

studies
or

may

have
not

Chichilnisky 2001,

demonstrated
be

accompanied

that
by

Samengo and Gollisch 2013].
adaptation
changes

in

in

mean

receptive

firfields

[Enroth-Cugell and Shapley 1973, Victor 1987, Butts et al. 2011, Baccus and Meister 2002,
Sharpee et al. 2011, Garvert and Gollisch 2013]. To our knowledge, there is yet no theoretical framework that allows us to understand why and when receptive fields are expected
to be modulated by feedback.

Such theoretical framework should be general enough

to be applicable to cases where adaptation is mediated by feedback at the network
level, or at the level of voltage-dependent ionic conductances and refractoriness, as for
example, in the Hodgkin-Huxley model [Samengo et al. 2013] or in a LGN model neuron
[Gaudry and Reinagel 2007]. In this work we describe the adaptive changes observed in
the stationary and transient encoding properties of linear Poisson models driven by a
combination of external stimuli and spike-triggered negative feedback. We theoretically
analyze how adaptation modifies the shape of the receptive field, providing a complete
spectral and temporal description in the limit where the feedback signal is fully determined
by the spiking probability of the cell under study (perfect feedback). Spike-evoked negative
feedback is shown to induce divisive gain control, to reshape the receptive field, and to
enhance resonant properties. In order to extend these results to the case where feedback
4

is a noisy function of the spiking probability, we incorporate stochastic elements into the
theory. Finally, we also discuss an extension to non-linear Poisson models.

II.

RESULTS
A.

Theoretical description of perfect feedback

The main goal of this work is to study how the receptive field of a neuron varies, when
feedback processes are incorporated. In addition to the temporal dimension, receptive fields
may be defined as a function of a variety of additional dimensions (spatial, frequency, chromatic, chemical) depending on the modality of the sensory system under study (vision,
audition, taste, etc.). Since adaptation processes unfold along the temporal domain, for the
moment, we restrict the analysis to the temporal profile of receptive fields, and defer to the
last section of result the extension to higher-dimensional problems.
Strictly speaking, the concept of receptive field is well defined for linear-nonlinear Poisson
models. In order to develop the theoretical framework, we initially restrict to purely linear
Poisson models, and later on discuss the extension to the nonlinear case. In the linear case,
the probability of generating a spike in the interval [t, t + dt] under the influence of stimulus
I(t) is r(t) dt, with

r(t) = h0 +

ˆ

∞

−∞

h(τ ) I(t − τ ) dτ.

(1)

Here, h0 is the spontaneous firing probability, and h(τ ) is the receptive field of the
cell. Since only past stimuli can influence the present firing probability, causality imposes that h(τ ) = 0, for all τ < 0. The stimulus I(t) can be interpreted as either the
external signal controlled by the experimentalist (light, sound, touch, etc.), or as the input ionic current entering the cell.

By stimulating the cell with stochastic input sig-

nals, the shape of h(τ ) may be easily obtained through reverse correlation techniques
[Chichilnisky 2001, Samengo and Gollisch 2013]. The shape, units and dimensionality of
the filter h(τ ) naturally depend on whether the input signal used in the reverse correlation analysis is the macroscopic external stimulus, or the microscopic ionic current. We
specifically distinguish between the component of I(t) representing the transformation of
the external signal accomplished by upstream neurons, and the component describing all
5

negative feedback signals that are triggered by previous activity of the cell under study

I(t) = s0 + s1 (t) − g x(t).

(2)

In Eq. (2), s0 + s1 (t) is the extrinsic stimulus component stemming from the transduction of sensory signals, and x(t) is the feedback signal whose value depends on the spiking
history of our neuron. The coupling constant g has dimensions of transduced stimulus, and
represents the strength of the feedback connection. It may be either negative or positive,
depending on whether the cell under study fires in response to positive or negative stimulus
deflections. The sign must be chosen in such a way as to produce a signal that opposes the
natural excitability of the cell, in order to avoid positive-feedback instabilities (see below).
We separate the average external stimulus s0 , so that the time-dependent component s1 (t)
can be assumed to have zero mean. Defining the baseline firing rate
r0 = h0 + H s0 ,

(3)

and replacing Eq. (2) in Eq. (1), we obtain
r(t) = r0 +

ˆ

∞
−∞

h(τ ) [s1 (t − τ ) − g x(t − τ )] dτ,

(4)

where
H=

ˆ

∞

h(τ ) dτ =

√

2π ĥ(ω = 0).

(5)

0

The parameter H, hence, is proportional to the zero-frequency component of the Fourier
transform of the receptive field, ĥ(ω = 0) (the convention used for the Fourier transform is
specified in Appendix A).
We assume that the feedback signal x(t) is boosted by discrete pulses, and has a natural
decay time τd . For example, if feedback is implemented through the inhibitory action produced by nearby neurons, the pulses represent spikes produced by other cells in the network
providing inhibitory feedback to the neuron under study. Hence,
N
X
x
dx
αi δ(t − tki ),
=− +
dt
τd i=1, ∀k

6

(6)

where αi weighs the increase of feedback activity due to a spike in the i-th presynaptic
neuron, occurred at time tki (k collectively represents all spike times). If Eq. (6) is meant to
represent a feedback signal, the average activity of the neurons contributing to the sum must
be proportional to the output of the neuron under study. Only with such proportionality can
we ensure that x(t) is linked to the past activity of the neuron. For the sake of simplicity, we
model the link as a simple proportionality. Moreover, in our first attempt to model feedback,
we assume that the sum in Eq. (6) is not proportional to the actual output of the cells, but
rather, to the probability r(t) to generate a given output. That is,
N
X

i=1, ∀k

αi δ(t − tki ) ≈ r(t).

(7)

This approximation is here called a perfect feedback signal, since x(t) is a deterministic function of r(t); more specifically, it is a leakily integrated copy of r(t). Later on we
discuss the case where the feedback signal is a stochastic (as opposed to deterministic)
function of r(t), and more accurately describes the actual output of the cell under study.
The approximation of perfect feedback is valid if there is a large number of neurons contributing to the sum in Eq. (6), and if all of them have similar statistical and dynamical
properties, so that they are all governed by the same firing probability. Alternatively, one
may assume that the external input drives a pool of independent neurons, which collectively provides a normalizing signal associated to the common processing of the incoming
stimuli [Heeger 1992, Carandini et al. 1997, Carandini and Heeger 2012]. Mathematically,
these conditions mean to assume that all the αi are equal, to take N → ∞, and in order to
maintain the total input bounded, additionally scale αi = 1/N. With these approximations,
replacing Eq. (7) in Eq. (6), we obtain
dx
x
= − + r(t).
dt
τd

(8)

Equations (4) and (8) constitute a closed set: If the external stimulus s0 + s1 (t) and the
filter h(τ ) are known, both the feedback term and the firing probability can be calculated.
The aim of this study is to deduce how feedback affects the filtering characteristics of
the neuron. To that end, we now assume that both the external stimulus and the firing
probability are known (the latter can be recorded from repeated presentations of the same
stimulus), and evaluate whether the input/output relation can still be considered a filtering
7

FIG. 1: Spectral characteristics of simplified ON, OFF, and biphasic filters. A: Example of an
ON filter displayed as a function of time (left). The modulus and phase of its Fourier transform
are displayed as a function of frequency (right). Note the logarithmic and semi-logarithmic scales.
B, C, D: Analogous representations of OFF, biphasic-ON and biphasic-OFF filters, respectively.
In these examples, ON and OFF filters have exactly the same |ĥ(ω)|, and the phases are shifted in
π (compare A and B). The same relation is found between biphasic-ON and biphasic-OFF filters
(compare C and D).

process, in spite of feedback. The linear nature of Eqs. (4) and (8) calls for a treatment
in Fourier space. Based on the properties of the Fourier transform (see Appendix A) and
rearranging terms, we obtain

r̂(ω) =

√

2π (1 + i ω τd )
√
1 + i ω τd + 2π g τd ĥ(ω)
×[r0 δ(ω) + ĥ(ω) ŝ1 (ω)].

(9)

In the absence of feedback (g = 0), this expression reduces to

r̂(ω) =

√

h
i
2π r0 δ(ω) + ĥ(ω) ŝ1 (ω) .
8

(10)

Solving Eq. (10) for the filter at non-zero frequencies leads to
√
ĥ(ω) = (1/ 2π) r̂(ω)/ŝ1 (ω)
√
= (1/ 2π) r̂(ω)ŝ∗1 (ω)/|ŝ1(ω)|2,

(11)

so for white-noise stimuli, the filter in the temporal domain h(τ ) is proportional to the
spike-triggered average [Gabbiani and Koch 1998].
When feedback is active (g 6= 0), the filter h(τ ) can no longer be calculated with Eq. (11).
Comparing Eqs. (9) and (10), we see that for each frequency ω, the firing probability is still a
linear function of the applied stimulus. The constant of proportionality, however, is modified
due to feedback, and the modification affects differently the continuous component (ω = 0)
and the non-zero frequencies (ω 6= 0). For the continuous case, feedback changes the baseline
firing rate r0 to an effective value
h0 + H s0
fb
≡ hfb
s0 ,
0 +H
1 + g τd H
which implements a divisive gain rescaling.
r0fb =

(12)

For non-zero frequencies, feedback modifies the coding properties of the neuron in such
a way that the intrinsic filter h(τ ), processing both the external stimulus and the feedback
signal, is equivalent to an effective filter hfb (τ ) that only filters the external signal. In Fourier
space, the relation between the intrinsic and the effective filters is
1 + i ω τd
ĥ(ω).
(13)
√
1 + i ω τd + 2π g τd ĥ(ω)
In the remaining part of the present section, we analyze the effects of Eqs. (12) and
ĥfb (ω) =

(13) both in the frequency and the temporal domains, for several types of filters. We then
extend the analysis to imperfect feedback processes, where the sum in Eq. (6) is no longer
deterministically proportional to r(t). Finally, we consider non-linear Poisson neurons, and
we discuss the validity of the linear approximation.

1.

Poisson neuron models in the absence of feedback

In order to understand the effect of feedback, we first describe the basic types of processing
in a purely feedforward model. Typically, neuronal filtering characteristics are classified
9

FIG. 2: Temporal evolution of the firing probability of different cells, with and without feedback.
A-D: ON, OFF, biphasic ON, and biphasic OFF cell models, respectively (see Fig. 1). Bottom
panel: Applied stimulus. At time t = 0 ms, a step of amplitude s0 = 0.05 stimulus units is
applied. At time t = 500 ms, the sinusoidal stimulation begins (frequency 10 Hz and amplitude
0.01 stimulus units). Intermediate panel: Firing probability in the absence of feedback. Top panel:
Firing probability r(t) (continuous red line; scale on the left margin) and feedback process x(t)
(continuous gray line; scale on the right margin) for the model with negative feedback. Shared
parameters: g = 0.005 stimulus units, τd = 100 ms. Monophasic filters are characterized by |H| =
2.506 (stim)−1 .(ms)−1 , whereas biphasic filters are symmetric, H = 0. In all cases, h0 = 300 Hz and
the response is measured in (ms)−1 . For OFF cells (both monophasic and biphasic) the coupling
factor g is negative.

according to the shape of h(τ ). For example, in visual areas, the filters of simple cells
are classified in a limited number of types [Segev et al. 2006]: ON, OFF, biphasic ON and
10

biphasic OFF cells, as shown in Fig. 1. In a previous study [Urdapilleta and Samengo 2009],
we demonstrated that when processing slow stimuli, the firing probability of these four
different cells is a simple function of the external stimulus. In ON and OFF cells, r(t) is
proportional to s1 (t − δ), where the delay δ is determined by the shape of h(τ ). In biphasic
cells, r(t) is proportional to s′1 (t − δ), where s′1 is the temporal derivative of the stimulus.

In Appendix B, we offer a novel derivation of these results, based on the Fourier approach
developed in this paper.

2.

Poisson neuron models with perfect feedback

To study the effects of feedback, we separate the analysis in two: First, we focus on the
mean response, determined by the spectral content of the response at ω = 0. Later, we
analyze non-zero frequencies, ω 6= 0.
Effect of feedback on the baseline firing level
As stated in Eq. (12), the presence of feedback reduces divisively the firing probability.
In Fig. 2 we observe how the magnitude of the reduction depends on the type of cell. In
the time interval between 0 and 500 ms, the response to a constant stimulus is displayed.
Before the onset of the step stimulus (t < 0), the presence of feedback (g 6= 0, red curve,
upper panels) reduces the steady state firing probability, as compared to the value obtained
in the absence of feedback (g = 0, middle panel), for ON cells (Fig. 2A). The same holds
for the steady-state firing probability after the step increase in input current, in the interval
between ∼ 250 and 500 ms. The stationary firing level of OFF cells is also diminished
(Fig. 2B) by feedback. In this case, negative feedback is implemented through a negative
coupling factor, g < 0, which could, for example, correspond to excitatory feedback from
lateral OFF cells. An OFF cell with a positive g value could cause the firing probability
to grow unboundedly, and the Fourier transforms to become ill-defined.

For biphasic

symmetric cells, the integral of the filter is zero, H = 0, so feedback does not modify the
asymptotic processing of stationary signals (see Figs. 2C and 2D, for t < 0).

Effect of feedback on temporal processing
Combining the effective baseline level r0fb of Eq. (12) and the effective filter ĥfb (ω) defined
11

in Eq. (13), we may now re-write Eq. (9) as

r̂(ω) =

√

h
i
2π r0fb δ(ω) + ĥfb (ω) ŝ1 (ω) ,

(14)

which is formally equal to Eq. (10). As a consequence, in the time domain,

r(t) =

r0fb

+

ˆ

∞

−∞

hfb (τ ) s1 (t − τ ) dτ.

(15)

The intrinsic filter h(τ ) characterizes the biophysical properties of the cell under study.
Since h(τ ) filters both the external component of the stimulus s0 + s1 (t) and the feedback
signal x(t), its shape cannot be calculated through reverse correlation analysis performed
with solely the external signal; knowledge of the internal signal is also required. The effective
filter hfb (τ ), instead, can be obtained with the sole knowledge of s1 (t). Once ĥfb (ω) is
obtained, the intrinsic filter ĥ(ω) can be recovered with Eq. (13), assuming that feedback
properties are known. The temporal profile of the effective filter hfb (τ ) can be obtained
simply by inverse Fourier transform.
The Fourier spectrum of the intrinsic filters of both monophasic and biphasic cells decays
at large frequencies (see Fig. 1). Hence, in the high frequency range, the denominator in
Eq. (13) is approximately equal to 1 + i ω τd , and consequently, lim

ω→∞

|ĥfb(ω)| ≈ |ĥ(ω)|.

Biphasic filters also have a reduced spectral content in the low frequency range (see Figs. 1C
and 1D). Therefore, in these cells, feedback exerts a limited effect in the whole frequency
range. Since the filtering properties of these cells are hardly modified by feedback, hereafter
we focus on monophasic cells (ON and OFF).
In Fig. 3, we discuss the differences in the spectral domain between ĥfb (ω) and ĥ(ω). For
any OFF filter there is another ON filter that is exactly equal in shape, but with inverted
sign. To consider negative feedback, the coupling constant g acting on an OFF cell also has
to be inverted in sign, otherwise, we fall on the case of positive feedback, which is unstable
in the linear case. Hence, due to inversion symmetry, ON and OFF cells present exactly the
same gain spectral behavior. Additionally, filter phases of ON and OFF cells display the
same spectral characteristics but shifted in π.
Overall, for monophasic cells, we observe a moderate spectral reshaping of filters due
to the presence of feedback. The low-pass filtering characteristic of ĥ(ω) are converted to
band-pass filtering properties in ĥfb (ω) (see black and red continuous lines, respectively, in

12

FIG. 3: Spectral composition of filters of monophasic cells, with and without feedback (ĥfb in red
and ĥ in black lines, respectively). A: The modulus |ĥ(ω)| is exactly the same for ON and OFF
cells. Feedback reduces the spectral content at low frequencies and induces a relative increase in
the intermediate range. B: Phase of ĥfb (ω) and ĥ(ω), for an ON cell (full lines) and an OFF cell
(dashed lines). Feedback advances the phases at intermediate frequencies. Parameters as in Fig. 2.

Fig. 3A). Feedback reduces the contribution of low frequency stimuli and slightly enhances
the influence of stimuli with intermediate frequencies. Since the system is linear, the application of a sinusoidal stimulus (see Fig. 2, for t > 500 ms) evokes a sinusoidal response
probability; the ratio between relative amplitudes of the response and the stimulus (multi√
plied by a factor 1/ 2π) defines the gain or the modulus of the filter. The introduction of
negative feedback produces a minor effect on the phase. Importantly, however, a phase advance is observed at intermediate frequencies, implying that r overtakes s in the asymptotic
regime (see Fig. 2 for t ≫ 500 ms).
Feedback is defined by two parameters: the time constant τd that determines the temporal
development of x(t), and its relative contribution to the input signal, given by g. In Figs. 4A
and 4C we study the effect of varying the coupling strength g on a monophasic ON filter.
When g is small, feedback barely influences neural processing. As g increases, low frequency
√
content decreases in order to satisfy ĥfb (ω) → H fb / 2π = ĥ(0)/(1 + g τd H) and band-pass
13

FIG. 4: Influence of parameters defining feedback on spectral and temporal processing. Black
line: intrinsic filter h. A: Modulus of the feedback filter ĥfb (ω), for different values of the coupling
strength g (red lines), with g = 1, 2, 5, 10 and 20 × 10−3 stimulus units. For all cases, τd =
100 ms. B: Modulus of the feedback filter ĥfb (ω), for different time constants τd (red lines), with
τd = 20, 40, 100, 200 and 400 ms. For all cases, g = 5 × 10−3 stimulus units. C, D: Temporal
filter reconstructed from the spectra in A and B and the corresponding phases (not shown). C:
As g increases, the region of inverted polarity becomes more prominent. D: As τd increases, the
recovery from the inverted polarity becomes slower. In all cases, H = 2.506 (stim)−1 .(ms)−1 .

behavior is emphasized. To see how these characteristics appear in the temporal domain, we
calculate the filter hfb (τ ) by applying the inverse Fourier transform on ĥfb (ω). The effective
filter hfb (τ ) is no longer purely monophasic, as the original filter h(τ ), since it contains a late
phase of inverted polarity (see Fig. 4C). The absolute value of the integral of the filter is also
reduced, when compared to the original H. Therefore, the feedback filter is more sensitive
to the fluctuations of the stimulus than the original filter [Urdapilleta and Samengo 2009].
As the coupling strength g grows, stronger feedback generates a more significant region of
inverted polarity in hfb (τ ).
The effect of varying τd is shown in Figs. 4B and 4D. For fixed g, if τd increases, low
frequency components decrease (Fig. 4B). In addition, for small values of τd , the gain extends
√
its zero-frequency value, H fb/ 2π, into a wider range of positive frequencies. As shown in
Fig. 4B, τd has only a minor influence at intermediate frequencies. Finally, in the temporal
14

domain, the duration of the region of inverted polarity is governed by τd (see Fig. 4D).
To summarize, we conclude that whenever reverse correlation reveals a filter with biphasic
characteristics, the obtained effective filter hfb (τ ) may not coincide with the intrinsic filter
h(τ ). In particular, at least some of the biphasic filtering characteristics may derive from
negative feedback.

3.

Feedback-induced resonances

A monophasic receptive field behaves as a low-pass filter, with a cutoff frequency determined by the inverse of the duration of the non-zero portion of h(τ ). The effect of feedback
is to additionally reduce the response at low frequencies, so the effective filter ĥfb (ω) acquires band-pass characteristics. The value of the lower cutoff frequency and the resulting
Q-factor depend on the properties of feedback (g and τd ). It is therefore conceivable that by
appropriately choosing these two parameters, feedback can be shaped as to induce a strong
resonance in the system, even up to the point of instability. In Eq. (13), this kind of strong
resonance appears as a sharp peak in ĥfb (ω), or even a divergence. The denominator of
Eq. (13) can indeed vanish for specific combinations of discrete frequencies ωj and values of
the product (g τd )j . In these cases, the presence of negative feedback renders the system unstable, amplifying one particular frequency (or several). Near a resonance, any infinitesimal
stimulus component matching the critical frequency is amplified in the response, giving rise
to strong oscillations. The oscillations enter repeatedly into the feedback loop producing a
divergent response. Of course, no real neuron can truly produce diverging responses, because
as oscillations grow in amplitude, Eq. (1) loses validity: The evolution of the system can no
longer be described by a linear equation; in particular, the linear scheme must be abandoned
before the oscillations in the firing probability r(t) are strong enough as to produce negative
values.
The linear analysis is nevertheless useful to point out the dramatic amplifying effect that
negative feedback can have, and the conditions that favor resonances. Clearly, if the denominator of Eq. (13) vanishes for one or more frequencies, the resulting effective filter ĥfb (ω)
cannot be transformed back into the temporal domain. As stated above, such divergences
may appear (if at all) at a discrete collection of frequencies ωj , and discrete values of the
product (g τd )j . The absence of divergences, however, does not guarantee that the inverse
15

FIG. 5: Feedback-induced resonances for the ON filter of Fig. 1. A: Modulus of the effective
filter |ĥfb (ω)| near the resonant instability. For negative feedback with timescale τd = 100 ms, a
sharp peak develops at ω ≈ 320.4 rad/s. In this case, the critical value for the coupling strength is
gi ≈ 0.1346 stimulus units. B: The phase of the effective filter varies rapidly near the resonance.
C: In the temporal domain, as the resonance is approached, the effective filter develops strong
oscillations at the frequency of the critical ωi . For g > gi , the filter ĥfb (ω) cannot be transformed
back to the time domain, implying that the linear system of Eq. (1) is ill defined.

Fourier transforms hfb (τ ) and r(t) exist and are bounded. In fact, the condition that gives
rise to instabilities is broader and includes the discrete cases where the denominator of
Eq. (13) vanishes. The proper mathematical framework to analyze the onset of instabilities is provided by control theory [Franklin et al. 1994], and can be addressed in terms of
the behavior of the Laplace transform of the effective filter h̃fb (s) with complex argument
s = σ + i ω. As derived in Appendix A, an instability appears when at least one pole
sj = σj + i ωj has positive σj . The pole s∗ with largest real part is hence critical, since the
16

FIG. 6: Inhibitory feedback supported by a finite population of neurons. The signal s1 (t) stimulates a population of identical neurons. The output spikes are filtered during synaptic transmission
and then return in the form of a negative feedback input current.

magnitude of σ ∗ determines the stability of the system. When σ ∗ < 0, the effective filter
is qualitatively similar to the examples shown in Figs. 3 and 4. As the coupling strength g
increases, s∗ gradually shifts to the right and gets closer to the imaginary axis; consequently,
the effective filter begins to show a prominent peak at the frequency ω ∗ of the critical pole,
as shown in Fig. 5A. This resonance is caused by feedback.
At the resonance, ω ≈ ω ∗, the phase of ĥfb (ω) varies rapidly (Fig. 5B). In the temporal
domain, the effective filter exhibits strong oscillations (Fig. 5C), which occasionally grow as
far as to make the system unstable. A mathematical analysis of the conditions giving rise to
instability (see Appendix A) reveals that unstable behavior is only observed if g is above a
critical threshold, the value of which is determined by the shape of the intrinsic filter ĥ(ω).
For large g, however, the baseline firing level r0fb drops significantly (see Eq. (12)). Therefore,
a transition to instability may only be expected in systems with strong feedback and, simultaneously, with large intrinsic spontaneous activity r0 or decreased stimulus fluctuations
s1 (t), so as to ensure that the firing rate r(t) remains positive. Once these conditions are
met, the frequency ω ∗ of the unstable oscillations is determined by the time constant τd and
the shape of the intrinsic filter h(τ ). In the limit of large τd (as in the example of Fig. 5),
the feedback time constant becomes irrelevant, and the location of the critical frequency
depends only on h(τ ).

17

B.

Poisson neuron models with imperfect feedback

So far, the analysis was based on Eqs. (4) and (8), where the temporal derivative of
the feedback signal x(t) was proportional to the firing probability r(t). This relation is only
valid in the limit of a homogeneous population of infinitely many identical neurons, uniformly
coupled and driven with identical stimuli s(t). These conditions are hardly realistic, since
the amount of feedback must be determined by the actual number of generated spikes, and
not by the spiking probability r(t). There is an important difference between these two
options. The spiking probability r(t) is a deterministic function of the input current I(t)
(Eq. (1)), whereas actual spikes are stochastic point processes governed by r(t). Therefore,
in an attempt to provide a more realistic description of feedback, we now assume that x(t) is
given by Eq. (6). Although this new model can be studied analytically in specific parameter
regimes (see below), we initially resort to a numerical approach to determine the point up
to which the results of the previous section can be extended to more realistic conditions.
In the present description, illustrated in Fig. 6, we assume that neurons are limited in
number, all have identical intrinsic filtering properties h(τ ), and process a common temporal
stimulus, s1 (t). Furthermore, the feedback signal x(t) is assumed to be the same for all cells,
so the firing probability r(t) given by Eq. (4) holds for any cell in the population. However,
since spike generation in Poisson processes is stochastic, the precise temporal location of
spikes differs from neuron to neuron and, therefore, the sum in Eq. (6) is a random variable,
which only recovers its deterministic limit (Eq. (8)) when the number of neurons tends to
infinity (N → ∞). Since the derivative of x(t) is no longer strictly proportional to r(t),
feedback is now called imperfect.
In Fig. 7A we show the evolution of the firing probability r(t) (upper panel), along with
the feedback signal x(t) (middle panel) and the driving stimulus (bottom panel) for the
finite population model. These three signals are common to all neurons. The feedback
signal is the sum of N filtered spike trains, a few of which are displayed in Fig. 7B. The
discontinuities in the traces (inset) are produced by individual spikes. These irregular traces
barely resemble the deterministic counterpart xdet (t)/N obtained in the limit N → ∞ (black
curve). Their sum, however, smoothes fluctuations out, and follows xdet (t) closely (middle
panel of Fig. 7A).
To quantify the stochastic behavior of this system, we drive the cells with a sinusoidal
18

FIG. 7: Evolution of dynamic variables in the presence of imperfect feedback. A: Time-dependent
firing probability r(t) and feedback process x(t) for the model with imperfect feedback driven
by the stimulus s0 + s1 (t). Black lines: prediction for N → ∞. Irregular red lines: single-neuron
signals, obtained from a population of N = 10 neurons. B: Single spike trains filtered with a simple
synaptic dynamics, dxi /dt = −xi /τd + (1/N )δ(t − tki ). Individual signals in colored irregular lines.
Irregularity arises from the discontinuities evoked by incoming spikes, amplified in the inset. The
P
feedback signal x(t) shown in A (middle panel) is N
i=1 xi (t) (notice the scale difference with xi (t)
in B). Black line: proportional contribution of a single xi (t) in the limit N → ∞. C: Extracting the
relation between stimulus and response in noisy conditions. For a linear system, a small sinusoidal
stimulus (black line; scale of the left) produces a sinusoidal firing probability of identical frequency
(gray line, scale on the right). A long run of the output spike train is split in T -windows, where
T is the period of the sinusoidal input. All spikes are then wrapped in a single window, and the
histogram r(t) is constructed. Top/bottom panels: Stimulation at 10 Hz / 100 Hz. D: From the
fit of the histograms in C, we calculate the gain √12π ∆r
∆s , and the phase, φr − φs , of the transfer
function (∆r is the amplitude of the sinusoidal function that best fits the response). Different
symbols represent different population sizes. Spikes are collected in asymptotic conditions (that
is, after the initial transient) during 500 s. For each data point, 10 repetitions are simulated.
Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the gain and phase, as calculated from the best
fit parameters obtained for each of these repetitions. Parameters: H = 2.506 (stim)−1 .(ms)−1 ,
τd = 100 ms, g = 0.005 stimulus units, r0 = 0.3 ms−1 , s0 = 0.05 and ∆s = 0.005 stimulus units.

19

stimulus. As observed in Fig. 7A, for times t > 500 ms, the firing probability has a marked
periodic component at the frequency of the input signal. Therefore, the input/output properties can be characterized by studying a single stimulus cycle. This reduction is implemented
by taking the spikes fired in different time windows (one window per stimulus period T )
and wrapping them together into a single window, taking care of preserving the original
firing phase with respect to the stimulus. That is, each spike is displaced an integer number of periods, and located within a window whose duration is equal to a single period of
stimulation. Once a long spike train realization is so wrapped, the corresponding histogram
in the T -window is built, as shown in Fig. 7C. In this figure, we can clearly observe the
periodic modulation of the response (stairs-like gray lines), which expectedly can be fitted
by a sinusoidal function (continuous blue lines). The amplitude and phase (relative to the
stimulus) of the adjusted response is used to construct the spectral characteristics of the
stochastic model.
In Fig. 7C we show the spectral characteristics of the population-based feedback model.
Both the gain and the phase shift are practically invariant with the number of neurons in
the population, and a good agreement with the case N → ∞ (black line) is observed. The
dispersion at each point (error bars) arises from the variability in the sinusoidal fit, which
depends on the irregularities of the histogram (controlled by the total recording time and the
mean number of spikes produced during a cycle). The irregularities, in turn, arise from the
Poissonian character of the spike generation process. When N = 1, the filtered activity of the
neuron itself is used as the feedback signal defined in Eq. (6), and the sum in i just involves
a single element, i = 1. This situation is adequate to model self-inhibition due to spiketriggered adaptation currents [Benda and Herz 2003, Benda et al. 2010, Urdapilleta 2011].
As N grows, the description gradually shifts to represent network-mediated feedback processes.
The wrapping procedure used to construct Fig. 7 allows us to determine the linear response function as the ratio between the amplitude of the firing probability (response) and
the stimulus driving the system (input), both measured at the same frequency. One important result is that the linear response function is independent of the population size N (see
Fig. 7D). However, the irregularities observed in the temporal response do indeed depend
on N. To exemplify this behavior, in Figs. 8A and 8B we show the time-dependent firing
probability r(t) and the feedback process x(t), for the cases N = 10, N = 5 and N = 1.
20

Irregularities become more prominent as the population size decreases. When the number
of neurons is finite, the firing probability contains a certain amount of power at frequencies
different from the incident frequency. The power at spurious frequencies does not affect
the linear response function, because the fitting procedure is casted specifically at the input
frequency. So far we have described the properties of the response at this input frequency.
Now we turn our attention to the rest of the spectrum.
As an example, in Figs. 8D and 8E we show the power spectral density of r(t) and of
x(t), when the system is stimulated with a 10 Hz, small-amplitude sinusoidal signal. Given
the linearity of the system, the firing probability and the feedback signal contain a strong
component at precisely 10 Hz (see the peaks in the corresponding spectra). The height of
the peak in r(t) is given by the linear response function studied before (see Fig. 7). The
remaining spectral power (the background) arises from the inherent randomness of Poisson
processes. As the population size increases, fluctuations in the spontaneous regime diminish
and, correspondingly, the background spectral density decreases as well.
The remaining part of this section is devoted to obtain an analytical expression of the
background spectrum. We first analyze the feedback process corresponding to N = 1 (adaptation current), and later generalize the result to arbitrary N. For N = 1, the signal x(t)
evolves according to
x
dx
= − + ξ(t),
dt
τd

(16)

where ξ(t) represents the spike train produced by a Poisson process (a realization), with a
time-dependent rate given by Eq. (4). This rate is coupled to Eq. (16) (and thereby, to the
noise source) through the feedback term. By approximating the time-dependent firing rate
by its baseline level r0fb (Eq. (12)), Eq. (16) becomes a standard linearly filtered Poisson
process (filtered shot noise). Under this approximation, it is simple to find the formal
solution to Eq. (16) and the resulting exponential autocorrelation function,
Cx (τ ) =

1 fb
r τd e−|τ |/τd .
2 0

(17)

The power spectral density (one-sided, per unit time) of the feedback signal x(t)
can be obtained from the autocorrelation function through the Wiener-Khinchin theorem
[Gardiner 1985, Press et al. 2007],

21

FIG. 8: Characterization of finite size effects. A, B: Evolution of the time-dependent firing rate
r(t) (in ms−1 ) and feedback process x(t) (adimensional), for the stimulus in C. In A and B, different
panels correspond to different population sizes: N = 10 (blue, top panel), N = 5 (green, middle
panel), and N = 1 (red, bottom panel). Black lines: deterministic limit N → ∞. All parameters
are the same as those used in Fig. 2A. As N decreases, fluctuations are amplified. D, E: Power
spectral density per unit time of r(t) (D) and x(t) (E), in the asymptotic regime of small-amplitude,
periodic stimulation (frequency: 10 Hz, amplitude: 0.005 stimulus units). Colors as in A and B.
The theoretically derived power spectral density, under the weak coupling assumption, is shown in
dashed lines (with corresponding colors) for Sr (f ) (D), Eq. (25), and Sx (f ) (E), Eq. (22). F, G:
Analogous to panels D, E for a weaker feedback, g = 0.001 stimulus units.


Sx (ω)
1
|x̂(−ω)|2 + |x̂(ω)|2
=
T
T
i
1 h
Ĉx (−ω) + Ĉx (ω) .
= √
2π
Since the Fourier transform of Eq. (17) reads
22

(18)

1
r fb
,
Ĉx (ω) = Ĉx (−ω) = √0
2π (1/τd )2 + ω 2
the one-sided power spectral density per unit time is

(19)

r fb
1
Sx (ω)
= 0
,
T
π (1/τd )2 + ω 2

(20)

or, in terms of frequency,
Sx (ω)
2 r0fb
Sx (f )
= 2π
=
.
(21)
T
T
(1/τd )2 + (2πf )2
The previous analysis can be easily extended to the case N > 1. In this case, the effective
rate for ξ(t) in Eq. (16) is now N r0fb . We recall that, in order to maintain the feedback
level constant when N increases, the efficacy of each spike in Eq. (6) has to be proportional
to 1/N. Therefore, now dx/dt = −x/τd + (1/N) ξ(t), and the autocorrelation function is a
scaled version of Eq. (17), CxN neurons (τ ) = Cx1 neuron (τ )/N. Consequently,

Sx (f )
1
2 r0fb
=
.
(22)
T
N (1/τd )2 + (2πf )2
This expression is represented with dashed lines in Fig. 8E, for different population sizes.
The power spectrum obtained from simulations agrees with the theoretical description, except at low frequencies, where higher order statistical interactions between x(t) and r(t)
become noticeable. At medium and high frequencies, the theoretical approach provides a
very good description of the simulations.
The firing probability r(t) inherits the correlation structure of x(t),
ˆ

τm

ˆ

τm

h(τ ′′ ) Cx(N ) (τ + τ ′ − τ ′′ ) dτ ′′ ,
h(τ ) dτ
0
ˆ τm
ˆ τm 0
1 2 fb
′
′
h(τ ′′ )
h(τ ) dτ
=
g r0 τd
2N
0
0
′
′′
× e−|τ +τ −τ |/τd dτ ′′ .

Cr (τ ) = g

The

filter

h(τ )

2

is

′

different

[Urdapilleta and Samengo 2009].

′

from

zero

inside

a

finite

window

(23)
[0, τm ]

Therefore, in Eq. (23), we replaced the upper inte-

gration limits by τm . Whenever τm ≪ τd , the exponential factor in the integrand of Eq. (23)
can be further simplified, so that only time differences τ comparable or larger than τm
matter:
23

′

• τ ∼ O(τm ) ⇒ e−|τ +τ −τ
′

′′ |/τ
d

• τ ≫ O(τm ) ⇒ e−|τ +τ −τ

′′ |/τ
d

≈ 1,
≈ e−|τ |/τd .

In this case, the autocorrelation function can be approximated by
1 2 2 fb
g H r0 τd e−|τ |/τd .
(24)
2N
Finally, based on this equation and the Wiener-Khinchin theorem, the power spectral
Cr (τ ) =

density for the firing probability r(t) is
g 2 H 2 r0fb
2
.
(25)
Sr (f ) =
N (1/τd )2 + (2πf )2
This expression is represented in Fig. 8D for different population sizes, in dashed lines.
As in the previous analysis, at low frequencies, the coupling between x(t) and r(t) produces
a small discrepancy between the numerical results and the theoretical expression. At high
frequencies, a faster decay than the predicted Sr (f ) ∼ 1/f 2 is observed, originated by the
approximation at τ ∼ O(τm ) during the assessment of the autocorrelation function Cr (τ ).
The derivation in this section is based on the hypothesis that the firing rate r(t) could be
approximated by its baseline level r0fb . This assumption is valid if s1 (t) is small, and if x(t)
and r(t) are weakly coupled. Obviously, as the coupling strength g becomes smaller, the
theoretical expressions become more accurate, and are valid in a wider range of frequencies.
As shown in Figs. 8F and 8G, in this limit, the simulated spectral densities are in excellent
agreement with Eqs. (22) and (25).

C.

Linear-nonlinear Poisson neuron models

Linear Poisson models are only an approximate description of the processes governing
neuronal dynamics. We here improve the approximation by adding a static nonlinearity, as
often done in the description of sensory systems [Dayan and Abbott 2001, Chichilnisky 2001,
Baccus and Meister 2002,

Gaudry and Reinagel 2007,

Butts et al. 2011, Garvert and Gollisch 2013].

Sharpee et al. 2008,

The new model constitutes the linear-

nonlinear Poisson approach, where

ˆ
r(t) = f r0 +

∞

−∞



h(τ ) [s1 (t − τ ) − g x(t − τ )] dτ .
24

(26)

In this section we demonstrate that although the results of the previous section do not
strictly hold in the presence of a nonlinearity, it is possible to develop an approximate version
of the theory that makes very good predictions in most practical cases.
In Fig. 9A, we show three sigmoidal nonlinearities f , all with the same functional shape,
but with different scaling parameters in the x-axis. Here we show how to produce an
approximate linearized model, and discuss its range of validity. The first step is to find the
operation point, that is, the spontaneous firing rate r0nl , that may differ from the spontaneous
rate of the linear case r0fb (Eq. (12)). In the absence of time-dependent external stimuli,
s1 (t) = 0, the linear-nonlinear model reduces to


r0nl = f r0 − g τd H r0nl ⇒ f −1 (r0nl ) = r0 − g τd H r0nl .

(27)

Equation (27) implicitly defines r0nl as the intersection between the function f −1 (r0nl ) and
the straight line r0 − g τd H r0nl . In Fig. 9B, we illustrate the procedure. The level r0 (arrow
on the left margin) sets the offset of the straight line (thick black line). The slope of the line
is determined by the intrinsic properties of the neuron (H) and feedback (g τd ). Depending
on the steepness of the nonlinearity, one same r0 may elicit different spontaneous firing rates
r0nl (colored circles located at the intersections).
If the constant stimulus component s0 is modified, a new value r0 is established and,
after a brief transient evolution, the operation level r0nl sets to a new value, as predicted
by Eq. (27). The y-intercept of the straight line shifts, thus displacing the stationary firing
probability. In Fig. 9B the shift is represented by the two parallel lines (thin gray lines), corresponding to the addition of two constant stimuli of opposite signs. Due to the non-linear
nature of the model, the same stimuli displace the response by different amounts (lengths
of the error bars). Moreover, positive and negative stimuli produce effects of different magnitude (compare the lengths of the left and the right portions of the error bars).
In Fig. 9C the temporal evolution of the firing rate (top panel) and the feedback process
(middle panel) is shown, for a temporally complex input signal. In the spontaneous regime,
t < 0 ms, the firing probabilities obtained in Fig. 9B are indicated with colored circles.
Following the application of a step stimulus, the firing probability and the feedback process
undergo a transient evolution that rapidly settles onto a new stationary value. When the
curvature of the nonlinearity is mild, the evolution is similar to the linear case (compare the
evolution of the red line in Fig. 9C with the one of Fig. 2A). As the nonlinearity becomes
25

FIG. 9: Effects of a static nonlinearity on the feedback model. A: Sigmoidal nonlinearities modeled
as error functions, (1/2) rmax {erf[(q − qc )/∆] + 1}, with ∆ = 0.05, ∆ = 0.10, and ∆ = 0.20 (blue,
green, and red lines, respectively). In all cases, qc = 0.25 and rmax = 0.50. Axis units in ms−1 . B:
The spontaneous firing rate is defined by the intersection between the line (r0 −g τd H r) (thick black
line) and the inverse function of the nonlinearity (colored curves in A). Spontaneous firing rates for
the different nonlinearities are indicated by colored circles, for h0 = 0.30 ms−1 . The addition of a
static positive or negative stimulus (gray lines) shifts the operation point nonlinearly (circles plus
error bars in the upper part of the figure). C: Temporal evolution of the firing probability (top
panel) and the feedback process (middle panel), under the effect of a particular time-dependent
stimulus (bottom panel). In the absence of stimulus, t < 0 ms, spontaneous firing rates are defined
by the colored circles in B. The step stimulus deflects the firing probability transiently, until a new
stationary value is reached. A periodic stimulus, t > 500 ms, evokes a periodic response probability,
whose amplitude is a non-linear function of the stimulus’ amplitude. D: Spectral composition of
filters’ gain in the non-linear model. Continuous black line: gain of the feedback filter for the
linear model, see Fig. 3A. Colors match the non-linearities shown in A. Symbols: ratio between the
amplitudes of the sinusoidal response
and stimulus, for a small sinusoidal stimulation, as a function
√
of the driving frequency, (1/ 2π)∆r/∆s. Irregular lines: gains of the Fourier transform of the
filters obtained from the spike-triggered average of the nonlinear model, equivalent to χ̂fb (ω) for
small stimuli, see Eq. (35). Dashed lines: equivalent linear filter of the non-linear model ĥnl,fb (ω),
which can be approximated by an appropriate scaling of the linear filter, see Eq. (37). Parameters
are identical to those used before for the linear model (see Figs. 2 and 3).

26

steeper (blue line in Fig. 9C), the firing probability evolves faster, and the initial transient
becomes stronger.
The next step is to determine how time-dependent stimuli are processed. When a sinusoidal signal is applied (t > 500 ms, in Fig. 9C), the response probability is periodic, but
not necessarily sinusoidal. Only in the limit of small s(t) is the sinusoidal response guaranteed, and in this limit, the ratio between the (mean-subtracted) relative amplitudes of the
input/output sinusoidal modulations is independent of the amplitude of the stimulus. The
amplitude of the response, however, depends on the steepness of the nonlinearity (Fig. 9D).
To understand the spectral processing of the non-linear model, we define the transformed
firing rate
q(t) = f −1 [r(t)],

(28)

h(τ ) [s1 (t − τ ) − g x(t − τ )] dτ.

(29)

so that Eq. (26) becomes

q(t) = r0 +

ˆ

∞
−∞

In terms of q(t), the feedback current x(t), previously described by Eq. (8), is now governed by
x
dx
= − + f [q(t)] .
dt
τd

(30)

Equations (29) and (30) constitute a closed system, but the presence of the nonlinearity
precludes the application of the linear Fourier approach that allowed us, in the previous
section, to find the relation between h(τ ) and hfb (τ ). Linearizing Eq. (30) around the
operation point, q0 = f −1 (r0nl ), yields
dx
x
≈ − + r0nl + f ′ (q0 ) [q(t) − q0 ] .
dt
τd

(31)

Equations (29) and (31) are closed and linear, and therefore, allow for a linear treatment.
Transforming them both to Fourier space, and after some algebraic manipulations,

27

q̂(ω) =

√

"

2π q0 δ(ω)

#
(1 + i ω τd ) ĥ(ω)
ŝ1 (ω) .
+
√
1 + i ω τd + 2π g τd f ′ (q0 ) ĥ(ω)

(32)

Equation (32) can be written in terms of an effective filter χ̂fb (ω), such that

q̂(ω) =

√

where
χ̂fb (ω) =



2π q0 δ(ω) + χ̂fb (ω) ŝ1(ω) ,

(33)

(1 + i ω τd ) ĥ(ω)
.
√
1 + i ω τd + 2π g τd f ′ (q0 ) ĥ(ω)

(34)

The possibility of summarizing the effect of feedback in Eq. (33) implies that in the
temporal domain,


r(t) = f q0 +

ˆ

+∞



fb

χ (τ ) s1 (t − τ ) dτ .

−∞

(35)

The presence of the nonlinearity implies that the effective filter χ̂fb (ω) can no longer
be calculated as the ratio between r̂(ω) and ŝ1 (ω). Reverse correlation, however, still
allow us to calculate χfb (τ ) from the spike triggered average of the recorded data
[Gabbiani and Koch 1998, Chichilnisky 2001]. The result is illustrated by the irregular lines
in Fig. 9D.
Reverse correlation provides the best possible estimate of χ̂fb (ω), since the approach only
entails the linearization of Eq. (8). The method, however, requires large amounts of data to
converge to a reliable estimation (2.5 ×106 spikes, in Fig. 9D). For practical purposes, hence,
one may be willing to sacrifice some modeling accuracy, and further linearize Eq. (35), for
the sake of obtaining an easier estimation method. Such approximation brings the response
and the stimulus to be linearly related
′

r(t) ≈ f (q0 ) + f (q0 )

ˆ

+∞

−∞

χfb (τ ) s1 (t − τ ) dτ,

so that the linear response function of the non-linear system is

28

(36)

ĥnl,fb(ω) =

(1 + i ω τd ) f ′ (q0 )
ĥ(ω),
√
1 + i ω τd + 2π g τd f ′ (q0 ) ĥ(ω)

(37)

differing from the linear approach (Eq. (13)) by a rescaling controlled by the gain at the
operation point.
In Fig. 9D, the spectral behavior of the filter obtained from the spike-triggered average of
the non-linear model, χ̂fb (ω), as well as the linearized filter ĥnl,fb (ω) are shown. The symbols
represent the results obtained from the ratio between r̂(ω) and ŝ1 (ω), for small sinusoidal
stimuli (defined as in Fig 7D). As observed, both filters are in excellent agreement with the
simulated data. Clearly, as the non-linearity becomes steeper, the band-pass characteristics
are more pronounced (see also, temporal responses in Fig. 9C).
The processing differences so far described for nonlinearities of varying steepness are also
observed in a single nonlinearity, at varying operation points. In Fig. 10A, the operation
point is varied by manipulating the value of h0 . The stationary firing rates are represented
in Fig. 10B by symbols located on the nonlinearity (thick black line), whereas the gains are
indicated on the derivative (gray line). The comparison between the nonlinear model with
the linear approximations is similar to the comparison of Fig. 9D.
In the purely linear case, we observed that in certain conditions, feedback could give
rise to unstable dynamics. Resonances, understood as peaks in the power spectrum of the
effective filter, are still possible in the nonlinear case. However, now the resonant peak
cannot grow indefinitely, so unstable divergences are ruled out. The linear approximation
of Eq. (31) has a limited range of validity. For sigmoidal nonlinearities, as the firing rate
increases, the operation point r0nl shifts upwards, so the slope f ′ (q0 ) should not be taken as
fixed. The value of the derivative diminishes progressively, as the flat part of the nonlinearity
is approached. In Eq. (34), a diminished f ′ (q0 ) is equivalent to a smaller feedback coupling
constant g, thereby precluding divergences. Hence, although the firing probability can still
contain a strong oscillatory component in the nonlinear case, the increased firing at the peaks
of the oscillations acts as a self-regulatory mechanism, that forestalls unstable dynamics.
In the present section, we have introduced a nonlinearity in the relationship between r(t)
and s1 (t). The feedback process, however, always remained linear. One could then wonder
what is the effect of maintaining a linear relation between r(t) and s1 (t), but introducing a
nonlinearity in the feedback process. From Eqs. (29) and (30), we see that in terms of q(t),

29

FIG. 10: Influence of the operation point in the nonlinear feedback model. A: A sigmoidal
nonlinearity operated at different points. Different straight lines correspond to different values
of h0 (0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 y 0.5 ms−1 , respectively). The y-intercept is h0 + H s0 , with H =
2.506 (stim)−1 .(ms)−1 and s0 = 0.05 stimulus units, and the nonlinearity is defined as in Fig. 9A,
with ∆ = 0.10. B: Firing probabilities, for the different values of h0 defined in A, indicated by
symbols located on the nonlinearity (thick black line, scale on the left margin). Associated gains
are represented with corresponding symbols on the derivative of the function (gray line, scale on the
right margin). C: Ratio between relative amplitudes of response and stimulus signals, for different
driving frequencies. Symbols and colors correspond to those represented in A. Black thick line
displays the spectral behavior of the lineal model, whereas colored dashed lines are appropriately
scaled versions.

a nonlinear relation between r(t) and s1 (t) traduces into a nonlinear system of equations,
where the nonlinearity appears in the feedback equation. Conversely, a nonlinearity in the
feedback process that modifies the second term of the right-hand side of Eq. (8) can be
treated, from the mathematical point of view, in the same way as the the nonlinear system
explored in this section. More general nonlinear feedback processes, for example, modifying
30

the first term of the right-hand side of Eq. (8), or even mixing the two terms together,
require additional techniques.

D.

Higher-dimensional receptive fields

The results obtained so far remain unchanged if the stimulus (and therefore also the
linear filter) depends on several dimensions, and not just time, as long as adaptation is
homogeneous in those dimensions. In this case, we write the external stimulus as s(y, t),
where y ∈ D is a vector in a one- or a multi-dimensional space D representing the relevant
features of the sensory modality under study (direction of the incoming light or chromatic
composition in the case of vision, frequency content in the case of audition, etc). The
external stimulus is filtered by some sort of transduction process and perhaps also by one
or more neurons that lie between the sensory receptors and the neuron under study. We
represent such upstream filtering processes by means of a high-dimensional filter hu (y, τ ),
that transforms the high-dimensional stimulus s(y, t) in a purely temporal ionic input current
s1 (t),
s1 (t) =

ˆ ˆ
D

+∞

−∞

hu (y, τ ) s(y, t − τ ) dy dτ.

(38)

This expression can be inserted into Eq. (2) to construct the new full input current I(t)
needed in Eq. (1). Notice that in the present framework, the high-dimensional stimulus is
first filtered in the y-dimensional and temporal domains by hu (y, τ ) (Eq. (38)), and afterwards by the temporal filter h(τ ) (Eq. (1)). Using a Fourier analysis completely analogous
to the one developed before, we arrive at
√

"
2π (1 + i ω τd )
r̂(ω) =
r0 δ(ω)
√
1 + i ω τd + 2π g τd ĥ(ω)
#
ˆ
√
hˆu (y, ω) ŝ(y, ω) dy .
+ 2π ĥ(ω)

(39)

D

This expression reduces to Eq. (9) when hu (y, τ ) = δ(y − y0 ) δ(τ ).
By stimulating the cell with signals that are localized in the additional dimensions,
s(y, t) = δ(y − y0 ) f (t), the whole of the previous theory becomes valid for each chosen y0 . In particular, feedback still transforms the intrinsic receptive field in an effective
31

receptive field by multiplying the Fourier transform of the former by a factor that depends
on the frequency, but does not depend on the stimulation point y0 . At least, such is the
effect of feedback if we may assume that the signal x(t) only depends on the output of the
cell and is not modulated, for example, by spatial input components.

III.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we analyzed how spike-evoked negative feedback modifies the effective
receptive field of a cell. The approach was based on an ideal concept, here named perfect
feedback, where the signal x(t) is not a function of the actual spikes generated by the
neuron, but rather of the probability that spikes be generated. This assumption is ultimately
unrealistic, but becomes a good approximation of the real system when (a) the stimulus
varies slowly compared to the inter-spike interval of the neuron under study, or (b) feedback
is mediated by a large number of similar neurons in the network. In both cases, the firing
probability r(t) is sampled exhaustively, and therefore, the distribution of sampled signals
follows the probability r(t) closely during the time scale τd governing the feedback process.
This idealized scenario allowed us to develop an analytical approach, and to derive the
mathematical connection between the intrinsic filter h(τ ) and the effective filter hfb (τ ). In
particular, Eq. (13) provides the link by which intrinsic or feedback parameters shape the
receptive field.
Previous studies have reported some reshaping of receptive fields as the input changes.
For example, in the case of visual stimuli, the spatial and the temporal context alter the input/output transformation, as the system adapts to the local statistics [Schwartz et al. 2007,
Wark et al. 2007, Wark et al. 2009], producing changes all the way up to the perceptual level
[Schwartz et al. 2007, Kohn 2007, Lochmann et al. 2012]. In single cells, both the total luminance and the amount of contrast shape linear filters with increased band-pass characteristics [Enroth-Cugell and Shapley 1973, Kaplan and Benardete 2001]. The same effects
are observed in single auditory cells, as the mean and the variance of synthetic sounds are
manipulated [Nagel and Doupe 2006]. According to our results, these phenomena could be
explained by modulating the amount of feedback as the signal varies. The modulation could
be mediated by synaptic scaling, in the case of network-based feedback processes, or by ionic
mechanisms, in the case of single cell adaptation, eg. by Ca2+ concentration. Moreover, the
32

reshaping of filters can also be modulated by the spatial structure of the stimulus. For
example, the receptive fields processing stimuli with natural spatio-temporal statistics are
different from those obtained from simple ensembles. When the higher-order input statistics are taken into account in the estimation of receptive fields [Theunissen et al. 2001], the
temporal profile of the filters processing natural stimuli turn out to be biphasic, whereas
monophasic filters are obtained in responses to gratings [David et al. 2004]. In terms of our
analysis, this change could be explained if the amount of negative feedback depended on the
statistical properties of the input signal. However, given the different long-range behavior of
spatial correlations for different ensembles, this would require to extend the model in order
to include some spatial dependence of the feedback signal, for example, associated to the
spiking activity of neurons that respond to stimuli presented in a shifted position.
In the purely linear case, positive feedback always produces unstable dynamics. If an
ON cell is subject to positive feedback, any positive stimulus fluctuation, no matter how
small, feeds a reverberating loop where activity eventually diverges. Any negative stimulus
fluctuation, in turn, eventually extinguishes firing altogether. An OFF cell is also unstable,
with the opposite effect of positive and negative stimulus fluctuations. Such unstable systems
are all-or-none (divergence or extinction) and have therefore not been studied here.
An important finding of this paper is that negative feedback, which is usually assumed to
exert a regularizing effect, can also produce unstable dynamics in the linear case. Negative
feedback always diminishes the responses to slow stimuli, enhancing the band-pass characteristics of the filtering process. However, in certain conditions, these characteristics can be
magnified dramatically, up to the point that the effective filter ĥfb (ω) be sharply peaked at
a specific frequency ω0 . In the time domain, hfb (τ ) exhibits pronounced oscillations at this
particular frequency. Feedback, hence, transformed an intrinsic receptive field that acted as
an integrator into an effective resonator [Mato and Samengo 2008].
Neurons often display resonant properties. A widely accepted view states that oscillatory
properties can either stem from intrinsic cellular characteristics or from network interactions [Buzsáki 2006, Prescott et al. 2008, Wang 2010]. The important ingredient is that
two types of mechanisms coexist [Hutcheon and Yarom 2000]: those attenuating high frequencies (typically, leak currents), and those attenuating low frequencies. Many processes
can be invoked to attenuate low frequencies, both at the single-cell (e. g., leak filtering),
and the network level (e. g., synaptic filtering). Previous studies of resonant behavior
33

have attempted to understand resonances in terms of such properties, invoking particular subthreshold processes [Izhikevich 2007, Gutfreund et al. 1995, Hutcheon et al. 1996a,
Hutcheon et al. 1996b, Richardson et al. 2003], or specific network interactions [Wang 2010,
Lampl and Yarom 1997, Köndgen et al. 2008, Buzsáki and Wang 2012].

In addition, to

avoid falling into quiescence, amplifying processes are sometimes also invoked. In agreement with previous studies on properties of neurons with spike-frequency adaptation
[Benda and Herz 2003, Gigante et al. 2007, Benda and Hennig 2008, Benda et al. 2010], in
this paper we have shown that negative feedback suffices to attenuate low frequencies. We
make no assumptions about subthreshold properties, inasmuch as they produce an intrinsic
receptive field that contains a maximal cutoff frequency. In addition, no ad-hoc mechanisms
are required to produce amplification, as long as the baseline firing rate r0fb remains positive,
for which a strong stimulus baseline s0 , or a strong spontaneous rate h0 , suffice. Moreover,
the formalism proposed here is general enough as to be equally applicable to networkmediated feedback currents, or to intrinsic adaptation currents. Our idealized approach,
hence, provides a unified description of the mechanisms through which spike-triggered negative feedback induces resonances.
In order to test the validity of the idealized approach provided by perfect feedback,
we also ran numeric simulations where a finite number N of individual feedback signals
xi (t) were triggered by actual spikes. Importantly, we concluded that the effective filtering
characteristics do not depend on N. Perfect feedback, hence, can be safely used to study
both self-inhibition (N = 1) and network-induced regulation (N > 1). The analytic study of
the fluctuations in the feedback signal and in the response, however, shows that the amount
of noise in the output spectrum diminishes as 1/N (Eqs. (22) and (25)). Moreover, the
shape of the noise spectrum is given by a Cauchy distribution [Johnson et al. 1994].
The above conclusions hold for linear Poisson neuron models. Only for the linear case
can the analytic approach be developed. The concept of receptive field, however, can also
be extended to the case of linear-nonlinear Poisson models, or generalized nonlinear models.
Although, strictly speaking, the presence of a nonlinearity does not allow us to employ linear
methods, in the last section of this paper we demonstrated that by linearizing one of the two
equations governing the system, an approximate description of the nonlinear case is possible.
We showed that feedback still produces an effective receptive field that is narrower than the
intrinsic one, and that resonances may also appear. Moreover, the nonlinear description is
34

also useful to understand how the divergences obtained in the purely linear case saturate at
a finite value in the nonlinear description.

Acknowledgments

This work has been funded by Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientı́ficas y Técnicas,
Agencia Nacional de Promoción Cientı́fica y Tecnológica, Universidad Nacional de Cuyo and
Comisión Nacional de Energı́a Atómica, all from República Argentina.

Appendix A: Appendix

The convention used here to operate with the Fourier transform is
ˆ +∞
1
ˆ
f (ω) = √
f (t) e−iωt dt.
2π −∞
From this definition, the following properties follow:
- The Fourier transform of a constant signal of magnitude r0 is fˆ(ω) =

(A1)

√

2π r0 δ(ω).

- If a signal f (t) is equal to the convolution of two other signals g(t) and h(t), then
√
fˆ(ω) = 2π ĝ(ω) ĥ(ω).
- If a signal f (t) is equal to another signal but delayed, f (t) = g(t − ∆), then fˆ(ω) =
e−iω∆ ĝ(ω).

- If a signal f (t) is the derivative of another signal f (t) = dg/dt, then fˆ(ω) = iωĝ(ω).
The Laplace transform, in turn, is defined as
f˜(s) =

ˆ

∞

f (t) e−st dt,

(A2)

0

where s = σ + iω is a complex number. In the particular case where s is evaluated at
a purely imaginary number (σ = 0), the Laplace transform is proportional to the Fourier
transform for temporally positive functions. The Laplace transform, hence, can be seen as
a generalization of the Fourier transform to the whole complex plane. Related properties
hold:
35

- The Laplace transform of a constant signal of magnitude r0 is f˜(s) = r0 /s.
- If a signal f (t) is equal to the convolution of two other signals g(t) and h(t), then
f˜(s) = g̃(s) h̃(s).
- If a signal f (t) is the derivative of another signal f (t) = dg/dt, then f˜(s) = s g̃(s) −
g(0).
Using these properties, it is easy to see that if the signals r(t) and x(t) are governed by
Eqs. (4) and (8), the Laplace transform of r(t), for an initial zero feedback contribution
x(0) = 0, is
r̃(s) =

r0 /s + h̃(s) s̃1 (s)
.
1 + g h̃(s)/(s + 1/τd )

(A3)

According to control theory [Franklin et al. 1994], this feedback system becomes unstable
when at least one pole of r̃(s) has positive real part. It is important to search for instabilities
in the Laplace representation, since they may not be evident in the Fourier space. In addition
to the fixed pole s = 0 given by the constant signal term, the poles of r̃(s) are those complex
points s where the denominator of Eq. (A3) vanish, that is,

1+g

h̃(s)
= 0.
s + 1/τd

(A4)

This equation holds in the complex plane, so both the real and the imaginary part of
the equality must vanish. Feedback gives rise to unstable behavior whenever at least one
solution of Eq. (A4) has positive real part. The onset of instability, hence, appears when
the pole (or pair of conjugate poles) with largest real part crosses the imaginary axis, from
left to right. At the crossing, σ = 0, so the real and imaginary parts of Eq. (A4) become

Im[ĥ(ω)] − τd ω Re[ĥ(ω)] = 0,
√
1 + 2π g τd Re[ĥ(ω)] = 0,

(A5)
(A6)

where now, ĥ(ω) is the Fourier transform of the intrinsic filter, obtained when evaluating
√
the Laplace transform at a purely imaginary point and dividing by 2π. The frequencies
satisfying Eq. (A5) are independent of the feedback strength, g. Note that, in addition,
Eq. (A6) can only be fulfilled by those frequencies ωi , from the set of solutions to Eq. (A5),
36

that result in Re[ĥ(ωi )] < 0. Even among these, if g is small, no frequency ω satisfies
Eq. (A6), and the system is stable (the pole with largest real part is on the stable semiplane). For a critical value of feedback strength, the condition imposed by Eq. (A6) can be
finally reached and the system becomes unstable. This means that for feedback strengths
beyond the critical value, there is at least one pole on the unstable semi-plane and therefore
the inverse Fourier transform diverges.

Appendix B: Appendix

In this section, we describe the temporal processing of slow stimuli. We arrive at the
same results as the ones derived by [Urdapilleta and Samengo 2009], but here we base the
analysis on the spectral properties of filters. In the absence of feedback,
r(t) = h0 +

ˆ

+∞

−∞

r̂(ω) =

√

h(τ ) s(t − τ ) dτ,

h
i
2π h0 δ(ω) + ĥ(ω) ŝ(ω) .

(B1)

In the present context, a slow stimulus is one that does not contain high frequency
components. In other words, the input/output relation of the cell is only determined by
the lowest frequency components of the filter ĥ(ω), since the higher frequencies are not
explored. The stimulus, hence, has to remain fairly constant throughout the time scale of
the filter (given by the non-zero portions in the temporal filters shown in Fig. 1). If only
low frequencies matter, we may take the limit ω → 0. In this context, we prove that

• ON cells behave as low-pass filters, see Fig. 1A. For ω → 0, the Fourier transform of
these filters is

ˆ +∞
1
√
h(τ ) e−iωτ dτ
ĥ(ω) =
2π −∞
ˆ +∞
1
= √
h(τ ) [cos(ωτ ) − i sin(ωτ )] dτ
2π −∞
ˆ +∞
1
1
h(τ ) [1 − i ω τ ] dτ = √ (H + i ω H1 )
≈ √
2π −∞
2π
37

(B2)

where H =

´ +∞
−∞

h(τ ) dτ and H1 = −

can be used again,

´ +∞
−∞


H
ĥ(ω) ≈ √
1+i ω
2π
 
H
cos ω
≈ √
2π
H −iωδ0
≈ √
e
,
2π

τ h(τ ) dτ . The small angle approximation


H1
H



H1
H1
+ i sin ω
H
H
(B3)

where we have defined the (positive) delay δ0 = −H1 /H. From this expression, it is
easy to check that the gain of the Fourier transform for ON cells at low frequencies
√
is constant and equal to H/ 2π. In addition, the phase decreases linearly with ω,
starting at 0 with slope −δ0 (in Fig. 1A, a linear graph instead of the semi-logarithmic
one would clearly show this linear relationship).
To relate ĥ(ω) to the neural response in the temporal domain, we simply make use of
the Fourier transform of a delayed signal (see Appendix A),
n
o
r(t) ≈ h0 + F −1 H e−iωδ0 ŝ(ω) ≈ h0 + H s(t − δ0 ).

(B4)

According to Eq. (B4), the amplitude of the response is exclusively determined by
H; simultaneously, neural processing introduces a fixed delay δ0 between the response
and the stimulus.

• ON biphasic cells behave as band-pass filters, see Fig. 1C. In the limit ω → 0, ĥ(ω)
is still given by Eq. (B1). However, symmetric biphasic filters satisfy H = 0, so to
obtain a meaningful description we have to perform the expansion around ω = 0 up
to the second order,


ˆ +∞
1 2 2
1
dτ
h(τ ) 1 − i ω τ − ω τ
ĥ(ω) ≈ √
2
2π −∞


1 2
1
✚ + i ω H1 − ω H2 ,
H
≈ √
✚
2
2π


H2
i H1 ω
.
1+i ω
≈ √
2H1
2π
38

(B5)

where H2 =

´ +∞
−∞

τ 2 h(τ ) dτ . Proceeding as before and defining a corresponding

(positive) delay δ1 = −H2 /(2H1 ), we obtain

 



H2
H1 ω iπ/2
H2
cos ω
e
ĥ(ω) ≈ √
+ i sin ω
2H1
2H1
2π
H1 ω i(π/2−ωδ1 )
H1 ω iπ/2 −iωδ1
e
e
e
.
= √
≈ √
2π
2π

(B6)

Hence, in the limit ω → 0, the gain of symmetric biphasic filters depends linearly on
√
the angular frequency, with a positive slope H1 / 2π. In addition, the filter phase is
a linearly decreasing function of ω, with intercept at the origin π/2 and slope −δ1 .
Both characteristics can be observed in Fig. 1C.
To relate ĥ(ω) to the neural response in the temporal domain, it is useful to recover
the imaginary unit as a factor and rewrite Eq. (B6) as

H1 −iωδ1
e
(i ω).
ĥ(ω) ≈ √
2π

(B7)

In this case, given that the Fourier transform of a convolution becomes a product in
Fourier space, the term (i ω) can be effectively associated to the stimulus, ŝ(ω). In
turn, by applying the Fourier transform of a derivative, and proceeding as before, it
is easy to check that r(t) is proportional to the delayed stimulus derivative, with a
factor of proportionality given by H1 and a fixed delay δ1 . Explicitly,

r(t) ≈ h0 + F

−1

n

−iωδ1

H1 e

[i ω ŝ(ω)]

o

≈ h0 + H1



ds
dt



.

(B8)

(t−δ1 )

• Corresponding OFF cells behave analogously to monophasic and biphasic ON cells
(see Figs. 1B and 1D). Specifically, the Fourier transforms of these filters are exactly
given by Eqs. (B2) and (B5), in the limit ω → 0. The only difference with the previous
ON cells is that the proportionality factors H and H1 for monophasic and biphasic
cells, respectively, are now negative. The presence of a factor (−1) affecting the whole
expression can be incorporated into a multiplicative term, exp (±iπ), which shifts
the phase of the Fourier transform in ±π. This shift can be observed in Fig. 1 by
39

comparing phases of corresponding filters (monophasic ON/OFF filters and biphasic
ON/OFF filters). Additionally, the factor (−1) does not affect the magnitude of the
Fourier transform of ON or OFF cells. In the temporal domain, this factor simply
means that the relationships obtained for ON cells are also valid, but associated to the
negative of the stimulus or its derivative. These results agree our previous analysis
[Urdapilleta and Samengo 2009].

[Amit and Brunel 1997] Amit, D. J., & Brunel, N. (1997). Model of global spontaneous activity
and local structured activity during delay periods in the cerebral cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 7,
237–252.
[Atwood and Karunanithi 2002] Atwood, H. L., & Karunanithi, S. (2002). Diversification of synaptic strength: Presynaptic elements. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3, 497–516.
[Ayaz and Chance 2009] Ayaz, A., & Chance, F. S. (2009). Gain modulation of neuronal responses
by subtractive and divisive mechanisms of inhibition. Journal of Neurophysiology, 101, 958–
968.
[Baccus and Meister 2002] Baccus S. A., & Meister, M. (2002). Fast and slow contrast adaptation
in retinal circuitry. Neuron, 36, 909–919.
[Benda and Hennig 2008] Benda, J., & Hennig, R. M. (2008). Spike-frequency adaptation generates intensity invariance in a primary auditory interneuron. Journal Computational Neuroscience, 24, 113-136.
[Benda and Herz 2003] Benda, J., & Herz, A. V. M. (2003). A universal model for spike-frequency
adaptation. Neural Computation, 15, 2523–2564.
[Benda et al. 2010] Benda, J., Maler, L., & Longtin, A. (2010). Linear versus nonlinear signal
transmission in neuron models with adaptation currents or dynamic thresholds. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 104, 2806–2820.
[Borst et al. 2005] Borst, A., Flanagin, V. L., & Sompolinsky, H. (2005). Adaptation without
parameter change: Dynamic gain control in motion detection. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA, 102 (17), 6172–6176.
[Bressloff 2012] Bressloff, P. C. (2012). Spatiotemporal dynamics of continuum neural fields. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 45, 033001.

40

[Buice et al. 2010] Buice, M. A., Cowan, J. D., & Chow, C. C. (2010). Systematic fluctuation
expansion for neural network activity equations. Neural Computation, 22, 377–426.
[Buonomano and Maass 2009] Buonomano, D. V., & Maass, W. (2009). State-dependent computations: Spatiotemporal processing in cortical networks. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10,
113-125.
[Butts et al. 2011] Butts, D. A., Weng, C., Jin, J., Alonso, J.M., & Paninski, L. (2011). Temporal precision in the visual pathway through the interplay of excitation and stimulus-driven
suppression. Journal of Neuroscience, 31 (31), 11313–11327.
[Buzsáki 2006] Buzsáki, G. (2006). Rhythms of the Brain. New York: Oxford University Press.
[Buzsáki and Wang 2012] Buzsáki, G., & Wang, X. J. (2012). Mechanisms of gamma oscillations.
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 35, 203-225.
[Carandini and Heeger 2012] Carandini, M., & Heeger, D. J. (2012). Normalization as a canonical
neural computation. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 13, 51–62.
[Carandini et al. 1997] Carandini, M., Heeger, D. J., & Movshon, J. A. (1997). Linearity and
normalization in simple cells of the macaque primary visual cortex. Journal of Neuroscience,
17 (21), 8621–8644.
[Chichilnisky 2001] Chichilnisky, E. J. (2001). A simple white noise analysis of neuronal light
responses. Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 12, 199-213.
[Coombes and Laing 2009] Coombes, S., & Laing, C. (2009). Delays in activity-based neural networks. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 367, 1117–1129.
[David and Friston 2003] David, O., & Friston, K. J. (2003). A neural mass model for MEG/EEG:
Coupling and neuronal dynamics. NeuroImage, 20, 1743–1755.
[David et al. 2004] David, S. V., Vinje, W. E., & Gallant, J. L. (2004). Natural stimulus statistics
alter the receptive field structure of V1 neurons. Journal of Neuroscience, 24 (31), 6991–7006.
[Dayan and Abbott 2001] Dayan, P., & Abbott, L. F. (2001). Theoretical Neuroscience: Computational and Mathematical Modeling of Neural Systems. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
[Dong and Atick 1995] Dong, D. W., & Atick, J. J. (1995). Statistics of natural time-varying images. Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 6 (3), 345–358.
[Douglas et al. 1995] Douglas, R. J., Koch, C., Mahowald, M., Martin, K. A. C., & Suarez, H. H.
(1995). Recurrent excitation in neocortical circuits. Science, 269, 981-985.

41

[Enroth-Cugell and Shapley 1973] Enroth-Cugell, C., & Shapley, R. M. (1973). Adaptation and
dynamics of cat retinal ganglion cells. Journal of Physiology, 233, 271–309.
[Eytan et al. 2003] Eytan, D., Brenner, N., & Marom, S. (2003). Selective adaptation in networks
of cortical neurons. Journal of Neuroscience, 23 (28), 9349–9356.
[Feldman 2009] Feldman, D. E. (2009). Synaptic mechanisms for plasticity in neocortex. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 32, 33–55.
[Felsen et al. 2002] Felsen, G., Shen, Y. S., Yao, H., Spor, G., Li, C., & Dan, Y. (2002). Dynamic
modification of cortical orientation tuning mediated by recurrent connections. Neuron, 36,
945–954.
[Franklin et al. 1994] Franklin, G. F., Powell, J. D., & Emami-Naeini, A. (1994). Feedback Control
of Dynamic Systems. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 3rd edition.
[Freeman 1972a] Freeman, W. J. (1972a). Measurement of open-loop responses to electrical stimulation in olfactory bulb of cat. Journal of Neurophysiology, 35 (6), 745–761.
[Freeman 1972b] Freeman, W. J. (1972b). Measurement of oscillatory responses to electrical stimulation in olfactory bulb of cat. Journal of Neurophysiology, 35 (6), 762–779.
[Freeman 1972c] Freeman, W. J. (1972c). Linear analysis of the dynamics of neural masses. Annual
Review of Biophysics and Bioengineering, 1, 225–256.
[Freeman 1987] Freeman, W. J. (1987). Simulation of chaotic EEG patterns with a dynamic model
of the olfactory system. Biological Cybernetics, 56, 139–150.
[Gabbiani and Koch 1998] Gabbiani, F., & Koch, C. (1998). Principles of spike train analysis. In
C. Koch & I. Segev (Eds.), Methods in Neuronal Modeling: From Ions to Networks. Cambridge
MA: MIT Press.
[Gardiner 1985] Gardiner, C. W. (1985). Handbook of Stochastic Methods: For Physics, Chemistry
and the Natural Sciences. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
[Garvert and Gollisch 2013] Garvert, M. M., & Gollisch, T. (2013). Local and global contrast
adaptation in retinal ganglion cells. Neuron, 77, 915–928.
[Gaudry and Reinagel 2007] Gaudry, K. S., & Reinagel, P. (2007). Contrast adaptation in a nonadapting LGN model. Journal of Neurophysiology, 98, 1287–1296.
[Geisler 2008] Geisler, W. S. (2008). Visual perception and the statistical properties of natural
scenes. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 167–192.
[Gigante et al. 2007] Gigante, G., Del Giudice, P., & Mattia, M. (2007). Frequency-depdendent

42

response properties of adapting spiking neurons. Mathematical Biosciences, 207 (2), 336–351.
[Gutfreund et al. 1995] Gutfreund, Y., Yarom, Y., & Segev, I. (1995). Subthreshold oscillations
and resonant frequency in guinea-pig cortical neurons: physiology and modelling. Journal of
Physiology, 483 (3), 621–640.
[Heeger 1992] Heeger, D. J. (1992). Normalization of cell responses in cat striate cortex. Visual
Neuroscience, 9, 181–197.
[Hutcheon et al. 1996a] Hutcheon, B., Miura, R. M., & Puil, E. (1996). Subthreshold membrane
resonance in neocortical neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 76 (2), 683-697.
[Hutcheon et al. 1996b] Hutcheon, B., Miura, R. M., & Puil, E. (1996). Models of subthreshold
membrane resonance in neocortical neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 76 (2), 698-714.
[Hutcheon and Yarom 2000] Hutcheon, B., & Yarom, Y. (2000). Resonance, oscillation and the
intrinsic frequency preferences of neurons. Trends in Neurosciences, 23 (5), 216–222.
[Izhikevich 2007] Izhikevich, E. M. (2007). Dynamical Systems in Neuroscience: The Geometry of
Excitability and Bursting. Cambridge, Massachussets: MIT Press.
[Johnson et al. 1994] Johnson, N. L., Kotz, S., & Balakrishnan, N. (1994). Continuous Univariate
Distributions, 2nd ed.. New York: Wiley.
[Kaplan and Benardete 2001] Kaplan, E., & Benardete, E. (2001). The dynamics of primate retinal
ganglion cells. Progress in Brain Research, 134, 17–34.
[Kohn 2007] Kohn, A. (2007). Visual adaptation: Physiology, mechanisms, and functional benefits.
Journal of neurophysiology, 97, 3155–3164.
[Köndgen et al. 2008] Köndgen, H., Geisler, C., Fusi, S., Wang, X. J., Lüscher, H. R., & Giugliano,
M. (2008). The dynamical response properties of neocortical neurons to temporally modulated
noisy inputs in vitro. Cerebral Cortex, 18, 2086-2097.
[Ladenbauer et al. 2014] Ladenbauer, J., Augustin, M., & Obermayer, K. (2014). How adaptation
currents change threshold, gain, and variability of neuronal spiking. Journal of Neurophysiology, 111, 939-953.
[Lampl and Yarom 1997] Lampl, I., & Yarom, Y. (1997). Subthreshold oscillations and resonant
behavior: Two manifestations of the same mechanism. Neuroscience, 78 (2), 325-341.
[Ledoux and Brunel 2011] Ledoux, E., & Brunel, N. (2011). Dynamics of networks of excitatory
and inhibitory neurons in response to time-dependent inputs. Frontiers in Computational
Neuroscience, 5 (25), 1–17.

43

[Lochmann et al. 2012] Lochmann, T., Ernst, U. A., & Denève, S. (2012). Perceptual inference
predicts contextual modulations of sensory responses. Journal of neuroscience, 32 (12), 4179–
4195.
[Mante et al. 2005] Mante, V., Frazor, R. A., Bonin, V., Geisler, W. S., & Carandini, M. (2005).
Independence of luminance and contrast in natural scenes and in the early visual system.
Nature Neuroscience, 8 (12), 1690–1697.
[Mato and Samengo 2008] Mato, G., & Samengo, I. (2008). Type I and type II neuron models are
selectively driven by differential stimulus features. Neural Computation, 20, 2418–2440.
[Nagel and Doupe 2006] Nagel, K. I., & Doupe, A. J. (2006). Temporal processing and adaptation
in the songbird auditory forebrain. Neuron, 51, 845–859.
[Peron and Gabbiani 2009] Peron, S., & Gabbiani, F. (2009). Spike-frequency adaptation mediates
looming stimulus selectivity in a collision-detecting neuron. Nature Neuroscience, 12 (3), 318326.
[Prescott et al. 2008] Prescott, S. A., Ratté, S., De Koninck, Y., & Sejnowski, T. J. (2008). Pyramidal neurons switch from integrators in vitro to resonators under in vivo-like conditions.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 100, 3030–3042.
[Prescott and Sejnowski 2008] Prescott, S. A., & Sejnowski, T. J. (2008). Spike-rate coding and
spike-time coding are affected oppositely by different adaptation mechanisms. Journal of Neuroscience, 28 (50), 13649-13661.
[Press et al. 2007] Press, W. H., Teukolsky, S. A., Vetterling, W. T., & Flannery, B. P. (2007).
Numerical Recipes: The Art of Scientific Computing. New York: Cambridge University Press.
[Richardson et al. 2003] Richardson, M. J. E., Brunel, N., & Hakim, V. (2003). From subthreshold
to firing-rate resonance. Journal of Neurophysiology, 89, 2538-2554.
[Samengo et al. 2013] Samengo, I., Elijah, D., & Montemurro, M. A. (2013). Spike-train analysis.
In R. Quian Quiroga & S. Panzeri (Eds.), Principles of Neural Coding. Boca Raton: CRC
Press.
[Samengo and Gollisch 2013] Samengo, I., & Gollisch, T. (2013). Spike-triggered covariance: Geometric proof, symmetry properties, and extension beyond Gaussian stimuli. Journal Computational Neuroscience, 34, 137-161.
[Sanchez-Vives et al. 2000] Sanchez–Vives, M. V., Nowak, L. G., & McCormick, D. A. (2000).
Cellular mechanisms of long-lasting adaptation in visual cortical neurons in vitro. Journal of

44

Neuroscience, 20 (11), 4286-4299.
[Schwartz et al. 2007] Schwartz, O., Hsu, A., & Dayan, P. (2007). Space and time in visual context.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 522–535.
[Schwartz and Simoncelli 2001] Schwartz, O., & Simoncelli, E. P. (2001). Natural signal statistics
and sensory gain control. Nature Neuroscience, 4 (8), 819–825.
[Segev et al. 2006] Segev, R., Puchalla, J., & Berry II, M. J. (2006). Functional organization of
ganglion cells in the salamander retina. Journal of Neurophysiology, 95, 2277-2292.
[Sharpee et al. 2008] Sharpee, T. O., Miller, K. D., & Stryker, M. P. (2008). On the importance
of static nonlinearity in estimating spatiotemporal neural filters with natural stimuli. Journal
of Neurophysiology, 99, 2496–2509.
[Sharpee et al. 2011] Sharpee, T. O., Nagel, K. I., & Doupe, A. J. (2011). Two-dimensional adaptation in the auditory forebrain. Journal of Neurophysiology, 106, 1841–1861.
[Shu et al. 2003] Shu, Y., Hasenstaub, A., & McCormick, D. A. (2003). Turning on and off recurrent balanced cortical activity. Nature, 423, 288–293.
[Sjöström et al. 2008] Sjöström, P. J., Rancz, E. A., Roth, A., & Häusser, M. (2008). Dendritic
excitability and synaptic plasticity. Physiological Reviews, 88, 769–840.
[Theunissen et al. 2001] Theunissen, F. E., David, S. V., Singh, N. C., Hsu, A., Vinje, W. E.,
& Gallant, J. L. (2001). Estimating spatio-temporal receptive fields of auditory and visual
neurons from their responses to natural stimuli. Network: Computation in Neural Systems,
12, 289–316.
[Theunissen et al. 2000] Theunissen, F. E., Sen, K., & Doupe, A. J. (2000). Spectral-temporal
receptive fields of nonlinear auditory neurons obtained using natural sounds. Journal of Neuroscience, 20 (6), 2315–2331.
[Ulanovsky et al. 2003] Ulanovsky, N., Las, L., & Nelken, I. (2003). Processing of low-probability
sounds by cortical neurons. Nature Neuroscience, 6 (4), 391–398.
[Urdapilleta 2011] Urdapilleta, E. (2011). Onset of negative interspike interval correlations in
adapting neurons. Physical Review E, 84, 041904.
[Urdapilleta and Samengo 2009] Urdapilleta, E., & Samengo, I. (2009). The firing statistics of
Poisson neuron models driven by slow stimuli. Biological Cybernetics, 101, 265–277.
[Victor 1987] Victor, J. D. (1987). The dynamics of the cat retinal X cell centre. Journal of Physiology, 386, 219–246.

45

[Wang 1998] Wang, X. J. (1998). Calcium coding and adaptive temporal computation in cortical
pyramidal neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 79, 1549-1566.
[Wang 2010] Wang, X. J. (2010). Neurophysiological and computational principles of cortical
rhythms in cognition. Physiological Reviews, 90, 1195–1268.
[Wark et al. 2009] Wark, B., Fairhall, A., & Rieke, F. (2009). Timescales of inference in visual
adaptation. Neuron, 61, 750–761.
[Wark et al. 2007] Wark, B., Lundstrom, B. N., & Fairhall, A. (2007). Sensory adaptation. Current
Opinion in Neurobiology, 17, 423–429.
[Wilson and Cowan 1972] Wilson, R., & Cowan, J. D. (1972). Excitatory and inhibitory interactions in localized populations of model neurons. Biophysical Journal, 12, 1–24.
[Xu-Friedman and Regehr 2004] Xu-Friedman, M. A., & Regehr, W. G. (2004). Structural contributions to short-term synaptic plasticity. Physiological Reviews, 84, 69–85.

46

