Sequence determines degree of knottedness in a coarse-grained protein model
Thomas Wüst,1, ∗ Daniel Reith,2 and Peter Virnau2, †

arXiv:1503.04432v1 [cond-mat.soft] 15 Mar 2015

2

1
Scientific IT Services, ETH Zürich, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland
Institut für Physik, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, Staudinger Weg 7, 55099 Mainz, Germany

Knots are abundant in globular homopolymers but rare in globular proteins. To shed new light
on this long-standing conundrum, we study the influence of sequence on the formation of knots in
proteins under native conditions within the framework of the hydrophobic-polar (HP) lattice protein
model. By employing large scale Wang-Landau simulations combined with suitable Monte Carlo
trial moves we show that, even though knots are still abundant on average, sequence introduces
large variability in the degree of self-entanglements. Moreover, we are able to design sequences
which are either almost always or almost never knotted. Our findings serve as proof of concept
that the introduction of just one additional degree of freedom per monomer (in our case sequence)
facilitates evolution towards a protein universe in which knots are rare.
PACS numbers: 87.14.et, 87.10.Rt, 02.10.Kn, 87.15.Cc

Knots have fascinated physicists, mathematicians and
chemists for a long time. About 140 years ago, Kelvin
hypothesized that atoms consist of knots in the aether
[1]. At first sight, this beautiful idea is quite appealing
as knots are, in a sense, unique and just like atoms cannot change their type: Without breaking bonds a simple unknotted ring (a so-called unknot) cannot be, e. g.,
transformed into a trefoil knot (31 , with three minimal
crossings in a projection onto a plane). But as this aesthetically pleasing model was finally rejected most of the
initial enthusiasm among natural scientists faded, and
knot theory became truly a part of mathematical sciences. In recent decades, however, the field went through
a renaissance spurred by the discovery of knots in DNA
[2, 3] and proteins [4–6].
Knotted proteins in particular pose a number of challenges which are not overcome easily and question our
understanding of evolution and folding - especially when
we keep in mind that the function of a protein is determined by its three-dimensional structure. Only eleven
folds are known to be knotted (one of which has been created artificially) and most of these knots are simple trefoils [6]. There is also one protein knot with five crossings
which incidentally makes up 1-2 % of our brain protein
mass, (pdb-code:2etl) [7], and there is even a knot with
six crossings (pdb-code:3bjx) [8]. Indeed, it is difficult to
imagine how such proteins always fold into their knotted
native state [9]. A number of experiments have shown
that certain knotted proteins can refold to the knotted
state upon degradation [10] and that the process can be
accelerated by chaperons [11]. From a topological point
of view folding may not always be as difficult as it appears in the first place though, as even complicated knots
(e. g., the 61 knot mentioned above) can be generated
from an unknotted state by a single global movement of
a subchain as shown by coarse-grained folding simulations with Gõ-models [8].
The apparent rarity of knotted proteins is in stark contrast to the abundance of knots in globular polymers [12–

15]. Even though proteins are not archetypal homopolymers of the bead-spring type, this discrepancy is nevertheless remarkable. Indeed, there are several competing
(and even complementing) ideas why knots are rare. Taylor and Lin [16] pointed out that proteins should rather
be compared to a chain of “sticky beads” – a visualization of an old idea [17]: The protein essentially folds from
an unknotted swollen state and remains in an unknotted
(“crumbled”) globular state which results from the initial
collapse. From a structural point of view the emergence
of secondary structure also changes the length-scale at
which knots occur and likely decreases their probability
of occurrence. A first systematic study in this context
was undertaken by Lua and Grosberg [18]; they compared the scaling of subchains between real proteins and
compact lattice loops and found that, statistically, proteins tend to “fold back on themselves” at intermediate
scales up to 40 amino acids which may act as a strong
suppressor of knotting. To which extent this is a result
of evolution working towards the suppression of knots (as
they may be adverse to folding or function) is still largely
unknown.
In this letter we focus on how such mechanisms may
have evolved in the first place. Consider a statistical ensemble of (potentially highly knotted) globular proteins
made up of random amino acids with a certain degree of
variability. Natural selection has led to a “Protein Universe” [19, 20] significantly different from the statistical
average of our random amino acid chains - apparently
full of purpose and function and with little or no knots.
Within the framework of a minimalist protein model,
the hydrophobic-polar (HP) lattice model [21–23], we
show that a single additional degree of freedom per
monomer, namely sequence, may provide an evolutionary pathway which allows proteins to evolve towards a
“lattice protein universe” which is almost void of knots.
We are able to design sequences and identify patterns,
which suppress or enhance the formation of knots in our
lattice model. However, due to the coarse-grained nature

2
of the lattice, these sequences are typically not the same
as in real proteins which are considerably more complex.
In the HP model the protein is represented as a selfavoiding chain of beads (the amino acid residues) on a
regular lattice (here, simple cubic). There are only two
classes of amino acids, hydrophobic (H) and polar (P)
residues. Proteins as opposed to homopolymers have a
hydrophobic core resulting from the tendency of shielding the hydrophobic side-chains from the polar (aqueous) environment. In the HP model this hydrophobic
force is (implicitly) mimicked by an attractive interaction  that acts between non-bonded neighboring H
residues (HH = −1, HP,P P = 0). Thus, at low temperatures H residues tend to gather in the interior of
the globular state and form a hydrophobic core while P
residues are located at the outer shell. Despite its limitations [24, 25], the HP model has been widely used to
describe protein folding qualitatively and to shed new
light onto some of the most puzzling questions in protein
science (e. g., Levinthal and blind watchmaker paradox
[20], chaperonin-mediated protein folding [26], mutationinduced fold switching [27], to mention a few). Thus, it
also serves as a good starting point to address the questions of knottedness (a fundamental, topological property of proteins) at the level of abstraction of the present
study. While the result of a successful folding process
along a folding funnel is generally assumed to correspond
to a free energy minimum [20, 28], our simulations generate conformations in the close vicinity of this minimum,
which are subsequently analyzed with respect to knots
[29].
In order to address the problem from a statistical point
of view we need to sample a large ensemble of random
protein sequences under native conditions (i. e., groundstate like). To make sure that lattice effects do not bias
the statistics, long chains lengths (N > 100) are required
[30]. Together, these requirements pose a considerable
challenge on the computational procedure and, thus, a
similar systematic study has not been carried out for any
type of protein model so far. Even for the very simplified HP model, estimating the ground-state of a specific
HP sequence has only been possible up to around 100
monomers with state of the art techniques and computational power [31–33].
Recently, however, Wüst and Landau [34] proposed an
efficient Monte Carlo scheme which renders the sampling
of uncorrelated, low-energy (i. e., “native like”) structures feasible even for chain lengths up to N = 500.
The key of their procedure is the combination of WangLandau (WL) sampling [35] with two non-traditional
Monte Carlo trial moves, namely pull moves [36] and
bond-rebridging moves [37] which complement each other
extremely well. Their methodology has proven to be very
powerful in overcoming both the energetic and entropic
barriers typically encountered when sampling the complex free energy landscape of dense lattice polymers and

proteins. For details, see [34].
For the topological characterization of protein conformations we need to compute so called knot invariants
which are only unique for closed curves (mathematically,
knots are only well-defined for closed curves). Thus, for
linear polymers and proteins the notion of knottedness
needs to be extended to open chains by choosing a particular closure which connects the termini in a well-defined
manner (thus closing the loop) [38–40]. It is important
that the closure itself has no significant influence on the
calculation of the knot invariants. Even though some ambiguity remains, different closures typically yield similar
results from a statistical point of view [7, 14]. In this
paper we use a rather simple closure which was already
applied successfully for the determination of knots in real
proteins: We determine the center of mass of the polymer and draw two lines through the first and the last
bead. Outside the protein the two lines are connected
by a straight line. From this structure we compute the
Alexander polynomial (knot invariant). The numerical
implementation of the entire procedure is described in
great detail in [7, 41].
Fig. 1 shows the unknotting probabilities for 100 random HP sequences and a few designed HP sequences under native conditions. All chains consist of N = 500
monomers with 50 % H and 50 % P residues (except for
the homopolymer with 100 % H). This chain length was
chosen such that the homopolymer already exhibit a significant amount of knotting. We have also studied shorter
chains (down to N = 100) and obtained qualitatively
similar results even though the overall probability to find
a knot for shorter chain lengths is, of course, correspondingly smaller. In each simulation the sequence of a chain
is fixed and does not vary. Thus, we investigate an ensemble of sequences to show how the introduction of this
additional degree of freedom per monomer may affect an
evolutionary system.
It is worth noting that the HP model exhibits a rather
large ground-state degeneracy, which could be reduced
somewhat by adding additional interactions between H
and P monomers. The degeneracy of the ground-state
and the additional states in its vicinity allowed us, however, to determine a ”likelihood” of knottedness for a
given HP sequence as follows: First, a pre-WL run was
performed to obtain an estimate of its ground-state energy. Then, a subsequent production WL simulation,
restricted to the lowest 20 % of the entire energy range,
consecutively sampled conformations within 5 % of the
ground-state energy. (This threshold was set heuristically but other values < 10 % gave similar results). Between the sampling of any two conformations the random
walker must always perform a full round trip through
the specified energy range in order to reduce possible
structural correlations. Multiple, independent production WL simulations were run simultaneously to speed up
the sampling and further increase the structural diversity

3

FIG. 1. Left panel: Unknotting probabilities of 100 random
HP sequences (gray dots) and selected, designed sequences
(black dots with error bars) with N = 500 monomers under
native conditions; for the latter, representative snapshots of
native conformations are shown too. The designed sequences
are: (upper part, from left to right) seq. #1 (see Fig. 2);
PH(PHPHPHHPHPHHPPHP)31 HP;
self-avoiding walk
([HP]250 ); (P2 H2 )12 (P4 H4 )8 (P2 H2 )12 (P4 H4 )8 (P2 H2 )6 PH +
same sequence in reverse order; (lower part, from left to right)
homopolymer (H500 ); (H10 P10 )25 ; seq. #2 (see Fig. 2). Error
bars of unknotting probabilities for the individual sequences
have been estimated by a jackknife analysis (because of
similarity, only shown for the designed sequences). Note that
the distribution of points on the x-axis is arbitrary. The
mean unknotting probability of the 100 random sequences
is 0.460(5) (thin horizontal line). Right panel: Frequency
distribution of unknotting probabilities of the 100 random
HP sequences.

of sampled conformations. Eventually, 1000 conformations were randomly selected among the entire sample
and their knottedness analyzed. The unknotting probability, as displayed in Fig. 1, is then defined as the
number of unknotted conformations divided by 1000 [42].
The total sampling time for the whole study amounted
to more than three million CPU hours (AMD Opteron
6272, 2.1 GHz).
To interpret this probability we can imagine that a
HP lattice polymer with a given sequence represents a
large number of possible proteins with the same or a
very similar sequence of hydrophobic and polar amino
acids. Small changes in interactions (representing, e. g.,
amino acids with a slightly different degree of hydrophobicity) or slightly different sequences will lead to similar
knotting behavior. To check this assumption we have
performed additional simulations in which we randomly
mutated monomers (while keeping the ratio of H and P
residues constant) and have confirmed that the likelihood
of containing knots is indeed similar for mutation fractions up to 4 %. Hence, the unknotting probability can

designed seq. #1

random seq.

homopolymer

designed seq. #2

punknot = 0.897

punknot = 0.443

punknot = 0.311

punknot = 0.114

FIG. 2.
Snapshots of representative native structures.
From left to right: Designed HP sequence featuring almost no knots ([HHPP]125 ); random HP sequence with
a modest degree of knottedness; homopolymer (an exact
ground-state structure); highly knotted designed HP sequence
([P10 (HP)7 H10 (HP)8 ]5 [(PH)8 H10 (PH)7 P10 ]5 ). Upper structures: Monomer type coloring with hydrophobic monomers
and polar monomers shown in red and blue, respectively.
Lower structures: Monomer index coloring, with colors gradually changing from blue (monomers at the beginning of the sequence), over white (monomers in the center of the sequence)
to red (monomers at the end of the sequence). punknot denotes
the unknotting probability of the corresponding sequence.

be interpreted as an estimate for the unknotted fraction
of conformational space of proteins represented by this
sequence.
Fig. 1 clearly illustrates the strong dependence of the
degree of knottedness on the particular sequence. Even
for the random sequences the unknotting probability fluctuates between 0.3 and 0.6. Despite this large variability
in the tendency of individual sequences to form knots, on
average heteropolymers are almost as knotted as globular homopolymers. Most remarkably, however, is the fact
that it is possible to design HP sequences (notably, with
the same ratio of H and P) featuring almost no knots or
being almost fully knotted.
Fig. 2 shows snapshots of typical native state like structures for a random HP sequence, two designed HP sequences, and the homopolymer. Lattice homopolymers
close to the native state are cubic, but have little local order: Inside the cube the chain goes back and forth leading
to a rather large degree of knottedness. A typical random HP sequence already has a pronounced hydrophobic
core and tends to be a bit more ordered at the local scale:
Beads which are only a few monomers apart tend to occupy the same region in space. This leads to a small
decrease in the overall knotting probability, but by no
means explains the large discrepancy between proteins
and homopolymers. The two designed sequences, which
are extreme examples with respect to the variability in
the tendency to form knots, exhibit very pronounced and
distinct features. The pattern of alternating HH and PP

4
segments in the designed sequence #1, which is almost
always unknotted, induces a very regular, slab-shaped,
native structure with H monomers filling the interior of
the slab and P monomers occupying its border. This
compact structure results from a distinct local threading
of the sequence which disfavors entanglements. Alternating sequences of H4 P4 and H2 P2 segments have a similar
effect (cf. snapshot in Fig. 1), but structures tend to be ellipsoidal rather than flat. Another, almost trivial motive
are simple alternating H and P monomers, which form
a swollen coil structure akin to a self-avoiding walk (cf.
snapshot in Fig. 1). In contrast, a pattern which highly
favors the formation of knots is presented in the designed
sequence #2. It consists of long contiguous segments of H
and P residues separated by segments of repeating (HP)
motives. This sequence forces the protein to fold back
through extended loops in order to optimize the number
of non-bonded HH interactions and there is almost no
local order inside the hydrophobic core. Both features
foster entanglements and knots. Again, we need to stress
that there is no one-to-one correspondence between motives which enhance or suppress knots in lattice proteins
and real proteins, which are considerably more complex.
Indeed, for the latter such motives have not even been
identified.
Despite the variation in the degree of knottedness, all
native like structures of HP sequences exhibit a more or
less pronounced hydrophobic core. Thus, the formation
of a hydrophobic core in itself cannot be considered as a
precursor of suppression of knots in proteins. However,
the local structure (order) among residues within a sequence strongly influences knotting as manifested by the
index coloring scheme of corresponding structures (see
lower row of snapshots in Fig. 2). Whereas in the designed sequence #1 nearby monomers are strongly localized and form a precursor of secondary structure, in
the designed sequence #2 they tend to spread out far
and in uncorrelated directions. In real proteins individual elements of secondary structure have the tendency
to fold back onto themselves which, in turn, introduces
locality and suppresses knots [18]. It is remarkable that
the HP sequences studied here show the same relationship between knottedness and local structure despite the
simplicity of the underlying protein model.
Finally, we compare the average knotting probability
of random hetero- and homopolymers as a function of
solvent quality (i. e., temperature in our model) ranging
from ground-state like structures, in which knots tend to
spread over the whole structure, to the denatured case,
in which they are weakly localized (not shown here). To
make a fair comparison, we plot the probability of observing an unknotted structure (or a trefoil knot) as a
function of the radius of gyration. To be able to define
an average knotting probability for random heteropolymers, we have again averaged over our 100 random HP
sequences; Metropolis Monte Carlo sampling (using the

FIG. 3.
Average probabilities of finding unknots (upper
curves) and trefoils (lower curves), respectively, in homopolymers (100 % H) and random heteropolymers (50 % H, 50 % P)
with N = 500
pas a function of the root mean squared radius
of gyration, hRg2 i. The red symbols denote corresponding
probabilities under native condition (ground-state like). Error bars have been calculated by averaging over independent
runs; they do not exceed symbol size and are, thus, not shown.

same move sets as described above) has been employed
to obtain correctly weighted estimates at finite temperatures. Fig. 3 shows that the probability of finding unknots or trefoil knots in heteropolymers (averaged over
random sequences) is quite similar to the one for homopolymers at comparable densities. However, at high
densities (low temperatures) the unknotting probability
of heteropolymers clearly deviates from the decreasing
trend observed in homopolymers.
In this study we have been able to demonstrate quantitatively that sequence strongly influences (or even determines) the degree of knottedness under native conditions. Within the framework of the minimalist HP protein model and large scale Monte Carlo simulations, we
have determined probabilities of knotting for random HP
sequences as well as homopolymers with 500 residues.
The introduction of sequence leads to a large variability
in the self-entanglements of heteropolymers even though
on average they are almost as knotted as globular homopolymers of comparable density. We have also been
able to design sequences which fold into either highly
knotted or almost knot-less structures. While we demonstrate that a variation of sequence leads to a variation of
self-entanglements and knots it is likely that variability in
other interactions may have similar effects. This shows in
principle that the introduction of a single additional degree of freedom per monomer, in our case sequence, may
already suffice to facilitate evolution towards a largely
unknotted “Protein Universe”. In a sense, proteins are

5
not an equilibrium ensemble of (knotted) random heteropolymers and should as such not be compared to an
equivalent ensemble of homopolymers, but instead live in
a very specific conformational subspace in which knots
are rare.
We thank D. Bölinger and H.-P. Hsu for stimulating
discussions. This work received partial financial support
from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB 625A17).

∗
†

[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]

[20]

twuest@ethz.ch
virnau@uni-mainz.de
W. Thomson, P. Roy. Soc. Edinb. VI, 94 (1867).
L. F. Liu, R. E. Depew, and J. C. Wang, J. Mol. Biol.
106, 439 (1976).
J. Arsuaga, M. Vázquez, S. Trigueros, D. W. Sumners,
and J. Roca, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 5373 (2002).
M. L. Mansfield, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 1, 213 (1994).
W. R. Taylor, Nature 406, 916 (2000).
P. Virnau, A. Mallam, and S. Jackson, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 23, 033101 (2011).
P. Virnau, L. A. Mirny, and M. Kardar, PLoS Comput.
Biol. 2, e122 (2006).
D. Bölinger, J. I. Sulkowska, H.-P. Hsu, L. A. Mirny,
M. Kardar, J. N. Onuchic, and P. Virnau, PLoS Comput.
Biol. 6, e1000731 (2010).
J. I. Sulkowska, P. Sulkowski, and J. Onuchic, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 3119 (2009).
A. L. Mallam and S. E. Jackson, J. Mol. Biol. 346, 1409
(2005).
A. L. Mallam and S. E. Jackson, Nat. Chem. Biol. 8, 147
(2012).
M. L. Mansfield, Macromolecules 27, 5924 (1994).
R. Lua, A. L. Borovinskiy, and A. Y. Grosberg, Polymer
45, 717 (2004).
P. Virnau, Y. Kantor, and M. Kardar, J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 127, 15102 (2005).
C. Micheletti, D. Marenduzzo, and E. Orlandini, Phys.
Rep. 504, 1 (2011).
W. R. Taylor and K. Lin, Nature 421, 25 (2003).
A. Y. Grosberg, S. K. Nechaev, and E. I. Shakhnovich,
J. Phys. 49, 2095 (1988).
R. C. Lua and A. Y. Grosberg, PLoS Comput. Biol. 2,
e45 (2006).
R. Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker: Why the Evidence
of Evolution Reveals a Universe without Design (Norton,
New York, 1996).
K. A. Dill, Protein Sci. 8, 1166 (1999).

[21] K. A. Dill, Biochemistry 24, 1501 (1985).
[22] K. F. Lau and K. A. Dill, Macromolecules 22, 3986
(1989).
[23] K. A. Dill, S. Bromberg, K. Yue, K. M. Fiebig, D. P.
Yee, P. D. Thomas, and H. S. Chan, Protein Sci. 4, 561
(1995).
[24] H. S. Chan, Proteins 40, 543 (2000).
[25] P. De Los Rios and G. Caldarelli, Phys. Rev. E 62, 8449
(2000).
[26] H. S. Chan and K. A. Dill, Proteins 24, 345 (1996).
[27] C. Holzgräfe, A. Irbäck, and C. Troein, J. Chem. Phys.
135, 195101 (2011).
[28] J. D. Bryngelson, J. N. Onuchic, N. D. Socci, and P. G.
Wolynes, Proteins 21, 167 (1995).
[29] Of course, the paradigm that ground-states correspond
to free energy minima of folding trajectories implicitly
assumes that folding does not get stuck in kinetic traps
which lead to topologically frustrated (unknotted) states.
The investigation of this interesting and challenging topic
is, however, beyond the scope of this paper.
[30] D. Bölinger, Topologische Untersuchungen von Proteinen, Homo- und Heteropolymeren, Master’s thesis, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany (2008).
[31] H.-P. Hsu, V. Mehra, W. Nadler, and P. Grassberger,
Phys. Rev. E 68, 021113 (2003); J. Chem. Phys. 118,
444 (2003).
[32] R. Backofen and S. Will, Constraints 11, 5 (2006).
[33] J. Zhang, S. C. Kou, and J. S. Liu, J. Chem. Phys. 126,
225101 (2007).
[34] T. Wüst and D. P. Landau, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 178101
(2009); J. Chem. Phys. 137, 064903 (2012).
[35] F. Wang and D. P. Landau, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2050
(2001); Phys. Rev. E 64, 056101 (2001).
[36] N. Lesh, M. Mitzenmacher, and S. Whitesides, in Proceedings of the 7th Annual International Conference on
Research in Computational Molecular Biology (2003) p.
188.
[37] J. M. Deutsch, J. Chem. Phys. 106, 8849 (1997).
[38] K. Millett, A. Dobay, and A. Stasiak, Macromolecules
38, 601 (2005).
[39] L. Tubiana, E. Orlandini, and C. Micheletti, Prog.
Theor. Phys. Suppl. 191, 192 (2011).
[40] K. C. Millett, E. J. Rawdon, A. Stasiak, and J. I.
Sulkowska, Biochem. Soc. Trans. 41, 533 (2013).
[41] P. Virnau, Phys. Procedia 6, 117 (2010).
[42] Note that for an estimate of the free energy minimum
knottedness, i. e., at zero temperature, an accurate determination of the density of states is irrelevant and WL
sampling has merely been used as a powerful Monte Carlo
driver to sample statistically uncorrelated, low-energy
conformations.

