Quantitative study of crossregulation, noise and synchronization between microRNA
targets in single cells
Carla Bosia,1, ∗ Francesco Sgrò,2, ∗ Laura Conti,3 Carlo Baldassi,1, 2 Federica Cavallo,3
Ferdinando Di Cunto,3 Emilia Turco,3 Andrea Pagnani,1, 2, † and Riccardo Zecchina1, 2, †
1

arXiv:1503.06696v1 [q-bio.MN] 23 Mar 2015

2

Human Genetics Foundation, Torino, Italy
Department of Applied Science and Technology, Politecnico di Torino, Italy
3
Molecular Biotechnology Center, University of Torino, Italy
(Dated: March 24, 2015)

Recent studies reported complex post-transcriptional interplay among targets of a common pool of
microRNAs, a class of small non-coding downregulators of gene expression. Behaving as microRNAsponges, distinct RNA species may compete for binding to microRNAs and coregulate each other
in a dose-dependent manner. Although previous studies in cell populations showed competition in
vitro, the detailed dynamical aspects of this process, most importantly in physiological conditions,
remains unclear. We address this point by monitoring protein expression of two targets of a common
miRNA with quantitative single-cell measurements. In agreement with a detailed stochastic model
of molecular titration, we observed that: (i) crosstalk between targets is possible only in particular
stoichiometric conditions, (ii) a trade-off on the number of microRNA regulatory elements may
induce the coexistence of two distinct cell populations, (iii) strong inter-targets correlations can be
observed. This phenomenology is compatible with a small amount of mRNA target molecules per
cell of the order of 10 − 102 .

I.

INTRODUCTION

Modern technologies to explore the transcriptome allow the identification of many non-coding transcripts whose
functions are only partially known and that may control gene expression at different levels. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
are small post-transcriptional repressors of gene expression [1] belonging to this class of molecules. Known to play
crucial roles in several biological processes, miRNAs often show altered expression profiles in human diseases [2–
5]. It is commonly believed that miRNAs play central roles in conferring robustness to biological processes against
environmental fluctuations [6–9]. The common assumption that one miRNA molecule can at one time at most interact
with one target mRNA [10] suggests a whole new layer of post-transcriptional cross-regulation named the “Competing
Endogenous RNA (ceRNA) effect” [11]. This theory proposes that the amount of a gene product may be tuned by
varying the concentration of another gene sharing with it the same miRNAs. Qualitative experiments based on
observing induced variations in transcripts indeed show that endogenous transcripts could be coupled due to the
interaction with a common pool of miRNAs [12–15]. The discovery that miRNA-target interaction is compatible with
a titration mechanism [16] supports the emergence of hypersensitivity regions [17, 18] where miRNA targets should
be highly correlated and their relative stoichiometry tightly controlled [19, 20]. However, the relevance of the ceRNA
effect is still largely debated: while absolute quantification experiments in primary hepatocytes and liver cells suggests
that the ceRNA effect is unlikely to significantly affect gene expression and metabolism [21], differential susceptibility
based on endogenous miRNA/target pool ratios provided a physiological context for ceRNA competition in vivo [22].
Crosstalk among mRNAs may thus be regulated depending on miRNA and mRNA relative abundances and may
exhibit a complex phenomenology in terms of target correlation and relative fluctuation profiles [19].
Here, we experimentally explore these features addressing the relevance of the relative mRNA-miRNA stoichiometric
composition. Through the design of two bidirectional plasmids, each with a two-color fluorescent reporter system,
we simultaneously tracked gene expression in the presence and absence of miRNA regulatory elements (MRE). A
stochastic gene interaction model [19] predicts the parameter region in which the targets are most correlated. Using
flow cytometry measurements of cotransfected mammalian cells allowed us to quantify the crosstalk and correlations
predicted by the model. We found that, besides the well-known “sponge effect” a given transfected target can exert
on the others [23], there is an optimal range of parameters (in terms of effective transcription rates and miRNA
interaction strengths) for which crosstalk is possible among ceRNAs. We show that such regulation arises both at the
level of mean protein concentrations and noise and that it is compatible with low numbers of mRNA molecules. It
is worth noting that an absolute quantification of exogenous transcripts reveals that in our experiments the crosstalk

∗
†

Joint First Authors
Joint Last Authors

2
is highest in a physiological regime of order 10 to 102 molecules per cell [24, 25]. Moreover, there is a non-trivial
competition mechanism on the number of available MRE such that synchronization can arise together with low noise.
Interestingly, in agreement with the model, the same mechanism may induce bimodal population distributions with
distinct high and low expression states of the targets.

II.

STOCHASTIC TITRATION MODEL FOR CROSSTALK

We suggest a stochastic model for the miRNA-mediated target crosstalk that provides insight into target crossregulation [16, 19, 26] (see Figure 1a). Through the formulation of a chemical master equation (see Material and
Methods and Supplementary Information (SI) for details on the model), the model describes the amount of two free
mRNAs r1 and r2 which are both targets of the same miRNA s, as a function of their constitutive expression r0 (i.e.
the value of r1 or r2 when g1 or g2 tend to 0). r1 and r2 can be translated into proteins (p1 and p2 respectively). The
two candidate ceRNAs r1 and r2 , and thus p1 and p2 , are coupled through their common miRNA s which can bind
both of them and then be released with or without degradation of r1 or r2 (miRNA turnover). The pool of available
mature miRNAs is then the limiting factor in a system of potentially interacting targets. A Gaussian approximation
of the master equation allows us to evaluate mean values and to quantify noise (coefficient of variation CVx = σpx /px )
for p1 , p2 and p0 (the protein translated from r0 ) as well as the Pearson correlation coefficient between p1 and p2 (i.e.
(hp1 p2 i − hp1 ihp2 i)/σp1 σp2 ), see Figures 1c-e respectively. Two parameters (g1 and g2 ) determine qualitatively the
shapes of the functions generated by the model. These parameters are proportional to the miRNA-mRNA association
rate. When one of them tends to zero (say g2 ) then its corresponding target (r2 ) is not interacting with the miRNA,
while the other (r1 ) behaves as described by Mukherji and coworkers [16]: as g1 increases, r1 (and then p1 ) is repressed
until a threshold level of r0 is exceeded (Figure 1c). The threshold established by miRNA regulation and the increase
of g1 sharpens the transition between threshold and escape regimes. From the point of view of r1 , g2 (proportional
to the association constant of the second target) governs the concentration of free miRNA available within the cell.
Increasing g2 (keeping all other parameters fixed) pushes the threshold to lower values of expression (lower r0 ) and
globally increases r1 (and p1 ): r2 is behaving as a sponge for the miRNA, and increasing g2 is equivalent to sponge
away the miRNA available to target r1 . When all the miRNA has been sponged away by r2 (high value of g2 ), then
r1 is not regulated anymore and its mean value is simply kr1 /gr1 (with kr1 and gr1 transcription and degradation
rates of r1 respectively). In an intermediate situation in which miRNA is not completely sponged away by one of
the targets, finely-tuned crosstalk between targets is possible. The mathematical model thus suggests experiments to
perform in order to test this hypothesis and to quantify the crosstalk, modulated by g1 , g2 and the amount of miRNA
present in the cell.

III.

FLOW CYTOMETRY REVEALS CROSS REGULATION

To investigate the predicted miRNA-mediated crosstalk in single mammalian cells, we used two different twocolor fluorescent reporters, as sketched in Figure 1b. Both constructs consist of bidirectional promoters driving two
genes whose products are fluorescent proteins. The first construct expresses the fluorescent proteins mCherry and
enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (eYFP) [16], while the second contruct expresses mCerulean and mKOrange. The
3’untranslated region (UTR) of both mCherry and mCerulean was engineered to contain a fixed number N of MRE
for miR-20a (with N = 0, 1, 4, 7), a miRNA endogenously expressed by HEK 293 cell line [27, 28]. mCherry and
mCerulean are therefore proxies for the two targets in the model. The 3’UTRs of eYFP and mKOrange were left
unchanged in order to measure the transcriptional activity of the reporters in single cells. The constructs thus allow
simultaneous monitoring of protein levels with (mCherry and mCerulean) and without (eYFP and mKOrange) miRNA
regulation. In the case of single construct transfections, when individual cells are sorted according to their eYFP or
mKOrange levels, we observed the threshold effect documented for HeLa cells by Mukherji and coworkers [16]. Briefly,
when no MRE are present, mCherry (mCerulean) and eYFP (mKOrange) levels of expression are proportional. In
cells with one or more miR-20a sites on mCherry (mCerulean), the mCherry (mCerulean) level does not increase
until a threshold level of eYFP (mKOrange) is exceeded (see Figure 5). This indicates that the protein production
is highly repressed below the threshold established by miRNA regulation and responds sensitively to target mRNA
input close to it. Cotransfections of both constructs with different MRE numbers and measurements of fluorescence
with flow cytometer enabled the quantification of crosstalk between mCherry and mCerulean as a function of N . We
expect both mCherry and mCerulean signals to be proportional to p1 and p2 respectively, while eYFP (mKOrange) is
proportional to p0 . To quantitatively capture the crosstalk, we measured the joint distributions of mCherry (p1 ) and
eYFP (p0 ) levels given mCerulean (p2 ) in single cells positive to the fluorophores. We then binned the data according
to their eYFP levels and calculated the mCherry and mCerulean mean levels as well as standard deviations in each

3
eYFP bin. Transient cotransfections allowed us to explore the space of parameters and manage 105 − 106 cells. Our
analysis has been restricted to cells whose fluorescence was 95% confidence above cellular autofluorescence and is
independent of the transfection method.

IV.

PHENOMENOLOGY OF CROSSTALK

To quantify the crosstalk by modulating g1 and g2 , we performed cotransfections with different MRE on mCherry
and mCerulean (N = 1, 4, 7) and compared them with the case N = 0. We thus obtained 16 combinations of different
cotransfections which allowed us to follow the expression of one target (mCherry) while tuning the amount of free
miRNA via the second target (mCerulean). Our results are independent of the method of transfections as similar
results were obtained by transfecting cells with lipofectamine-based (data reported in Figures 2-5,7,8) or CaCl2 -based
protocols (Figure 6). As predicted by the model (Figure 1c), it is possible to identify two different effects: (i) the
appearence of a threshold on mCherry while increasing the number N of MRE on its 3’UTR and keeping N = 0
on mCerulean (Figure 2a and Figure 6a) and (ii) a global increase of mCherry mean fluorescence and a shift in the
threshold while increasing N on mCerulean (Figure 2b and Figure 6b). mCherry thus tends to the unregulated case
(mCherry linearly proportional to eYFP) while increasing the number of MRE on mCerulean. This result is well
summarized by the fold repression F between regulated and unregulated mCherry mean fluorescence (Figure 2c-e).
F is the ratio between the value of mCherry in the absence of miR-20a MRE and its value in the presence of MRE for
each eYFP bin and for each N on mCerulean. Increasing the number of MRE on mCherry increases its repression,
and F is highest when mCerulean has N = 0 MRE while tends to one increasing eYFP or the number of MRE on
mCerulean. In particular, in proximity to the threshold, F shows a maximum whose value depends both on mCherry
and mCerulean MRE. F could be indirectly considered as a measure of crosstalk between the two targets. Crosstalk
is maximal for intermediate levels of repression, when mCerulean has between 1 and 4 MRE.

V.

LOCAL INCREASE OF CELL-TO-CELL VARIABILITY: BIMODALITY

It is well known that the intrinsic noise of an unregulated gene product decreases when its expression level increases
[29]. The effect of miRNA regulation could introduce an extra source of noise (extrinsic noise). Our mathematical
model predicts that, at fixed levels of expression, the total noise (intrinsic plus extrinsic) of a miRNA-regulated
gene product should increase upon enhancing miRNA-target interaction strength (see Figure 1d) with respect to the
unregulated case. In particular the model predicts the onset of a local maximum in the noise profile of a miRNA
target versus its level of constitutive expression for high miRNA-target interaction strength. Experimentally, we could
identify two competing effects: (i) upon increasing N on mCherry (i.e. g1 ) the total noise of mCherry, quantified by
its CV, globally increases as a function of eYFP (Figure 3a and Figure 6c) and (ii) upon increasing N on mCerulean
(i.e. g2 ) the total noise of mCherry globally decreases (Figure 3b and Figure 6d). The overall result is that there is an
optimal range of MRE on the “sponge” (mCerulean) for which a given miRNA-regulated target (mCherry) can show
lower noise with respect to a target with lower N (compare Figures 3a and 3b). For high levels of repression (high N
on mCherry and low N on mCerulean), mCherry CV eventually shows a local maximum in proximity to the threshold
(Figure 6c,d). A low level of noise indicates unimodal distributions while an increase in noise stands for an increased
cell-to-cell variability and may indicate bimodal population distributions with distinct high and low expression states
[30]. We then checked if this was the case and found that bimodality on mCherry is present near the threshold in case
of high miRNA-target interaction (N = 4, 7 on mCherry and N = 0, 1 on mCerulean), see histograms in Figure 3 and
Figure 7. In particular, for N = 7 on mCherry and N = 0 on mCerulean two well discernible phenotypes appear.
This suggests the binary response is directly linked to the variability in the level of repression the miRNA exerts on
the target. The emergence of bimodality in the proximity of the miRNA-target threshold has been recently suggested
[19].

VI.

SHIFT OF THE OPTIMAL CROSSTALK REGION

In order to assess the crosstalk dependence on the availability of miRNA we transfected 100nM of pre-miR for
miR-20a together with the bidirectional constructs. In our model this is equivalent to increasing the basal miRNA
transcription rate ks . We analyzed the cases with N = 4 for mCherry and N = 0, 1, 4, 7 for mCerulean. In agreement
with the model predictions and with previous work [16], we observed a shift of the threshold towards higher eYFP
levels (Figure 4a) together with a global increase in the fold-repression (Figure 4b) and a resulting shift of the optimal
crosstalk region towards a higher number of MRE. We then quantified the absolute amount of exogenous targets in

4
three subpopulations of cells, sorted according to their eYFP intensity (low, medium and high) both in the presence
and absence of pre-miR for the case with N = 4 on mCherry and N = 1 on mCerulean (Figure 4c). We found that
mCherry and mCerulean ranged from 40 to 400 and from 10 to 250 molecules per cell, respectively, without pre-miR
and both from 10 to about 100 molecules in the presence of pre-miR. In particular, the amount of exogenous targets
for an intermediate level of eYFP is in quantitative agreement to what previously found [16]. These values show that
even if the phenomenology so far described has been obtained through transient cotransfection, the numbers involved
could be compatible with physiological values [22].

VII.

POTENTIAL SYNCHRONIZATION IN PERMISSIVE ENVIRONMENT

Our model predicts a maximum in the correlation between two miRNA targets near the threshold (see Figure 1e).
We investigated the strength of this prediction distinguishing between correlations dependent on the experimental
setting (mainly transient cotransfections and partial sharing of regulatory elements in the promoter) and correlations
induced by the competition for miRNA binding, which can potentially lead to synchronized fluctuations. We thus
defined the ratio of the Pearson correlation coefficients (ratio of Pearson coefficient between mCherry and mCerulean
possessing different MRE to the same measure in the absence of MRE). We measured this ratio for eYFP below,
around and above the threshold (Figure 8a-c respectively), and observed that the competition for miRNA binding
introduces correlations ranging from 4 to 12 fold higher than the basal level of correlation. Our results show that it is
possible to have weakly or highly correlated targets for precise transcriptional programs. The regime of synchronized
fluctuations is determined by the number of MRE on both the targets and by their relative stoichiometry.

VIII.

DISCUSSION

Our results on miRNA-mediated target cross-regulation offer a detailed feature map to characterize the “ceRNA
effect” (Figure 9). Besides the general consistency with previous population-based qualitative results [15], and the
agreement with a titration-based mechanism of miRNA-target interaction [16, 19, 31], the stochastic analysis allowed
us to characterize curve trends for fluctuations and correlations of two miRNA targets as function of their expression
level. The detailed picture points out that crosstalk between targets is quantitatively relevant only in conditions
of intermediate miRNA repression and small amounts of target molecules (order 10 − 102 ), in agreement with a
cell population-based study by Bosson and coworkers [22]. Since in this situation two or more targets may be
highly cross-correlated, our result suggests that optimal levels of expression of genes and of miRNAs with respect
to maximizing crosstalk may control relative fluctuations of targets that have to interact or bind in complexes with
a precise stoichiometry [20]. On the other hand, we found that strong miRNA repression together with low target
crosstalk is sufficient to induce bimodality, i.e. the appearance of two distinct population of cells with low and high
target expression states. This result suggests that the system could be locked in one of these two states both changing
the miRNA-target interaction strength through the expression of other competitors or through regulatory links. Such
titrative regulatory mechanisms of miRNAs may easily switch ‘on’ or ‘off’ whole gene networks depending on miRNAs
and targets relative stoichiometry. It is thus tempting to speculate that gene expression thresholding could be an
important feature of cell fate decisions.
Although our experimental setting is “artificial”, i.e. induced by transient cotransfections of engeneered plasmids,
it provides a deep exploration of the parameter space. A physiological system of miRNAs and targets could indeed
experience only a small subset of the features so far described, rendering the characterization of crosstalk difficult.
The map of properties we ended up with (Figure 9) links quantitative measurements (effective miRNA repression
and number of mRNA molecules) and model parameters (effective miRNA-target binding and transcription rates),
suggesting the possibility to move around in phenotype space tuning quantities as the accessibility of binding sites
or the affinity between miRNA and targets. In particular, it suggests the class of molecules we should look at when
investigating for crosstalk. Molecular species physiologically present in the order of 10 − 102 molecules per cell, such
as transcription factors or signalling molecules [25, 32], are more likely to be affected by crossregulation since they are
potentially closer to the threshold than highly expressed genes. We think that this findings would pave the way for
signifincant progress in the understanding of pathological mechanisms underlying many diseases based on miRNAtarget crosstalk dysregulation and therefore potentially lead to new therapeutic options.
During the submission process of this paper we became aware of ref.[33] which contains results that partially overlap
with a subset of ours.

5

FIG. 1. Model and predictions (a) Sketch of the minimal model of miRNA-target interactions. One miRNA s and two
targets r1 and r2 are independently transcribed with rates ks , kr1 and kr2 , respectively. Each transcript can then degrade with
rate gs , gr1 and gr2 , respectively. Each miRNA s can interact with targets r1 or r2 with an effective binding rates g1 or g2 . α
measures the probability of miRNA recycling. If not bound to a miRNA, targets r1 and r2 can be translated into proteins p1
and p2 respectively, which could then degrade with rates gp1 and gp2 . (b) Schematic representation of the two bidirectional
plasmids coding for the four fluorophores. (c-e) Predictions from the stochastic model of interactions sketched in (a) in terms
of mean amount of p1 free molecules (c), p1 coefficient of variation CVp1 (d) and pearson correlation coefficient between p1
and p2 (e) as a function of p0 , which is the constitutive value of p1 when g1 tends to 0. The colored arrows in (c) and (d)
show the directions in which the curves move when tuning the miRNA-target interaction strengths g1 and g2 and the miRNA
transcription rate ks . Grey curves in (c,d) are predictions for p1 and CVp1 when g1 tends to 0.

IX.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

A detailed description of experimental procedures used in this study (including reporter plasmid construction, cell
transfection, FACS measurement, cell sorting, qTR-PCR, modelling and data analysis procedures) is available in SI.

AUTHORS CONTRIBUTION

Carla Bosia (CB1), AP and RZ derived the stochastic model; CB1, FDC, ET, AP and RZ designed experiments;
CB1, Carlo Baldassi (CB2) and AP analyzed data; CB1, FS, LC, FC and ET performed experiments; CB1, FS, LC,
FDC, AP and RZ wrote the manuscript.

CORRESPONDING AUTHOR

Carla Bosia: carla.bosia@hugef-torino.org
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

CB2 and RZ aknowledge the European Research Council for grant n. 267915. The authors would like to thank E.
Fraenkel, A. Weisse and M. Osella for carefully reading the draft and U. Ala, F. Balzac, M. Caselle, P.P. Pandolfi, P.
Provero, M. Osella and A. Riba for helpful discussions.

6

FIG. 2. Threshold and fold-repression (a-b) mCherry mean fluorescence is plotted against eYFP. Shadowed strips around
data are the error bars on the biological replicates. A threshold emerges when increasing mCherry MRE (a) while it disappears
when increasing mCerulean MRE (b). The intensity of crosstalk (measured in terms of fold-repression F with respect to the
unregulated fluorophores) depends on the particular combination of MRE on both exogenous targets (c-e). Purple and cyan
circles in legends represent the plasmids coding for the mCherry and mCerulean fluorophores.

7

FIG. 3. Local increase of cell-to-cell variability (a-b) mCherry total noise quantified by its coefficient of variation
(CV) is plotted against eYFP. Shadowed strips around data are the error bars on the biological replicates. The CV globally
increases when increasing the number of mCherry MRE (a) while decreases when increasing mCerulean MRE number (b). The
competition of these two “strengths has the result of lowering the noise even if the expected repression from the rough number of
mCherry MRE is high. Histograms in the lower panels show mCherry data distributions for the shaded regions in (a-b). A strong
miRNA target repression strength increases cell-to-cell variability with the eventual appearance of different phenotypes (bimodal
distributions). Purple and cyan circles in legends represent the plasmids coding for mCherry and mCerulean fluorophores,
respectively.

8

FIG. 4. Shift of the optimal crosstalk region (a) According to the model, increasing the pool of available miRNAs
(transfecting pre-miRNAs) shifts the threshold to higher constitutive expression values. Shadowed strips around data are the
error bars on the biological replicates. (b) Different combinations of miR-20a MREs lead to different levels of fold repression
and crosstalk. Purple and cyan circles in legends represent the plasmids coding for mCherry and mCerulean fluorophores,
respectively. Triangles and circles in the plot are data from transfections with pre-miR20a and negative control respectively.
(c) The mean amount of mRNA exogenous molecules per cell for three different intervals of eYFP basal expression is low enough
to be comparable with physiological values. Triangles and circles show quantification in presence and absence of pre-miR-20a
respectively.

9
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
A.

Reporter plasmid construction

The set of fluorescent reporters coding for eYFP and mCherry was obtained from Addgene (#31463, #31464, #31465, #31466,
deposited by Phil Sharp Lab) and are the same used in [16]. The second set of fluorescent reporters were cloned into
pBI-CMV1 (Clontech). NLS sequence (ATGGGCCCTAAAAAGAAGCGTAAAGTC) was appended to mCeruleanN1 (Addgene #27795, deposited by Steven Vogel Lab [34]) by PCR and then inserted into the main vector with ClaI
and BamHI. mKOrange-NLS (Addgene #37346, deposited by Connie Cepko Lab [35]) was cloned into the vector
using EcoRI blunt and BamHI. miR-20a regulatory elements were appended to the 3’UTR of mCerulean with the
same strategy applied in [16]

B.

Transient transfections

We performed two different methods of transfection, with Lipofectamine (data in Figures 2-4 in the main text)
and with CaCl2 (data in Figures 1S-3S in SI). Lipofectamine transfection method: 293-HEK TeT-Off cells (Clontech)
below passage 6 were plated in G418 (Gibco) 200µg/ml media in 6-well dishes the day before transfection. Reporter
plasmids were transfected with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s specifications. miR-20a
pre and negative control (Ambion) were cotransfected at the indicated concentrations. Media was changed 24 h after
transfection. Assays were performed 48 h after transfection. CaCl2 transfection method: 293-HEK TeT-Off cells
(Clontech) below passage 6 were plated in 100 × 20 mm (Falcon BD) dishes the day before transfection. The cells
were transfected using CaCl2 protocols [36]. Media was changed 24 h after transfection. Assays were performed 48 h
after transfection.

C.

Flow cytometry

Cells were harvested 48 h after transfection (cell confluency ∼ 90%) and run on a CyanADP (Beckman Coulter)
flow cytometer. For each sample, at least 0.5 · 106 cells were acquired. The raw FACS data were analyzed with
Summit3.1 software (Beckman Coulter) to gate cells according to their forward and side scatter profiles and to define
the intensity of fluorescent signals emitted by the four reporters in each cell. These values were normalized for
background fluorescence by subtracting the mean plus two standard deviation of the fluorescent signal measured in
the unstransfected control cells. Data were then binned according to their eYFP values.

D.

Fluorescence-activated cell sorting

Cells were transfected with theN = 4 eYFP-mCherry andN = 1 mkOrange-mCerulean reporters and pre-miR-20a
100 nM (Ambion; PM10057) or Negative miRn20 100nM (Ambion). 48 h after transfection three cell populations
were sorted according to their eYFP fluorescence value (low, medium and high YFP expression) using a BD FACS
Aria III (Becton Dickinson) cell sorter. Cell pellets were washed and snap frozen before RNA isolation.

E.

Quantitative Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction

Total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent (Ambion Life Technologies, USA) in combination with Pure Link
RNA Mini Kit (Ambion) from each sorted cell subpopulation. 1µg of total RNA was reverse transcribed using M-MLV
reverse transcriptase and random primers (Life Technologies). Quantitative rt-PCR was performed on a 7300 Real
Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) using specific primers for eYFP, mCherry, mCerulean and mKOrange. 18S
probe (Life Technologies) was used as internal control. Subsequent diluitions of each amplicon in known volumes
allowed the definition of a calibration curve for each fluorophore directly linking threshold cycles and number of
molecules per cell.

10
F.

Empirical observables and Pearson correlation coefficient ratio

PWe defined the empirical average of a given observable O over an ensamble of cells with the symbol hOi =
i∈cell Oi /Ncell . The Pearson ratio is defined as the ratio of the Pearson correlation coefficient (ρx,y = (hxyi −
hxihyi)/σx σy ) between mCherry and mCerulean with a given combination of MRE to the same measure in absence
of MRE. We evaluated the ratio for each eYFP bin (below, around and above threshold) for at least three different
biological replicates. We then estimated the p-values of each ratio with respect to the distributions having as standard
deviation the error on biological replicates and as mean values the pearson ratio for mCherry and mCerulean with
N = 0 MRE for the three eYFP intervals.

G.

Stochastic model of molecular titration and crosstalk
1.

Model definition

We describe with a stochastic model the miRNA-target interactions. The system can be described by 5 interacting
variables (1 microRNA, 2 mRNAs, 2 proteins) indicated respectively as s, r1 , r2 , p1 , p2 , which represent the (integer)
copy number of molecules present in the cell at any given time t. Using this notation, the probability P of finding in
a cell exactly s, r1 , r2 , p1 , p2 molecules at any time t is governed by the following master equation:
∂t P =

2
X

[kri (Pri −1 − P ) + kpi ri (Ppi −1 − P )] + ks (Ps−1 − P )

i=1

+

2
X

{gri [(ri + 1)Pri +1 − ri P ] + gpi [(pi + 1)Ppi +1 − pi P ]} + gs [(s + 1)Ps+1 − sP ]

i=1

+a

2
X

gi [(ri + 1)(s + 1)Pri +1,s+1 − ri sP ]

i=1

+ (1 − α)

2
X

gi s[(ri + 1)Pri +1 − ri P ]

(1)

i=1

where P := Pr1 ,r2 ,p1 ,p2 ,s and, for example Pp2 +1 is a short hand notation for pr1 ,r2 ,p1 ,p2 +1,s . In Eq. (1) kri , ks , kpi
i = 1, 2, are the transcription rates of mRNAs ri and microRNA s and the translation rates for proteins pi respectively.
gri , gpi , gs i = 1, 2 are their degradation rates. gi i = 1, 2 are the effective association rates for the microRNA s and
the mRNA ri . Finally the parameter α measures the catalyticity of the interaction, i.e. the fraction of microRNA
molecules that are recycled after the interaction with their targets. This master equation is not amenable for analytic
solutions and approximate methods have been proposed [15, 19] to obtain accurate quantitative predictions. Following previous work [19] we obtained the approximated expression for mean values, standard deviations and Pearson
correlation coefficients (sketched in Figure 1c-e), which we describe in the next paragraph.

2.

Independent molecular-species approximation

As long as one is interested in mean values of the observables at steady state, a good approximation is the so-called
independent molecular species approximation, also known as mean-field approximation which amounts to assume that
the multivariate probability distribution P is factorized among the different chemical species:
P ind (r1 , r2 , p1 , p2 , s) := pr1 (r1 )pr2 (r2 )pp1 (p1 )pp2 (p1 )ps (s) .

(2)

Plugging this factorized functional form into Eq. (1), and computing the first moments at steady state (i.e. in the
limit t → ∞), one obtains a system of second order equations in the five variables which is easily solved numerically
for any value of the model parameters. The main limitation of the factorized ansatz in Eq. (2) is that, although it
empirically turns out to give a fairly accurate prediction of the mean values of the different chemical species across a
wide range of parameters, the very simple structural form of Eq. (2) cannot predict their statistical correlations such
as Pearson correlation coefficients which under the independent chemical species approximation are always zero by
definition.

11
3.

Gaussian Approximation

To overcome the above mentioned limitations and to take under control correlations across chemical species, a very
simple yet accurate approximation scheme is the so-called Gaussian one [19]. Note that, following this approximation
scheme copy numbers will not be bound to be integer numbers as it was the case in for the master equation defined
in Eq. (1). As we will see in the following, and has already been extensively discussed in [19], this does not affect the
~ the five-dimensional vector of components r1 , r2 , p1 , p2 , s
good quality of the approximation. Let us denote with X
respectively. We can thus make the following multivariate Gaussian ansatz for the probability distribution function
~
of X:
"
#
~ −µ
~ −µ
(X
~ )T C(X
~)
1
Gauss ~
exp −
,
(3)
P
(X) := p
2
(2π)5 detC
which in our 5−dimensional case depends on 20 parameters: 5 numbers specify the mean µ
~ and 15 the covariance
matrix C (which is symmetric). The key property that makes Eq. (1) very difficult to solve analytically is that, as
shown in details in [19], it generates a whole hierarchy of moments such that the lower moments are expressed in
terms of higher order moments and no moment-closure scheme can be utilized. Multivariate Gauss distributions, on
the other hand, have the useful property that all moments can be expressed as a linear combination of just the first
and the second moments. As an illustrative example, defining µi = E(Xi ) and E(Xi Xj ) − E(Xi )E(Xj ) for i 6= j, we
could consider the generic third moment of the distribution defined in Eq. (3) E(Xi , Xj , Xk ) = Cij µk + Cik µj + Cjk µi
for i 6= j 6= k.
A systematic procedure to compute µ
~ and C requires to define the time dependent moment generating function:
Ft (~z) :=

5
Y

~
ziXi Pt (X)

(4)

i=1

Plugging the above equation in the master equation we get the following second order partial differential equation:
∂t Ft (~z) = H(~z)Ft (~z)

(5)

The moment generating function has the following properties:
F (z = 1, q = 1) = 1 ,
∂zi F |z=1,q=1 = hXi i ,

(6)

∂z2i F |z=1,q=1 = hXi2 i − hXi i ,
∂z2i ,zj F |z=1,q=1 = hXi Xj i .
By inserting the previous definitions and imposing the Gaussian marginalization conditions mentioned above, we
obtain a system of 20 equations in 20 unknown that we can numerically solve to get the values for µ
~ and C. As
already shown in [19], this approximation turns out to reproduce fairly accurately both noise (in terms of coefficient
of variation CV) of single targets and Pearson correlation coefficient between targets, when compared with the
numerical values obtained through Gillespie algorithm.

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURES

12

FIG. 5. Threshold for single plasmid transfections with CaCl2 (a) mCherry mean fluorescence is plotted against eYFP.
A threshold emerges when increasing mCherry bs. The same holds for mCerulean with respect to mKOrange (b). Shadowed
strips around data are the error bars on the biological replicates. Red and cyan circles in legends represent the mCherry and
mCerulean fluorophores.

13

FIG. 6. Threshold and noise for CaCl2 transfections (a-b) mCherry mean fluorescence is plotted against eYFP. Shadowed
strips around data are the error bars on the biological replicates. A threshold emerges when increasing mCherry MREs (a)
while it disappears when increasing mCerulean MREs (b). (c-d) mCherry coefficient of variation (CV) is plotted against eYFP.
Shadowed strips around data are the error bars on the biological replicates. The CV of mCherry globally increases when
increasing mCherry MREs (a) while decreases when increasing mCerulean MREs (b). Red and cyan circles in legends represent
the mCherry and mCerulean fluorophores. Black arrows point to the threshold.

14

FIG. 7.
Strong miRNA-target interaction engenders bimodality Rough mCherry cytofluorimetry data scattered
against eYFP. Soon after the threshold two clear phenotypes appear.

FIG. 8. Fold Pearson and p-values The Pearson ratio is measured for three different values of eYFP basal expression:
below threshold (a), around threshold (b) and above threshold (c). p-values are reported for each combinations of miRNA
MREs on the two plasmids. The regions inside the blue perimeters are those statistically significant with p-values < 0.01.
As predicted by the model, the correlation is maximal around the threshold and could be even 12 fold higher than in the
unregulated case. Blue-delimited areas are regions whose Pearson ratio (i.e. ratio of Pearson coefficient between mCherry and
mCerulean possessing different MRE to the same measure in the absence of MRE) is statistically relevant with respect to the
corresponding unregulated case.

15

FIG. 9. Map of phenomenology The cartoon shows how the crosstalk between targets and bimodality on mCherry behave
varying effective miRNA respression strength and target molecule amounts.

16

[1] Alex S Flynt and Eric C Lai. Biological principles of microRNA-mediated regulation: shared themes amid diversity. Nat
Rev Genet, 9(11):831–842, Nov 2008.
[2] David P Bartel. MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, and function. Cell, 116(2):281–297, Jan 2004.
[3] Natascha Bushati and Stephen M Cohen. microRNA functions. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol, 23:175–205, 2007.
[4] Ines Alvarez-Garcia and Eric A Miska. MicroRNA functions in animal development and human disease. Development,
132(21):4653–4662, Nov 2005.
[5] Aurora Esquela-Kerscher and Frank J Slack. Oncomirs - microRNAs with a role in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer, 6(4):259–269,
Apr 2006.
[6] Xin Li, Justin J. Cassidy, Catherine A. Reinke, Stephen Fischboeck, and Richard W. Carthew. A microRNA imparts
robustness against environmental fluctuation during development. Cell, 137(2):273–282, Apr 2009.
[7] Masafumi Inui, Graziano Martello, and Stefano Piccolo. MicroRNA control of signal transduction. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol,
11(4):252–263, Apr 2010.
[8] M Osella, C Bosia, D Corá, and M Caselle. The role of incoherent microrna-mediated feedforward loops in noise buffering.
PLoS Comput Biol, 7(3):e1001101, 2011.
[9] Carla Bosia, Matteo Osella, Mariama El Baroudi, Davide Corá, and Michele Caselle. Gene autoregulation via intronic
micrornas and its functions. BMC Systems Biology, 6:131, 2012.
[10] Aaron Arvey, Erik Larsson, Chris Sander, Christina S Leslie, and Debora S Marks. Target mrna abundance dilutes
microrna and sirna activity. Molecular Systems Biology, 6(1), 2010.
[11] L Salmena, L Poliseno, Y Tay, L Kats, and PP Pandolfi. A cerna hypothesis: the rosetta stone of a hidden rna language?
Cell, 146(3):353–358, 2011.
[12] P. Sumazin, X. Yang, and H.-S. et al. Chiu. An extensive microrna-mediated network of rna-rna interactions regulates
established oncogenic pathways in glioblastoma. Cell, 147(2):370–381, 2011.
[13] Y. Tay, L. Kats, and L et al. Salmena. Coding-independent regulation of the tumor suppressor pten by competing
endogenous mrnas. Cell, 147(2):344–357, 2011.
[14] F. Karreth, Y. Tay, and D. et al. Perna. In vivo identification of tumor- suppressive pten cernas in an oncogenic braf-induced
mouse model of melanoma. Cell, 147(2):382–395, 2011.
[15] U Ala, FA Karreth, C Bosia, A Pagnani, R Taulli, V Léopold, Y Tay, P Provero, R Zecchina, and PP Pandolfi. Integrated
transcriptional and competitive endogenous rna networks are cross-regulated in permissive molecular environments. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A, 110(18):7154–7159, 2013.
[16] S Mukherji, MS Ebert, GX Zheng, JS Tsang, PA Sharp, and A van Oudenaarden. Micrornas can generate thresholds in
target gene expression. Nat Genet, 43(9):854–859, 2011.
[17] J Elf, J Paulsson, O Berg, and M Ehrenberg. Near-critical phenomena in intracellular metabolite pools. Biophysical
Journal, 84:154–170, 2003.
[18] N Buchler and M Louis. Molecular titration and ultrasensitivity in regulatory networks. Journal of Molecular Biology,
384:1106–1119, 2008.
[19] Carla Bosia, Andrea Pagnani, and Riccardo Zecchina. Modelling competing endogenous rna networks. PLoS One,
8(6):e66609, 2013.
[20] A Riba, C Bosia, M El Baroudi, L Ollino, and M Caselle. A combination of transcriptional and microrna regulation
improves the stability of the relative concentrations of target genes. PLoS Comput Biol, 10(2):e1003490, 2014.
[21] R. Denzler, V. Agarwal, J. Stefano, D. P. Bartel, and M. Stoffel. Assessing the cerna hypothesis with quantitative
measurements of mirna and target abundance. Molecular Cell, 54(5):766–776, 2014.
[22] A. D. Bosson, J. R. Zamudio, and P. A. Sharp. Endogenous mirna and target concentrations determine susceptibility to
potential cerna competition. Molecular Cell, 56:347–359, 2014.
[23] MS Ebert and PA Sharp. Microrna sponges: progress and possibilities. RNA, 16:2043–2050, 2010.
[24] B Schwanhäusser, D Busse, N Li, G Dittmar, J Schuchhardt, J Wolf, W Chen, and M Selbach. Global quantification of
mammalian gene expression control. Nature, 473:337–342, 2011.
[25] G.K. Marinov, B.A. Williams, K. McCue, G.P. Schroth, J. Gertz, R.M. Myers, and B.J. Wold. From single-cell to cell-pool
transcriptomes: Stochasticity in gene expression and rna splicing. Genome Research, 24:496–510, 2014.
[26] Erel Levine, Zhongge Zhang, Thomas Kuhlman, and Terence Hwa. Quantitative characteristics of gene regulation by small
RNA. PLoS Biol, 5(9):e229, Sep 2007.
[27] C. Mayr and D.P. Bartel. Widespread shortening of 3’utrs by alternative cleavage and polyadenylation activates oncogenes
in cancer cells. Cell, 138:673–684, 2009.
[28] S Rüegger and Grosshans H. Microrna turnover: when, how, and why. Trends in Biochemical Sciences, 37: 10:436–446,
2012.
[29] M. Krn, T.C Elston, W.J. Blake, and J.J. Collins. Stochasticity in gene expression: from theories to phenotypes. Nature
Reviews Genetics, 6:451–464, 2005.
[30] W. Blake, M. Kaern, C.R. Cantor, and J.J. Collins. Noise in eukaryotic gene expression. Nature, 422:633–637, 2003.
[31] M. Figliuzzi, E. Marinari, and A. De Martino. Micrornas as a selective channel of communication between competing rnas:
a steady-state theory. Biophysical Journal, 104(5):1203–1213, 2013.
[32] G Li, D Burkhardt, C Gross, and JS Weissman. Quantifying absolute protein synthesis rates reveals principles underlying
allocation of cellular resources. Cell, 157:624–635, 2014.

17
[33] Ye Yuan, Bing Liu, Peng Xie, Michael Q. Zhang, Yanda Li, Zhen Xie, and Xiaowo Wang. Model-guided quantitative
analysis of microrna-mediated regulation on competing endogenous rnas using a synthetic gene circuit. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 112(10):3158–3163, 2015.
[34] S.V. Koushik, H. Chen, C. Thaler, H.L. Puhl, and S.S. Vogel. Cerulean, venus, and venusy67c fret reference standards.
Biophysical Journal, 91(12):L99–L101, 2006.
[35] K.T. Beier, M.E. Samson, T. Matsuda, and C.L. Cepko. Conditional expression of the tva receptor allows clonal analysis
of descendents from cre-expressing progenitor cells. Developmental Biology, 353(2):309–20, 2011.
[36] M Jordan, A Schallhorn, and FM Wurm. Transfecting mammalian cells: optimization of critical parameters affecting
calcium-phosphate precipitate formation. Nucleic Acids Research, 24(4):596–601, 1996.

