Fixational eye movements: about a binocular slow
control mechanism
Marco Rusconia,b,#,*, Stephanie Jaintac, Hazel Blythed, Ralf Engbertb
a

Institute of Mathematics, DYCOS, University of Potsdam, Potsdam,
Germany.
b
Department of Psychology, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany.
#
Present address: Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
c
IfADo - Leibniz-Institut für Arbeitsforschung, Dortmund, Germany.
d
Department of Psychology, University of Southampton, Southampton,
United Kingdom.
*

Corresponding author:
Marco Rusconi
e-mail: dr.m.rusconi@gmail.com
Keywords: Drift, microsaccades, central generator, superior colliculus.
Abbreviations: FEM, fixational eye movements; SC, superior colliculus; DPI,
Dual-Purkinje Image; H, horizontal; V, vertical; MS, microsaccades.

Abstract
Even when we look at stationary objects, involuntarily our eyes perform
miniature movements and do not stand perfectly still. Such fixational eye
movements (FEM) can be decomposed into at least two components: rapid
microsaccades and slow (physiological) drift. Despite the general agreement
that microsaccades have a central generating mechanism, the origin of drift is
less clear. A direct approach to investigate whether drift is also centrally
controlled or merely represents peripheral uncorrelated oculomotor noise is to
quantify the statistical dependence between the velocity components of the
FEM. Here we investigate the dependence between horizontal and vertical
velocity components across the eyes during a visual fixation task with human
observers. The results are compared with computer-generated surrogate time
series containing only drift or only microsaccades. Our analyses show a
binocular dependence between FEM velocity components predominantly due
to drift. This result supports the existence of a central generating mechanism
that modulates not only microsaccades but also drift and helps to explain the
neuronal mechanism generating FEM.

Introduction
Even during fixating a stationary target our eyes perform erratic tiny
movements. These fixational eye-movements (FEM) are the superposition of
two types of motion1: microsaccades and drift. About 97% of the fixation time
consists of drift movements (Yarbus, 1967), an eye-movement type whose
underlying control mechanism (slow control) allows keeping the gaze
relatively stationary on a fixed target (Steinman et al., 1973). Drift is
interrupted by rare events, which are small-amplitude movements (< 1°) and
almost always simultaneously occurring in both eyes (Krauskopf et al., 1960).
Such microsaccades typically have a mean duration of about 25 ms
(Ditchburn, 1980) and an average occurrence rate of 1-2 per second
(Martinez-Conde et al., 2004).
Observed already in the 18th century (Jurin, 1738), the role of FEM is still
not fully understood and their physiological function is still debated (MartinezConde et al. 2004, 2009; Rolfs, 2009a). Particularly, it is discussed whether
the process that generates FEM might be central (e.g. located in the brain
stem) or peripheral (noise in the motor neurons). While for microsaccades
evidence converges on a central generator (Otero-Millan et al., 2008;
Laubrock et al., 2008, 2010; Rolfs et al., 2006, 2008a, 2008b; Hafed et al.,
2009a; Mergenthaler & Engbert, 2010; Engbert et al., 2011), drift was
reported to be coherent (Spauschus et al., 1999) and conjugate (Ditchburn &
Ginsborg, 1953) as well as independent (Yarbus, 1967) and uncorrelated
(Krauskopf et al., 1960).
Recent experiments suggested the importance of drift for improving
perception already at the early stage of visual processing (Rucci et al., 2007;
Kuang et al., 2012). However, the origin of fixational drift remains unclear. On
the one hand, drift might result from noisy firing of oculomotor neurons
(Eizenman et al., 1985). On the other hand, drift might be centrally modulated
based on a complex brain network including the superior colliculus (SC; see
discussion in Rolfs, 2009b and Hafed et al. 2009b). Characterizing the
statistical properties of drift movements (Engbert & Kliegl, 2004) can allow
inferences on the neuronal origin of slow control and is thus important to
understand the role of the ocular instability during fixation crucial for visual
perception.
In order to understand the control principles underlying FEM, we
systematically investigated the dependence across the eyes. In contrast to
previous studies, we recorded FEM from a large sample of participants and
computed the correlation of various FEM components across the eyes and
two data sets recorded with two different eye-tracking systems (i.e., videobased and Dual-Purkinje eye-tracker). Based on experiments suggesting that
the velocity of an image rather than its absolute position on the retina is the
sensory input to the slow control of drift (Epelboim & Kowler, 1993), we used
the eye velocities rather than the eye positions to analyze the dependence
structure of the FEM components. Comparing the results with surrogate data,
we aimed at understanding whether fixational drift movements are centrally
modulated or merely uncorrelated motor noise.

Materials and Methods
Horizontal (H) and vertical (V) components of FEM were derived from
binocular eye-movement trajectories recorded in a fixation experiment in
which participants were instructed to fixate a target for several seconds
without moving the eyes. To ensure that the obtained results did not depend
on the video-based eye-tracking technique, we also analyzed binocular
fixations recorded with two Dual-Purkinje Image (DPI) eye trackers.
Video-based data. The data were previously published with a different
focus in Engbert and Mergenthaler (2006) and Mergenthaler and Engbert
(2007). During a fixation experiment the horizontal and vertical components of
FEM were recorded from both eyes while participants were sitting. In order to
reduce movements, a chin-rest stabilized the head of the participants.
Recording was performed in a dark room and luminance was kept constant.
20 students of the University of Potsdam with normal or corrected to normal
vision participated in the experiment consisting of 30 trials. For some
participants, a few trials had to be discarded resulting in four participants with
29 trials, one with 27 and one with 28 trials. Each trial consisted of 20
seconds of fixation on a static target (i.e., a dot on a uniform background)
followed by 10 seconds of relaxation on natural landscape pictures. During
recording trials interrupted by eye blinks were repeated. The eyes' trajectories
were recorded with a high-speed video-based eye tracker (EyeLink-II, SR
Research, Osgoode, ON, Canada) with 500 Hz sampling. The raw data were
smoothed to reduce the presence of high frequency noise (Engbert &
Mergenthaler, 2006), using a four-point velocity moving average (Engbert
2006).
Dual-Purkinje data. The full set of data was analyzed in depth and
reported regarding a reading experiment aimed at investigating binocular
impacts on word identification elsewhere (Jainta, Blythe, & Liversedge 2014).
For the present analysis, we selected fixation data for N = 11 participants
aged between 18–32 years with good visual acuity in each eye (better than
0.8 in decimal units). No participant wore glasses or contact lenses during the
experiment. During recording with two DPI eye trackers (sampling rate 1000
Hz; spatial resolution <1 min arc) participants bit on a wax dental mold and
used forehead rests to minimize head movements. In between sentence
presentations, the task for the participants was to fixate a central dot (0.25
deg in diameter; presented at eye-height and at a viewing distance of 70 cm).
Out of 48 trials per participant, a total number of 178 trials remained after
excluding trials containing blinks or large saccades. Only the last saccade
moving the eyes from the sentence-final word to the fixation dot remained in
the data. Each analyzed epoch thus consisted of a saccade plus the following
fixation leading to a total average duration of 1900 ms.
Finally, before computing the correlation coefficients, each epoch was
band-pass filtered between 0.001 and 100 Hz (Eizenman, Hallett, & Frecker
1985) with a FIR filter of order n = 100 to remove noise above 100 Hz. The
upper cut-off of 100 Hz was chosen based on FEM data recorded from an
artificial eye in order to avoid spurious correlations across and within eye
velocities that could only be due to high-frequency system noise. Filter design
and application as well as the following analyses were done with standard
Matlab (The MathWorks Inc., Natick, Massachusetts) tools. In order to avoid

border effects and phase shift of the signals due to filtering, the initial n
sample points (corresponding to the filter order) were removed.
Data analysis. The scope of the present analysis was to investigate the
statistical dependence between horizontal and vertical components of FEM.
As experimental evidence supports a velocity-based rather than a positionbased analysis to characterize FEM (Epelboim & Kowler, 1993), we
investigated the dependence between the velocity components of FEM rather
than the position components. Velocities were computed as increments of the
smoothed time series after removing the mean. The dependence was
quantified by means of Spearman's ρ. The choice of using a rank-based
instead of a standard correlation analysis was motivated by several properties
of the FEM. Firstly, the time series of FEM contained microsaccades. Fig. 1
shows that microsaccades (red dots) are essentially velocity outliers with
respect to the slow background motion activity, and it is well known that the
Pearson correlation coefficient r is extremely responsive to outliers (Abdullah,
1990). As a matter of fact, the occurrence of binocular microsaccades
contributed to a (positive) Pearson correlation, overestimating the actual
dependence. In addition, the number of microsaccades and their amplitude
differed in horizontal and vertical components. Thus, microsaccades could
even have a differential effect on the correlations between velocity
components. Secondly, drift velocities are not normally distributed (Cherici,
Kuang, Poletti, & Rucci 2012) and Pearson's r is not robust against nonnormality (Kowalski, 1972). Finally, the rank-based Spearman's ρ is more
general than the Pearson's r because it captures any monotonic dependence
in the data and not only linear trends.
We analyzed the dependencies between the horizontal left and horizontal
right component, and between the vertical left and vertical right component of
the FEM. We refer to these components as parallel components. For each
trial of each participant we computed the Spearman's ρ between the velocity
components. Averaging across trials, the corresponding mean value ρ
characterizes the statistical dependence for each participant. The correlation
coefficients are not normally distributed. For this reason, before averaging
them or computing the relative confidence interval (ci), the correlation values
were transformed using Fisher's z-transform (Fisher, 1915, 1921). After
computing mean and ci, the corresponding values were transformed back into
meaningful velocities. In the following, we will report the velocities only.
In a second analysis, we removed the microsaccades from the FEM time
series to examine a possible effect only of drift on the dependence between
the eyes. This has been done using a two-step objective procedure. In a first
step, microsaccade onsets and offsets have been detected with a 2D
velocity-threshold algorithm as in Engbert and Kliegl (2003; see also Engbert
& Mergenthaler, 2006). After converting position-based trajectories into
velocity time series, microsaccades were detected as velocity outliers (i.e., all
events exceeding an elliptic threshold relative to noise level). Similar to
Engbert and Mergenthaler (2006), the threshold parameter was set to λ = 5
multiples of the standard deviation of each velocity component. Finally, a
minimum duration criterion was adopted to select only events with durations
larger than 6 ms. Finally, the epochs between onset and offset of the
detected microsaccades were removed from the velocity time series.

To examine the effect of only the microsaccades on the dependence
between the velocity components, the correlation analysis was also
performed on phase-randomized amplitude-adjusted surrogate data (Theiler
et al., 1992; Engbert & Mergenthaler, 2006). To generate the surrogate data,
the velocity time series without microsaccades were shuffled. After random
shuffling the Fourier phases, the microsaccadic epochs were inserted at the
original time positions. This technique ensured that (i) the velocity distribution
of FEM remained unchanged and that (ii) the autocorrelation structure of the
surrogate time series approximated the autocorrelation of the original data.
Ethical standard
Concerning the data collected with the DPI eye trackers, the experimental
procedure was approved by the University of Southampton Ethics and
Research Governance Office and followed the conventions of the Declaration
of Helsinki. Informed written consent was obtained from each participant after
explanation of the procedure of the experiment. The video-based data were
already reported with a different focus in Engbert and Mergenthaler (2006)
and Mergenthaler and Engbert (2007).
Statistical Methods
The data are reported as mean value ± confidence interval. The
𝐬
confidence interval is computed as 1.96 ! , where N is the corresponding
!

number of values entering the mean. Before averaging the correlation
coefficients or computing the relative confidence interval, we applied the
Fisher's z-transform (Fisher, 1915, 1921) to correlation values. The plots
show the inverse transformed average and corresponding confidence
interval. To access the significance of the effect of removing microsaccades
we used a paired t-test.
Results
To test the hypothesis that FEM are independent oculomotor noise, we
computed Spearman's ρ for the parallel velocity components across both
eyes. Fig. 2 (panels A and D) shows the mean statistical dependence for the
horizontal and the vertical velocity components of the FEM (i.e., between the
parallel components in the left and right eye). The entire time series was
considered for this analysis including microsaccadic events. The bars
correspond to the value of ρ obtained for each participant. The participants
were ordered by microsaccade rates with the rates reported on the abscissa.
The analysis showed that the parallel velocity components were dependent
across the eyes. For all participants, in both the horizontal and the vertical
components, the dependence was always positive, and participants with a
higher rate of microsaccades had larger values of ρ. This result shows the
existence of a monotonically increasing mapping between the parallel velocity
components of FEM and stands in contrast to the independence postulated
under the oculomotor noise assumption.
Fig. 2 (panels B and E) shows the values of ρ obtained after removing the
microsaccades. Contrary to the hypothesis of independent and uncorrelated
processes, the velocity components of the remaining drift epochs were still
correlated, and this rank-correlation was positive. Again, participants with a
higher microsaccade rate showed the larger correlations, especially between

the horizontal velocities. This analysis indicates dependence between the
parallel velocity components in case of drift even if microsaccades are
removed.
To further quantify the impact of removing the microsaccades on the
measured dependence, we tested for differences between the mean 〈ρ〉
across participants of the rank coefficients with and without microsaccades.
Significance was assessed with a paired t-test on the z-transformed data.
After removing the microsaccades we observed a small significant reduction
of 〈ρ〉 in both horizontal and vertical components (mean difference < 0.05 for
both, t19 = 6.9888, P = 1.17∙10-06 and t19 = 5.5507, P = 2.36∙10-05 respectively
for H and V). From this test we can conclude that removing microsaccades
have a small impact on the rank-correlations.
Finally, Fig. 2 (panels C and F) shows the values of ρ obtained for the
velocity components of surrogate data that were obtained by constrained
random shuffling (see Materials and Methods). This technique ensured that
the surrogate time series contained microsaccades at the same temporal
position as the original data, while randomly shuffled epochs of drift were
generated between microsaccades. For the large majority of the analyzed
participants the surrogate time series were correlated. However,
microsaccades could not have had a strong impact on the dependence
obtained in the entire FEM time series (including drift and microsaccades)
because the absolute mean rank-correlations ρ of the microsaccades alone
were small and not larger than 0.15.
To ensure that these findings were not due to artifacts of data processing,
we further tested whether the correlations measured in the data were possibly
due to the algorithm used to detect microsaccades. Microsaccades were
detected with the velocity-threshold algorithm developed by Engbert and
Kliegl (2003; see also Engbert & Mergenthaler, 2006). For the analysis
presented in Fig. 2 we used λ = 5 for the threshold, which was suggested by
Engbert and Mergenthaler (2006) to be optimal. Increasing the value of λ
corresponds to a more conservative criterion for selecting microsaccadic
events, and only microsaccades would be considered which are extreme
outliers. As a consequence, after removing those microsaccades, more
binocular events would be retained in the dataset that could contribute to
dependencies. Conversely, by decreasing the value of λ a larger part of the
drift motion would be detected as microsaccades and thus removed. Fig. 3
reports the correlations observed for different values of λ. Decreasing λ, we
observed the expected reduction of the dependence due to loss of data
points. However, even for the extreme value of λ = 2 we still found the critical
positive correlations.
A last possible source of confound might have been that microsaccades
were only removed partially leaving the residual part in the velocity
components. To test this, we removed a larger portion of data adding an extra
∆t before and after each microsaccade onset and offset. Fig. 3 shows an
example of the correlations obtained for ∆t = 160 ms and λ = 5. While for
some participants we observed a reduction of correlations, the global trend
remained unchanged. These analyses suggest that the observed correlations
were not due to undetected microsaccades or residual microsaccadic epochs
that may have still been contained in the drift time series.
Finally, to test the robustness of our results, we replicated the same

analyses with a different data set of FEM recorded with two DPI eye-trackers.
Fig. 4 summarizes the results of these additional analyses and shows the
comparison of the grand mean 𝜌 of video-based and DPI data. Overall, the
DPI data confirmed the positive correlation between parallel FEM
components (see Fig. 4 B). Again, detection of microsaccades was done with
λ = 5. Using this value, we not only removed the microsaccades but also the
large horizontal saccade from the sentence-final word to the central fixation
dot at the beginning of each fixation trial. Additionally removing the data
belonging to this large saccade, we expected to see a large impact on the
dependence between the eyes velocity in the drift time series. Indeed, we
observed a substantial decrease in the correlations of the horizontal
component in the drift time series after removing the (micro-) saccadic
events. The impact of the large horizontal saccade could also be seen in the
results of the surrogate data (MS time series in Fig. 4 B): the horizontal
component showed a larger correlation than the vertical one. Despite these
differences, the analysis of DPI data confirmed the existence of positive
correlations due to drift. Finally, averaging across the horizontal and vertical
correlations indicated that the video-based and DPI data showed a similar
trend (see Fig. 4 C). Therefore, the DPI data supports the results obtained for
eye movements recorded with the video-based system suggesting that FEM
velocities are rank-correlated across the eyes and that such dependence is
mostly due to drift rather than to microsaccades.
Discussion
The fundamental question we addressed in this study was whether the
eyes’ drift movements during fixation represent uncorrelated oculomotor
noise. If, on the contrary, drift movements were correlated across the eyes
this could indicate a central modulation of slow control guiding the drift. To
study the coordination of FEM across the eyes we examined the correlation
between the parallel velocity components that is between the horizontal
component of the left eye and the horizontal component of the right eye, and
likewise between the vertical components across the two eyes. All
coefficients showed a positive correlation of the fixational velocity suggesting
that FEM across eyes are not statistically independent but are yoked eye
movements. In order to test whether drift and microsaccades contributed
differently to the dependence, we recomputed the correlations after removing
microsaccades from the time series, and for surrogate data sets containing
only the microsaccades with randomly shuffled drift epochs. Most importantly,
even after removing microsaccades from the time series we still observed a
positive dependence between parallel components of the eyes. This indicates
that the correlation between FEM velocities is mainly due to drift, and
microsaccades contribute to the binocular dependence to a much smaller
degree.
In addition, we obtained that higher correlations between the velocity
components of FEM corresponded to a higher rate of microsaccades,
independent of whether microsaccades were still present in the data sets or
not. Participants with a higher microsaccade rate showed FEM that were
more strongly rank-correlated. This result supports the idea that
microsaccades are not only episodes embedded in some sort of background
activity due to slow control, but that microsaccades and drift are dynamically

related (Engbert & Kliegl, 2004; Engbert & Mergenthaler, 2006). As such, the
present results are in good agreement with a model introduced by Engbert et
al. (2011) that unifies the generation of both microsaccades and drift under a
common mechanism.
The present evidence for binocular dependence contrasts with earlier
findings of uncorrelated drift (Ditchburn & Ginsborg, 1953; Krauskopf et al.,
1960; Yarbus, 1967). One possible explanation of this inconsistency is that
the results reported previously were based on the analysis of only two
participants (Ditchburn & Ginsborg, 1953; Krauskopf et al., 1960). Our much
larger sample (Ntot = 20 + 11) showed a large interindividual variability and,
contrary to the previous studies, permitted to derive a more robust estimate of
the population correlation.
More importantly, the finding of binocular drift dependence is also
incompatible with the hypothesis of independent drift that is in principle
expected from an oculomotor noise perspective. Nevertheless, King and
Zhou (2000; see also Zhou & King, 1998) recently introduced a physiological
model for eye movement control in which monocular pre-motor commands
are modulated by binocular motoneurons resulting in the binocular
coordination of the eyes. In this model, drift movements could be accounted
for by correlated noise generated by the random firing of the binocular
motoneurons. Given such correlated motor noise, a correlation between
parallel FEM components would not necessarily rule out an oculomotor noise
explanation in favor of a common central mechanism. However, Di Stasi et al.
(2013) reported results that speak against the interpretation of drift as
peripheral noise. They showed that drift is modulated during cognitive tasks
due to mental fatigue. Thus, evidence is converging in favor of drift being
centrally modulated rather than being pure motor noise.
But where could such a common central mechanism be located? Due to
the importance of the SC in smooth pursuit eye movements, Rolfs (2009b) in
a comment to Hafed et al. (2009a) suggested that the SC might play a role
not only in the control of microsaccades but also in the modulation of drift. In
response, Hafed et al. (2009b) argued that the modulation of SC activity
during smooth pursuit could be due to the motion of the pursued target
projected on the retina rather than the signature of pre-motor modulation of
drift. Nevertheless, Hafed and colleagues agreed that drift seems to be
controlled by a brain network that may possibly include the SC. This
interpretation was supported by Di Stasi et al. (2013) who suggested an
involvement of the brainstem in the modulation of the kinematic properties of
FEM (drift and microsaccades). Although the neuronal mechanisms behind
the control of drift may still not be fully identified, our results indicate that
fixational drift is not just uncorrelated oculomotor noise. The evidence for
binocularly correlated drift is in line with accounts that favor a central
modulation of drift. The SC seems to be one of the best candidates among
the neuronal circuitries to be involved in the slow control of fixational drift
movements.
Recently, video-based recording systems were criticized because of the
noise level during recording (Collewijn & Kowler, 2008) and because they
may be prone to possible artifacts due to pupil oscillations during recording
(Wyatt, 2010; Kimmel, Mammo, & Newsome, 2012). Concerning the effect of
noise we would like to distinguish between the intrinsic noise of the recording

system as discussed by Collewijn and Kowler (2008) and possible artificial
signals introduced during recording or analysis due to external sources. As it
has been done in the present study, intrinsic eye-tracking noise can be
significantly reduced during analysis using signal-processing techniques such
as smoothing. Note that in the present case, however, the applied smoothing
cannot have generated spurious results because, although smoothing
introduces an autocorrelation within the time series, it cannot generate
artificial correlations between data sets given they are uncorrelated. Thus,
smoothing cannot, even partially, explain our findings. Moreover, we
presented a correlation analysis between signals (i.e., the velocity
components) that are recorded by (in principle) independent sensors (i.e., the
left and right camera). Thus, possible recording noise should be uncorrelated
and have a small, if not irrelevant, effect on the observed correlations.
Different is the case of systematic signals artificially introduced during
recording. Noise per-se can have a positive effect not only on physical
systems (Gammaitoni, Hänggi, Jung, & Marchesoni, 1998), but also on
biological systems (Wiesenfeld, & Moss, 1995; Hänggi, 2002; Moss, Ward, &
Sannita, 2004; Rusconi, Zaikin, Marwan, & Kurths, 2008; McDonnell &
Abbott, 2009) and on visual perception (Simonotto, Riani, & Seife, 1997).
However, systematic noise as due to pupil oscillations or artifacts produced
by head or eye-tracker movements may have the effect of masking the
genuine FEM and may contaminate correlations. To reduce pupil confounds,
we controlled for luminance conditions. No luminance variations were
possible during recording and thus, the luminance-induced pupil oscillations
described above can be excluded. A chin rest and head-movement correction
was used, and a trial-by-trial calibration limited the presence of slow signals
due to head movements or slip of the eye-tracker. Although the data were
carefully recorded, it is not possible to exclude completely that the obtained
correlations were biased by artificial signals such as other pupil oscillations
for which we could not control. To clear any doubt on this matter, we
analyzed binocular fixations recorded with a DPI eye-tracking system that
allows high resolution recordings (Rucci, Iovin, Poletti, & Santini, 2007;
Poletti, M., Listorti, C., & Rucci, 2010; Kuang, Poletti, Victor, & Rucci, 2012;
Cherici, Kuang, Poletti, & Rucci 2012), that is typically used to study drift and
that cannot be biased by pupil oscillations. Also in the DPI data, we observed
the positive correlations between both horizontal and vertical velocity
components and thus replicated the findings of binocular drift dependence.
Experimental and theoretical evidence seems to converge towards the
existence of a central mechanism generating and/or partially modulating both
motion types of FEM, drift and microsaccades. Our result is in line with this
interpretation. However, in the case of drift, the alternative explanation
involving binocular motoneurons is not completely ruled out. Microsaccades
seem to be regulated by higher-level cognitive processes such as attention
(Hafed & Clark, 2002; Engbert & Kliegl, 2003; Laubrock et al., 2005; Engbert,
2006; Laubrock et al., 2007, 2010). Therefore, a way to further confirm that
slow control is centrally modulated may be to study whether drift is also
affected by cognition. We think that future investigation in this direction is
important to clarify the mechanisms generating and modulating FEM. Such
research will be crucial for a better understanding of visual perception and
visual stability.

Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank Simon Liversedge for providing the DPI
data; we would also like to thank Carsten Allefeld, Matthias Holschneider, and
Konstantin Mergenthaler for helpful discussions and suggestions. Special
thanks to Sarah Risse for her comments on an earlier version of the
manuscript. MR received support from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft:
Research Unit 868, grant EN471/3 and project KFO 247.
References
Abdullah, M.B. (1990). On a Robust Correlation Coefficient. J. R. Stat. Soc..
Ser. D, 39, 455–460.
Cherici, C., Kuang, X., Poletti, M., & Rucci, M. (2012) Precision of sustained
fixation in trained and untrained observers. J. Vis., 12, 1–16.
Collewijn, H. & Kowler, E. (2008) The significance of microsaccades for vision
and oculomotor control. J. Vis., 8, 20, 1-21.
Ditchburn, R.W. (1980) The function of small saccades. Vis. Res., 20, 271272.
Ditchburn, R.W. & Ginsborg, B.L. (1953) Involuntary eye movements during
fixation. J. Physiol. (Lond.), 119, 1-17.
Di Stasi, L.L., McCamy, M.B., Catena, A., Macknik, S.L., Cañas, J.J. &
Martinez-Conde, S. (2013) Microsaccade and drift dynamics reflect mental
fatigue. Eur. J. Neurosci., 38, 2389–98.
Engbert, R. (2006) Microsaccades: A microcosm for research on oculomotor
control, attention, and visual perception. Prog. Brain Res., 154, 177-192.
Eizenman, M., Hallett, P.E. & Frecker, R.C. (1985) Power spectra for ocular
drift and tremor. Vis. Res., 25, 1635–1640.
Engbert, R. & Kliegl, R. (2003) Microsaccades uncover the orientation of
covert attention. Vis. Res., 43, 1035-1045.
Engbert, R. & Kliegl, R. (2004) Microsaccades keep the eyes' balance during
fixation. Psych. Sci., 15, 431.
Engbert, R. (2006) Microsaccades: A microcosm for research on oculomotor
control, attention, and visual perception. Prog. Brain Res, 154, 177-192.
Engbert, R. & Mergenthaler, K. (2006) Microsaccades are triggered by low
retinal image slip. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 103, 7192-7197.
Engbert, R., Mergenthaler, K., Sinn, P. & Pikovsky, A. (2011) An integrated
model of fixational eye movements and microsaccades. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A., 108, E765-E770.

Epelboim, J. & Kowler, E. (1993) Slow control with eccentric targets: evidence
against a position-corrective model. Vis. Res., 33, 361-380.
Ezenman, M., Hallett, P. & Frecker, R. (1985) Power spectra for ocular drift
and tremor. Vis. Res., 25, 1635-1640.
Fisher, R. (1915) Frequency distribution of the values of the correlation
coeffcient in samples from an indefinitely large population. Biometrika, 10,
507-521.
Fisher, R. (1921) On the" probable error" of a coefficient of correlation
deduced from a small sample. Metron, 1, 3-32.
Gammaitoni, L., Hänggi, P., Jung, P. & Marchesoni, F. (1998) Stochastic
resonance. Rev. Mod. Phys., 70, 223–287.
Hafed, Z. & Clark, J. (2002) Microsaccades as an overt measure of covert
attention shifts. Vis. Res., 42, 2533-2545.
Hafed, Z., Goffart, L. & Krauzlis, R. (2009a) A neural mechanism for
microsaccade generation in the primate superior colliculus. Science, 323,
940- 943.
Hafed, Z., Krauzlis, R. & Goffart, L. (2009b) Reply to M. Rolfs' E-Letter.
Retrieved from:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/323/5916/940.short/reply#sci el 12334.
Hänggi, P. (2002) Stochastic resonance in biology. How noise can enhance
detection of weak signals and help improve biological information
processing. Chem. Phys. Chem., 3, 285–290.
Jainta, S., Blythe, H.I. & Liversedge, S.P. (2014) Binocular advantages in
reading. Curr. Biol., 24, 526–30.
Jurin, J., (1738) An essay upon distinct and indistinct vision. In Smith, R. (ed),
Complete system of optics in four books. Cambridge, pp. 115–171.
Kimmel, D. L. , Mammo, D. & Newsome, W.T. (2012) Trackingtheeyenoninvasively:simultaneouscomparisonofthescleralsearchcoilandopticaltracking
techniquesinthemacaquemonkey. Front. Behav. Neurosci., 6, 1-17.
King, W. & Zhou, W. (2000) New ideas about binocular coordination of eye
movements: Is there a chameleon in the primate family tree? Anat. Rec.,
261, 153-161.
Kowalski, C. J. (1972) On the of Non-normality On the Effects of the Sample
Product-moment Distribution Coefficient Correlation. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. C
Appl. Stat., 21, 1–12.

Krauskopf, J., Cornsweet, T. N., & Riggs, L. A. (1960) Analysis of eye
movements during monocular and binocular fixation. J. Opt. Soc. Am., 50,
572-578.
Kuang, X., Poletti, M., Victor, J. D. & Rucci, M. (2012) Temporal encoding of
spatial information during active visual fixation. Curr. Biol., 22, 510–14.
Laubrock, J., Engbert, R. & Kliegl, R. (2005) Microsaccade dynamics during
covert attention. Vis. Res., 45, 721-730.
Laubrock, J., Engbert, R. & Kliegl, R. (2008) Fixational eye movements
predict the perceived direction of ambiguous apparent motion. J. Vis., 8,
13, 1-17.
Laubrock, J., Engbert, R., Rolfs, M. & Kliegl, R. (2007) Microsaccades are an
index of covert attention. Psychol. Sci., 18, 364.
Laubrock, J., Kliegl, R., Rolfs, M. & Engbert, R. (2010) When do micro saccades follow spatial attention? Atten. Percept. Psychophys., 72, 683-694.
McDonnell, M.D. & Abbott, D. (2009) What is stochastic resonance?
Definitions, misconceptions, debates, and its relevance to biology. PLoS
Comput. Biol., 5, e1000348
Martinez-Conde, S., Macknik, SL. & Hubel, DH. (2004) The role of fixational
eye movements in visual perception. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 5, 229-240.
Martinez-Conde, S., Macknik, SL., Troncoso, XG. & Hubel, DH. (2009)
Microsaccades: a neurophysiological analysis. Trends Neurosci., 32, 463475.
Mergenthaler, K. & Engbert, R. (2007) Modeling the control of fixational eye
movements with neurophysiological delays. Phys. Rev. Lett., 98, 138104.
Mergenthaler, K. & Engbert, R. (2010) Microsaccades are different from
saccades in scene perception. Exp. brain Res., 203, 753–7.
Moss, F., Ward, L. & Sannita, W. (2004) Stochastic resonance and sensory
information processing: a tutorial and review of application. Clin.
Neurophysiol., 115, 267–281.
Otero-Millan, J., Troncoso, X., Macknik, S., Serrano-Pedraza, I., MartinezConde, S. (2008) Saccades and microsaccades during visual fixation,
exploration, and search: Foundations for a common saccadic generator. J.
Vis., 8, 1-18.
Poletti, M., Listorti, C., and Rucci, M. (2010) Stability of the visual world
during eye drift. J. Neurosci., 30, 11143–50.

Rolfs, M. (2009a) Microsaccades: Small steps on a long way. Vis. Res., 49,
2415-2441.
Rolfs, M. (2009b) A neural mechanism for fixation instability. Retrieved from:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/323/5916/940.short/reply#sci el 12334.
Rolfs, M., Kliegl, R., and Engbert, R. (2008a) Toward a model of
microsaccade generation: The case of microsaccadic inhibition. J. Vis., 8,
5, 1-23.
Rolfs, M., Laubrock, J., and Kliegl, R. (2008b) Microsaccade-induced
prolongation of saccadic latencies depends on microsaccade amplitude. J.
Eye Mov. Res., 1, 1-8.
Rolfs, M., Laubrock, J., and Kliegl, R. (2006) Shortening and prolongation of
saccade latencies following microsaccades. Exp. Brain Res., 169, 369-376.
Rucci, M., Iovin, R., Poletti, M., and Santini, F. (2007) Miniature eye
movements enhance fine spatial detail. Nature, 447, 851–4.
Rusconi, M., Zaikin, A., Marwan, N., and Kurths, J. (2008) Effect of Stochastic
Resonance on Bone Loss in Osteopenic Conditions. Phys. Rev. Lett., 100,
128101
Simonotto, E., Riani, M., and Seife, C. (1997) Visual perception of stochastic
resonance. Phys. Rev. Lett., 78, 1186–1189.
Spauschus, A., Marsden, J., Halliday, D., Rosenberg, J., and Brown, P.
(1999) The origin of ocular microtremor in man. Exp. Brain Res., 126, 556562.
Steinman, R., Haddad, G., Skavenski, A., Wyman, D. (1973) Miniature eye
movement. Science, 181, 810-819.
Theiler, J., Eubank, S., Longtin, A., Galdrikian, B., and Doyne Farmer, J.
(1992) Testing for nonlinearity in time series: the method of surrogate data.
Physica D, 58, 77-94.
van der Geest, J. N., and Frens, M. A. (2002) Recording eye movements with
video-oculography and scleral search coils: a direct comparison of two
methods. J. Neurosci. Meth., 114, 185–95.
Wiesenfeld, K. and Moss, F. (1995) Stochastic resonance and the benefits of
noise: from ice ages to crayfish and SQUIDs. Nature, 373, 33-36.
Wyatt, H. (2010) The human pupil and the use of video based eye-trackers.
Vis. Res., 50, 1982-1988.
Yarbus, A. (1967) Eye movements and vision. Plenum press, New York.

Zhou, W. and King, W. (1998) Premotor commands encode monocular eye
movements. Nature, 393, 692-694.
Footnote
1	   A third type, tremor, is an aperiodic oscillation of the eyes that, due to its
very small amplitude (Martinez-Conde et al., 2004), cannot be investigated
with the techniques used here.
Figure legends
Figure 1: Scatterplot of velocities within the same eye (left panel) and across
the two eyes (right panel). Data is presented for one example trial of one
participant. In both panels we observe the presence of outliers due to
microsaccades highlighted in red. The binocularity of the microsaccades
introduces linear correlations between the parallel velocities, i.e., across
eyes.
Figure 2: Dependence between the velocity components of FEM. Individual
bars for each participant. Participants are ordered by microsaccade rate.
Black error bars represent the 95% confidence interval of the mean of each
𝐬
participants (i.e. 1.96 ! , with s for the inverse Fisher-transform of the sample
!

standard deviation of the Fisher-transformed means and N the number of
trials for each participant). Panels A and D show the mean Spearman's r ρ
for the original data for horizontal (FEM H) and vertical (FEM V) components
respectively. For all participants we obtained a positive correlation ρ, thus the
velocity components of FEM are not independent between the eyes. The
same is valid after removing microsaccades (Drift H and Drift V in panels B
and E). Microsaccades alone (MS H and MS V in panels C and F) produced
overall small correlations: the largest mean ρ was smaller than 0.15.
Figure 3: Effect of λ on the mean Spearman's ρ between horizontal (A) and
vertical velocities (B). Green and red symbols show ρ obtained for λ = 2 and λ
= 8. The blue bars correspond to λ = 5. Reducing λ lead to a reduction of
dependencies, but even for λ = 2 we still observed positive ρ for all
participants.
Figure 4: Group level analysis and contrast between the results with videobased (N = 20) and DPI (N = 11) data. Panel A shows the grand mean 𝜌 for
the horizontal (H) and vertical (V) velocity components. The correlations are
compared between three data sets: (1) containing the full fixational eyemovement trajectory (FEM), (2) containing mainly the drift epochs with the
microsaccades being removed (Drift), and (3) containing only the
microsaccades with the drift epochs being randomly shuffled (MS). The data
were recorded with a video-based system. Panel B shows the same for DPI
data. In both cases we obtained a positive significant correlation. The
average between horizontal and vertical components showed a similar trend
for video-based and DPI data (panel C).

Horizontal velocity [°/s]

within eye

Horizontal velocity [°/s]

across eyes

Figure 1

Horizontal velocity [°/s]

Vartical velocity [°/s]

ρ̄

ρ̄

0
0.22

0.5

1

0

0.5

1

D

A

1.86

FEM V

FEM H

3.39 0.22

E

B

1.86
MS rate [s−1]

Drift V

Drift H

3.39 0.22

F

C

1.86

MS V

MS H

3.39

Figure 2

Figure 3

0.8

A

B

=2
=8
160 ms
=5

0.7
0.6

ρ¯

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.22

1.86

3.39
0.22
MS rate [1/s]

1.86

3.39

<ρ>

<ρ>

0

0.2

0.4

0

0.5

H

V

C

tH
D

rif

tV
M

S

H

FEM

0

0.5

Drift

DPI
N = 11

MS

V H
H
tV SH SV
t
f
f
M
M
i
i
E Dr Dr M M
FE F

B

Video based Vs. DPI (trend)

M

S

V

N = 20

Video based
DPI

M EM rif
E
F D
F

A

Video based

Figure 4

	  

