Motor-free actin bundle contractility driven by molecular crowding
Jörg Schnauß1 , Tom Golde1 , Carsten Schuldt1 , B. U. Sebastian Schmidt1 ,
Martin Glaser1 , Dan Strehle1 , Claus Heussinger2 , and Josef A. Käs1

arXiv:1503.02929v1 [physics.bio-ph] 10 Mar 2015

1 Institute for Experimental Physics I, University of Leipzig, Linnéstraße 5, 04103 Leipzig, Germany and
2 Institute for Theoretical Physics, Georg-August University of Göttingen,
Friedrich-Hund Platz 1, 37077 Göttingen, Germany
(Dated: March 11, 2015)
Modeling approaches of suspended, rod-like particles and recent experimental data have shown that
depletion forces display different signatures depending on the orientation of these particles. It has
been shown that axial attraction of two rods yields contractile forces of 0.1 pN that are independent
of the relative axial shift of the two rods. Here, we measured depletion-caused interactions of actin
bundles extending the phase space of single pairs of rods to a multi-particle system. In contrast to
a filament pair, we found forces up to 3 pN. Upon bundle relaxation forces decayed exponentially
with a mean decay time of 3.4 s. These different dynamics are explained within the frame of a
mathematical model by taking pairwise interactions to a multi-filament scale. The macromolecular
content employed for our experiments is well below the crowding of cells. Thus, we propose that
arising forces can contribute to biological force generation without the need to convert chemical
energy into mechanical work.
PACS numbers: 87.15.H-, 87.16.Ln, 87.15.kr, 87.16.Ka

Interactions of actin and its molecular motor myosin
are known as the fundamental process for biological force
generation. These interactions convert chemical energy
into mechanical work by ATP hydrolysis [1]. However,
we show an alternative mechanism of force generation in
the absence of any molecular motors or actin accessory
proteins. The system is not driven by ATP hydrolysis and
relies solely on minimization of the free energy based on
filament - filament interactions. Interactions are induced
by a crowded environment in a regime well below the
macromolecular content of biological cells [2].
These so-called depletion forces were originally described by spherical colloidal particles suspended in a
polymeric solution [3, 4]. However, this effect inherently
appears in crowded solutions independent of the geometry
of colloidal particles. Besides lateral particle attraction,
the influence of depletion forces on axially shifted rod-like
colloids has already been described by theoretical approaches [5–7]. All these approaches describe the relative
shift of two rod-like particles due to the induced interaction. Arising forces are found to be linear in the axial
shift since the energy gain per unit length is constant.
Recently, Hilitski et al. experimentally verified these
approaches by investigating the overlap of single microtubuli filaments [8]. They found a constant force driving
these two rods towards a maximized overlap of their excluded volumes. Additionally, force components sum up
in a pairwise manner when introducing a third rod to the
system [8]. We describe a different, emerging behavior of
rod-like colloids in a multi-filament system, in our case
actin bundles formed by the depletant methyl cellulose
[9–12]. These bundles are formed without influences of
additional accessory proteins.
We used a mesoscopic approach allowing to deflect
bundles from their energetic minimum by pulling forces

exerted by optical tweezers. We investigated kinetics and
restoring forces arising from the relative, axial sliding
of single rod-like filaments within the bundle. Observed
responses did not yield a constant force - in contrast to
a two filament system - but an exponential force decay.
These unexpected, complex dynamics can be explained
by a mathematical model when increasing pairwise, linear
interactions to a multi-filament scale. Additionally, the
model is verified by simulations. These emergent dynamics can exert forces corresponding to a regime of weak
active behavior of single myosin motors [13, 14].
To probe these contractions, we used two different
experimental approaches. A dual-trap configuration was
used to maneuver one bead while the other bead was held
at a constant position. This pulling process resulted in
a stretched bundle exceeding its former contour length.
After releasing the deflected bead from the trap, the
bundle started to contract (Fig. 1 (a)). This process
was recorded as an image series of the fluorescent signals
(Fig. 1 (b), Movie S 1). A bead tracking algorithm computed with adapted MATLAB routines provided by
Pelletier et al. [15] - was used to transform these image
series to trajectories. Following data evaluations were
conducted with self-written MATLAB scripts as described
previously [16]. Alternatively, an arrangement of only one
bead attached to a bundle was employed. By displacing
the bead, the bundle was dragged through the solution.
The longitudinal viscous drag elongated the bundle (Fig.
1 (c)). Immediately after the movement was stopped
bundles started to contract and fluorescent signals were
recorded (Movie S 2). To evaluate these experiments,
a kymograph (picture series joined in one image) was
used to visualize the bundle length over time (Fig. 1
(d)). Standard edge detections routines of MATLAB were
employed to extract the bundle length at given times.

2

(a)

(b)

t=0s

5 µm

t = 100 s

(c)

(d)

t=0s
t=0s

5 µm

t = 10.5 s

Figure 1. (Color online) (a) Optical tweezers were used to
stretch bundles exceeding normal elastic deformations. After
releasing one bead from the trap the bundle started to contract
(Movie S 1). In a stretched bundle, the overlap of excluded
volumes was not maximized anymore. When the pulling force
was switched off, filaments tended to maximize this overlap
again and contractions appeared (magnification). A bead
tracking algorithm was used to transform recorded image
series to bead trajectories giving the bundle length between
these two beads over time. (b) After the pulling process the
right bead was released and the bundle relaxed to a position
maximizing the overlap of the excluded volumes again. (c) The
bead can be trapped and moved through the viscous solution
stretching the bundle due to friction. When the movement
is stopped, the bundle started to contract. (d) Displayed are
the first frame of the picture series and the kymograph of a
contractile actin bundle attached to one bead with detected
bundle length over time.

These methods are suitable to investigate dynamics of
the system. However, multi-filament systems involve a
variety of parameters (such as molecular content, bundle
thickness, filament length distributions and more) yielding
diverse starting conditions for every experiment.
In our experiments we tested responses of filament bundles under stress and recorded strains exceeding normal
elastic deformations (up to 175 % of the initial contour
length). Due to actin’s rigidity these elongations can
neither be attributed to thermal fluctuations of single
filaments nor stretching of the filament backbone. Thus,
within the pulling process filaments were pulled apart
and overlapping excluded volumes of filaments were not
maximized anymore. After stress release bundles started
to contract. This behavior can be attributed to filaments
restoring a maximal overlap of their excluded volumes.
Although previous studies revealed a constant force
for pairwise overlapping filaments, the decreasing bundle length over time in our experiments is well described by an exponential decay (Fig. 2 (a)). Thus,
bundle dynamics correspond to an overdamped relaxation in a harmonic free energy landscape. These
dynamics arise due to the multi-filament nature of
probed actin bundles as described in the mathemat-

ical model below. Resulting exponential decay functions (bundle length(t) = a · exp(−t/τ ) + c) yield a distribution of decay times τ showing the consistency of
the effect with a median of 3.4 s (Fig. 2 (a)) inset). Determined exponential decays were used to calculate the
velocity of contractions showing maximal speeds in the
range from 0.10 to 0.65 µm s−1 (Fig. S2). Resulting maximal forces were evaluated by Stokes’ law and typically
range from 0.5 to 3.0 pN (Fig. S2).
In three cases we observed contractions involving additional accelerating events. These rendered one single
exponential decay inappropriate (Fig. 2 B) to describe the
whole contraction process. Those contractions, however,
can be well described by a series of exponential decay
functions. Interestingly, the decay times of these individual exponential decay functions are consistent. In general,
we attribute these accelerating events to split bundle
structures. A part of the bundle with originally overlapping filaments was fully detached during the stretching
process. Filaments in the “main bundle” still shared excluded volumes to cause contractions. When releasing the
external stress these bundles started to contract lacking
the contribution of the non-overlapping filaments. Their
formerly attractive potential was not involved in the cumulative energy balance of the starting contraction. At a
certain point non-overlapping filaments came close enough
to share excluded volumes with the already contracting
bundle. New overlaps changed the attractive potential
and accordingly the energy balance. Thus, a second or
third additional internal contraction process set in and
the overall contraction was accelerated again (Fig. 2 (b)).
To model the results of our experiments we extend the
depletion-induced interaction between filaments from individual filament pairs to a multi-filament scale. Within
the model a bundle is represented as a two-dimensional
arrangement of N rigid rods of length L. The only degree
of freedom of the rods is their relative axial shift xi (Fig.
3). The Hamiltonian is given by
H = −u

N−1
X
i=1

(L − |xi |) − f

N−1
X

xi ,

(1)

i=1

where the first term represents the depletion-induced
attraction between filaments; assumed pair-wise additive
and of strength u. The second term is the work done by
the external pulling force f. The free energy F and the
force-extension relation hR − Li = −∂F/∂f can easily be
calculated numerically. In the large-N limit one obtains
in linear response

 
N x2
hR − Li = f
,
(2)
kB T
which is a consequence of the law of large numbers (similar
as, for
 example,
in the Gaussian chain model). The

value x2 represents fluctuations of a single filament
pair in the absence of force (f=0). Neglecting end-effects

3

1

(a) 15

0.4
5
10
15
20
Decay time constant (s)

4

6
Time (s)

8

10

0

25
0.6
23
0.4
21
19
0

0.2
20

40
Time (s)

60

0

Figure 2. (Color online) (a) The recorded bundle length over
time is well described by an exponential decay allowing an
evaluation of the contraction velocity (red graph). Decay
times (inset) are consistent with a median of 3.4 s. (b) A
contracting bundle can exhibit multiple contraction events
(due to a split bundle structure) described by a series of
exponential decay functions with consistent decay times. The
black curve displays the bundle contraction overlaid with
according single exponential decay functions. The red graph
is the according velocity for the contractions and accelerating
events.


 
it is given by x2 = 2/(βu)2 . As a result we find the
force to be proportional to the extension with a spring
constant k = u2 /NkB T. In Fig. 3 (a) we numerically
calculate the free energy of this model as a function of
the bundle extension R − L and the number of filaments
N that are arranged laterally. With two filaments in the
arrangement (one pair), the free energy is a linear function
of bundle extension, as expected from the definition of the
model. However, this linear relation does not persist for
multi-filament arrangements. Already bundles with four
filaments display approximately a harmonic free energy
that very closely resembles the asymptotic form (N → ∞).
Thus, within the analytical model a combination of
several linear force pairs in an additive manner yields a
relation describing a harmonic potential. The origin of
this transition is the addition of more and more internal
degrees of freedom (in our case the relative sliding of
each individual pair) contributing an entropic term to
the free energy. Extended bundles have a much smaller
entropy, because the accessible configuration space for

x1

x2

R = L + ∑ixi

(b)

N=2
0.4

Free energy NFN(R)

2

0
0

2

x3 (>0)

velocity (µm/s)

Bundle length (µm)

0.6

0.2
12
0

(b)

3

1

13

x4

0.8
velocity (µm/s)

14

(a)

Median

4
Counts

Bundle length (µm)

5

N=3
N=4
Harmonic potential (N ∞)

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
-0.4

-0.2

0.0
0.2
Extension (R-L)/L

0.4

Figure 3. (Color online) (a) Schematic of idealized 2d-scenario,
where forces are applied at the first (i = 1) and at the last filament (i = N). (b) Free energy FN (R) vs. end-to-end distance
R. A two-filament bundle (N = 2) has a linear energy landscape, but with only a few filaments (N = 4) the asymptotic
harmonic form (dashed) is nearly reached.

bundle conformations is highly reduced.
While for the formulation of the theory several simplifying assumptions have been made, we expect this scenario
to be generic and also useful to understand the complex
experimental bundle contraction. The internal degrees of
freedom in this case may also include filament bending
fluctuations which are suppressed by extension [17], thus
decreasing the entropy. The depletion force, in general,
cannot be written as a sum over two-body contributions
[18]. We test this assumption of the model by running
molecular dynamics simulations where the depletant is
modeled explicitly via soft spheres (see supplement). Simulations and theoretical model are in excellent agreement
indicating that many-body effects for the depletion interaction in our case are indeed negligible. Although other
studies revealed a constant force for pairwise overlapping
filaments [5–7], we are able to show that pairwise linear,
additive forces create a harmonic potential. This potential for attractive filament-filament interactions in our
system supports the approach to describe actin bundle
contractions by an overdamped harmonic motion. Within
the frame of this model decreasing bundle lengths over
time can be well described by an exponential decay.
Our approach explains the spring-like elastic behavior of
the bundle under elongation predicting a spring constant
k = c · u2 /(kB T). The prefactor c ∝ N3d /N can be estimated to depend on the number of filament pairs N in
the two-dimensional bundle element ( Fig. 3 (a)) and

4

Decay time (s)

7
6
5

14

0.6

10

0.5
50

150 250
Time (s)

Bundlelength (µm)

8

Bundle thickness (µm)

(a)

350

4
3
2
1
0.45

(b)
Decay time (s)

the number N3d of these elements that are coupled in
parallel. The precise value of c depends on the internal
bundle structure and may vary with the experimental
situation. With c = O(1) we are able to estimate a spring
constant by using filament-filament interaction energies of
30 kB T /µm as measured previously [12]. The resulting
k=3.6 pN µm−1 is in good agreement with the magnitudes
of our data. We were not able to quantitatively compare
this theoretical approach to our data any further due to
experimental uncertainties. Unfortunately, there is no
technique known to us to determine the exact amount
of filaments within the bundle in situ and values can be
only estimated roughly [10]. Furthermore, packing effects
within the bundle cannot be resolved, which would be essential to extend our model from a simple two-dimensional
arrangement to fully three dimensional structures and to
determine N3d . Computer simulations are underway to
elucidate the specific role of packing effects.
Evaluations of the dynamic behavior of contractions
enable us to test influences of the contraction process
on the bundle itself. We monitored the bundle thickness over time (Fig. 4 (a)) and found that a bundle
becomes thicker during the contraction since overlapping
filaments are driving the system to a shorter structure.
These measurements aimed at comparing different bundle
thicknesses to contractile dynamics. Bundle widths were
evaluated via a Radon transform along the bundle backbone [19]. Some of these measurements were discarded
since these evaluations showed a dependency on input
parameters. Presented data, however, were consistent and
evaluations were done with the same parameters. The
full width at half maximum of the intensity profiles was
chosen to compare thicknesses of different bundles. Due
to the direct correlation to interacting filament pairs we
expect an influence of the overall bundle thickness on
exerted forces and kinetics during contractions of different bundles. However, we found no apparent correlation
within the limits of our measurements (Fig. 4 (a)). This
data is in good agreement with consistent decay times
for accelerating events, where a bundle thickening has
seemingly a minor influence. Possibly, effects due to
thicker bundles are superimposed by unavoidable viscosity variations for differing experiments. These variations
correspond to different macromolecular contents of the
depletion agent influencing the contraction process. We
observed that a higher macromolecular content inherently
slows down contractions due to higher friction forces and
shows approximately a linear dependency with respect to
the decay times of contraction processes (Fig. 4 (b)). For
this investigation the viscosity was measured by optical
tweezers as described in [20] with a bead in vicinity to
the bundle. Viscosity values were directly translated into
macromolecular contents with data sheets provided by
Sigma-Aldrich.
As a further test of influences of the contraction process
to the bundle, we investigated the persistence of a bun-

0.55
0.65
Bundle thickness (µm)

0.75

10

6

2
80

100

120 140 160 180 200
Macromolecular content (µM)

220

Figure 4. (Color online) (a) The bundle thickness has no
detectable scaling behavior within the limits of our measurements. (Inset) In the course of a contraction process (red
dots) a thickening of the contracting bundle (blue dots) can
be observed . (b) With an increasing molecular content of the
depletion agent an increase of decay times was observed. Thus,
a more viscous medium yields a slower bundle contraction due
to higher friction.

dle’s contraction behavior. In that course we deformed a
single bundle multiple times and recorded its contraction
behavior. For a better experimental realization bundles
attached solely to one bead were probed. Our experiments revealed a degenerating effect after consecutive
expansions and contractions. As displayed in Fig. 5, later
contractions display lower maximal velocities and reach
a higher baseline representing an increased relaxed bundle length. We attribute this fact to potential filament
annealing (two filaments concatenate) yielding a change
in the energy balance [21]. For further contractions these
merged filaments would have to buckle and thus hinder
the overall contraction process.
In conclusion, we developed an optical tweezers based
technique to investigate the contractile behavior induced
by depletion forces [9] of a multi-filament actin bundle. In
comparison to previous theoretical as well as experimental
studies [5–8] we found a fundamentally different, dynamic
behavior. These earlier studies described that a relative,
axial sliding of single rod-like filaments induced by deple-

5

1

acknowledges the support of the German Science Foundation (DFG) via the Emmy Noether fellowship He 6322/1-1
as well as via the collaborative research center SFB 937,
project A16.

1

Relative bundle length

2
7

0.9

11
13

0.8

13
11

0.7
0.6
1
0

4

8
Time (s)

12

2

7
16

Figure 5. (Color online) Contractions show a decaying behavior
when one bundle is deformed multiple times consecutively
(Movie S 2). Dynamic behavior becomes slower with every
expansion and contraction event and the bundle relaxes to
other baselines. Numbers refer to the specific contraction
process. Image series were evaluated in form of a kymograph.
The relative bundle length describes the actual bundle length
normalized by the maximal outstretched configuration in the
according experiment.

tion forces leads to a linear force exertion. Dynamics of
contractions would then proceed with a constant velocity,
at odds with our findings of an exponentially decreasing
velocity. We are able to describe this behavior as an
emergent phenomenon of rod-like colloids in an actin bundle when taking pairwise interactions to a multi-filament
scale. To further understand the results of our experiments we model the bundle as a simple two-dimensional
arrangement of N-1 laterally stacked pairs of rigid filaments. The arising harmonic potential and accordingly
the exponential force decay were verified by simulations.
To measure absolute force values, different techniques
have to be applied like in [8], but these methods hardly
allow evaluations of dynamics.
Molecular crowding effects represent a fundamental
physical interaction, which cannot be switched off even
in active systems such as cells. The cytoplasm itself is
a dense environment filled with macromolecules [2]. In
the experiments presented here, however, the amount of
macromolecules is well below the macromolecular content
of a cell emphasizing the biological relevance (see supplement). Additionally, kinetics and force generation are in a
regime of active processes but without the need to convert
chemical energy into mechanical work [1, 14, 22–24].
We like to thank Jessica Lorenz helping to set up the
SDS-PAGE and David M. Smith as well as Tina Händler
for proofreading this manuscript and helpful discussions.
This work was supported by the graduate school “Building
with Molecules and Nano-Objects” (BuildMoNa – GSC
185/1) and the DFG Forschergruppe (FOR 877). CH

[1] H. F. Lodish, Molecular cell biology, 4th ed. (W.H. Freeman, New York, op. 2000).
[2] R. Ellis, Trends in Biochemical Sciences 26, 597 (2001).
[3] S. Asakura and F. Oosawa, Journal of Polymer Science
33, 183 (1958).
[4] S. Asakura and F. Oosawa, The Journal of Chemical
Physics 22, 1255 (1954).
[5] M. Kinoshita, Chemical Physics Letters 387, 47 (2004).
[6] W. Li and H. R. Ma, The European physical journal. E,
Soft matter 16, 225 (2005).
[7] J. Galanis, R. Nossal, and D. Harries, Soft matter 6,
1026 (2010).
[8] F. Hilitski, A. R. Ward, L. Cajamarca, M. F. Hagan,
G. M. Grason, and Z. Dogic, arXiv:1408.5068 (2014).
[9] M. Hosek and J. Tang, Physical Review E 69 (2004),
10.1103/PhysRevE.69.051907.
[10] D. Strehle, J. Schnauß, C. Heussinger, J. Alvarado,
M. Bathe, J. Käs, and B. Gentry, European Biophysics
Journal 40, 93 (2011).
[11] Lau, A. W. C., A. Prasad, and Z. Dogic, EPL (Europhysics Letters) 87, 48006 (2009).
[12] M. Streichfuss, F. Erbs, K. Uhrig, R. Kurre, A. E.-M.
Clemen, Böhm, Christian H J, T. Haraszti, and J. P.
Spatz, Nano letters 11, 3676 (2011).
[13] K. Carvalho, F.-C. Tsai, E. Lees, R. Voituriez, G. H.
Koenderink, and C. Sykes, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 110, 16456 (2013).
[14] A. E.-M. Clemen, M. Vilfan, J. Jaud, J. Zhang, M. Bärmann, and M. Rief, Biophysical Journal 88, 4402 (2005).
[15] V. Pelletier, N. Gal, P. Fournier, and M. Kilfoil,
Physical Review Letters 102 (2009), 10.1103/PhysRevLett.102.188303.
[16] T. Golde, C. Schuldt, J. Schnauß, D. Strehle, M. Glaser,
and J. Käs, Physical Review E 88 (2013), 10.1103/PhysRevE.88.044601.
[17] F. MacKintosh, J. Käs, and P. Janmey, Physical Review
Letters 75, 4425 (1995).
[18] M. Dijkstra and R. van Roij, Physical Review Letters 89
(2002), 10.1103/PhysRevLett.89.208303.
[19] Q. Zhang and I. Couloigner, IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing 16, 310 (2007).
[20] S. F. Tolić-Nørrelykke, E. Schäffer, J. Howard, F. S.
Pavone, F. Jülicher, and H. Flyvbjerg, Review of Scientific Instruments 77, 103101 (2006).
[21] E. Andrianantoandro, L. Blanchoin, D. Sept, J. McCammon, and T. D. Pollard, Journal of Molecular Biology
312, 721 (2001).
[22] J. T. Finer, R. M. Simmons, and J. A. Spudich, Nature
368, 113 (1994).
[23] S. J. Kron and J. A. Spudich, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 83,
6272 (1986).
[24] J. M. Scholey, Motility assays for motor proteins, Methods
in cell biology, Vol. v. 39 (Academic Press, San Diego,
1993).

Supplementary Material
Motor-free actin bundle contractility driven by molecular crowding
Jörg Schnauß1 , Tom Golde1 , Carsten Schuldt1 , B. U. Sebastian Schmidt1 ,
Martin Glaser1 , Dan Strehle1 , Josef A. Käs1 , and Claus Heussinger2

arXiv:1503.02929v1 [physics.bio-ph] 10 Mar 2015

1 Institute for Experimental Physics I, University of Leipzig , Linnéstraße 5, 04103 Leipzig , Germany and
2 Institute for Theoretical Physics, Georg-August University of Göttingen,
Friedrich-Hund Platz 1, 37077 Göttingen, Germany

I BIOCHEMICAL PREPARATION AND
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS

G-actin was prepared from rabbit muscle as described
previously [1]. This procedure involved size-exclusion
chromatography to ensure the purity of the actin and
the absence of other proteins. This purity was verified
by SDS-PAGE (Fig. S1). We observed the actin
signal at 42 kDa but no other signals, which would
indicate additional components. To ensure a complete
independence of myosins, we verified the persistence
of the effect under ADP conditions rendering active
processes impossible. The presence of any crosslinking
proteins would have inhibited the initial experimental
step since sliding motions would have been suppressed.
Monomeric actin was polymerized and labelled by
adding 1/10 volume fraction of 10 times concentrated F-buffer (1.0 M KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 50 mM
HEPES, 2.0 mM ATP or ADP, 10 mM DTT) and
Phalloidin–Tetramethylrhodamine B isothiocyanate
(Phalloidin-TRITC - Sigma-Aldrich Co.) at a concentration of 5 µM. Biotinylated actin (5 µM - Cytoskeleton
Inc.) was added to the solution to decorate filament
ends after polymerization (ratio of 3 to 50). Further
actin preparation was done as described above and
polymerization was induced by ADP-F-Buffer conditions.
For experiments under ADP conditions, all buffers
were prepared with ADP instead of ATP. To exchange
the former G-Buffer (5 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1 mM CaCl2,
0.2 mM ATP, 1.0 mM DTT, 0.01 % NaN3), G-actin
was polymerized under ADP-F-Buffer conditions and
centrifuged at 100,000 g for 3.5 h at 4°C. The pellet was
resuspended in ADP-G-Buffer (5 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1 mM
CaCl2, 0.2 mM ADP, 1.0 mM DTT, 0.01 % NaN3) and
dialyzed against ADP-G-Buffer overnight.
2 µm fluorescent streptavidin beads (Streptavidin
Fluoresbrite® YG Microspheres - Polysciences Inc.) were
used to allow binding of the prepared, labelled actin
via biotin-streptavidin bonds. Beads were captured by
optical tweezers enabling contact-free manipulations and
measurements of dynamics within the system.
Depletion forces were induced by adding methyl cellulose
(400 cP (2 % in aqueous solution) - Sigma-Aldrich
Co.) to arrange actin filaments into bundles without
the need of accessory proteins [2]. The final solution
contained 0.2 µM TRITC-labelled, biotinylated actin,

glucose/glucose oxidase as antiphotobleaching agent,
and 1.6 % methyl cellulose in F-buffer conditions. This
solution was deposited into a sample chamber as
described previously [2].
Fluorescence was induced by a mercury vapor lamp and a
N2.1 filter cube transmitting the appropriate green light
(Leica 11513882, excitation filter from 515 to 560 nm) on
the sample. In this spectrum actin bundles as well as
beads were visualized.
To manipulate beads and actin structures an epifluorescence Leica DM IRB microscope equipped with
a 100×oil-immersion objective (Leica 11506168) and a
custom-built optical tweezers setup was used (similar
to the setup described by Koch et al. [3] equipped
with a Manlight ML3-CW-P-OEM-OTS laser). Observations and image acquisitions were realized by a
Hamamatsu Orca ER digital CCD camera (Hamamatsu
Photonics). All components of the setup were controlled
and integrated by a self-written LabVIEW (National
Instruments) program. Experiments were observed via
image sequences with a typical frame rate of 20 Hz.

260 kDa

260 kDa

70 kDa

70 kDa

40 kDa

40 kDa
Sample
solution

Reference

Reference

Figure S1. SDS-PAGE was used to show the absence of any
myosin motors or other accessory proteins in solution. Only
the actin signal at 42 kDa was observed verifying the purity
of the solutuion.

2
III SIMULATION OF THE CROSS-OVER TO A
MULTI-FILAMENT SYSTEM

Exponential decay functions describing the bundle
length over time during the contraction process can be
used to further evaluate these processes. The fitting function can be analytically differentiated yielding the velocity
of the contraction. Resulting maximal velocities of the
contractions typically ranged from 0.10 to 0.65 µm/s (Fig.
S2). If two beads were attached to a bundle, the bead’s
geometry was used to determine contractile forces. The
released bead was dragged through the solution by the contraction. Forces, necessary to displace a bead in a viscous
medium, can be approximated by Stokes’ law (F = 6πηrv,
with η being the viscosity, r the radius of the bead, and
v the velocity). This approach, however, systematically
underestimates forces since longitudinal friction at the
bundle surface is neglected. For this evaluation the viscosity of the surrounding medium was measured with
microrheological methods. Measurements yielded a viscosity of η = 0.24 ± 0.03 Pa s. Our data have shown
maximal forces typically range from 0.5 to 3.0 pN (Fig.
S2). A spread of maximal forces is evident since bundles
are very heterogeneous structures and uniform starting
conditions are not feasible. Bundle thicknesses, for instance, naturally vary and the number of filaments within
a bundled structure can only be approximated [2]. The
amount of free filament ends can vary drastically from
bundle to bundle. Additionally, maximal velocities as well
as forces depend on the extension of the bundle during
the stretching process, which is limited by the strength
of the optical tweezers setup.
Due to the exponential length decay, generated forces
converge to zero when bundles are fully contracted approaching the thermal noise regime. Forces due to thermal
noise, however, are not directed. Contractile forces in
our experiments are directed and thus bundles still relax
even in this low force regime until reaching their energetic
minimum.

The analytical model describes the free energy of the
system as a function of the end-to-end distance R quickly
reaching an asymptotic form already for a few filaments.
We are able to confirm this behavior by molecular dynamics simulations, where the depletant is modeled explicitly via soft spheres. Filaments are modeled as rigid
rods and excluded volume effects via shifted and truncated Lennard-Jones interactions for filament-filament
and filament-depletant pairs. The ratio between filament
and depletant diameter is chosen to be five. The filament
length is 50 in units of the depletant diameter, and the
volume fraction of the depletant is taken to be 0.5.
In Fig. S3 the probability distribution for the offset between first and last filament in the bundle (no force, f = 0)
is shown. For an N = 2 bundle an exponential distribution
arises as given by the Boltzmann weight (exp(-βu |x|)).
Upon addition of more filaments to the bundle a crossover to a Gaussian distribution can be observed. This
distribution corresponds to a harmonic energy profile.
Distributions of more filaments (e.g. N = 4, 6) can be
well described by Gaussian fits, in particular for small
offsets. Furthermore, the fit for N = 6 resembles also the
behavior for larger offsets as expected from the theory.
The relative width σ of the Gaussian fits for the
p two cases
of N = 4,6 filament bundles yield σ6 /σ4 ≈ 6/4. This
behavior is as expected from the p
N-dependence of the
spring constant k ∼ 1/N and σ ∼ 1/k.
1

N=2
N=4
N=6
0.1
PN(R)

II FORCES AND VELOCITIES

0.01

8

0

0.22

vmax (µm/s)
0.44
0.66

0.88
0.001
0

Counts

6
4
2
0

0

1

2
3
Forcemax (pN)

4

Figure S2. Maximal velocities (typically ranging from 0.10 to
0.65 µm/s) and forces (typically ranging from 0.5 to 3.0 pN)
of contractile bundles attached to two beads.

0.1

0.2
0.3
Extension (R-L)/L

0.4

Figure S3. Probability distributions P(R) for the extensions
(end-to-end distance) of bundles of N = 2, 4, 6 filaments are
displayed. Points are direct results of the simulation and
lines are corresponding fits. For a bundle of two filaments the
probability distribution follows an exponential distribution as
given by the Boltzmann weight. Probability distributions of
a bundle with more filaments follow a Gaussian distribution.
This transition is illustrated by simulating N = 2, 4, 6 filament
bundles. Already bundles formed by six filaments yield a
Gaussian probability distribution corresponding to a harmonic
potential.

3
IV BIOLOGICAL RELEVANCE

Especially for forces in the piconewton range, the
passive process we found cannot be ignored. These
contributions minimize the free energy of the bundle
if filaments interact in an attractive fashion. Our
experiments only rely on filament-filament interactions
induced by the environment and no other proteins besides
actin are involved. In addition, contractions do not
require a specific orientation of actin filaments concerning
their plus and minus ends. Dynamics of the energetically
driven processes, however, are slow in comparison to
velocity ranges of some myosins. Myosin II motors, for
instance, have been reported to move up to 4.5 µm/s
[4–7]. Myosin types moving actively in a lower velocity
range have also been described [8]. Besides dynamic
differences, myosin activity is switchable while filament
interactions cannot be influenced easily [9].
Although dynamics of the energy minimizing processes
are slow, they can be employed to contribute to contractions. The passive contractility process we found may act
independently of molecular motors but may also act in
concert with motor activity. Cellular actin systems, for
instance, are prestressed by myosin minifilaments [10].
These motors maintain tensile strains of the bundle and
the overall cellular strain can be preserved. However,
myosin motors bind transiently and minifilaments can be
very small containing only three to four myosins. Thus,
there are states when all molecular motors are detached
from the bundle. Due to its prestress a bundle would
extend its length decreasing its tension. In extreme
cases bundles would even fully dissolve. Nevertheless
prestressed bundles remain intact since filament-filament
interactions antagonize bundle disintegration. Tensile
strains of bundles and consequently of whole cells can be
sustained.
On a cellular scale this mechanism may play a role in the
retraction phase of filopodia, which are among the most
molecularly crowded structures in cells. Actin filament
bundles stretching from the tip to the base of filopodia
are highly contractile although they are not directly
contracted by the myosin motors located at the basal
interface to the interior actin cortex [11]. This is further
supported by the fact that bundled actin filaments
within filopodia are highly parallel in polarity due to
their polymerization from the tip, thereby rendering
active myosin contractions implausible. In contrast,
the fundamental mechanism underlying contraction
presented here is entirely independent of the orientation
of interacting filament pairs. Stall forces for retracting
filopodia are on the same order of magnitude as the
crowding-induced contractile forces measured in our
experiments [11]. Their kinetics, however, seem to be
slower [12], which might be attributed to crosslinkers
such as fascin or fimbrin regulating the depletion force

effect. Fascin itself might inhibit these depletion driven
contractions due to its properties as a relatively stable
crosslinker on the time scale of retraction events [13].
However, fascin’s binding affinity can be influenced by
phosphorylation, which drastically reduces its actin
binding affinity [14, 15]. This mechanism, which itself is
regulated by interactions between the surface of the cell
and its surrounding environment, might act as a trigger
to initiate bundle, and thereby filopodia contraction via
crowding-induced forces.
The in vivo situation in cellular systems, however, is far
more complex with many interacting components and
interwoven functions. Examinations of a minimal system
of actin filaments in a crowded environment initially
allowed us to investigate distinct biophysical properties,
which are hardly accessible in in vivo systems. However,
extensive in vivo studies are necessary to determine
processes and magnitudes of entropic forces induced by a
crowded environment in active systems such as cells.
In conclusion, these contractions are based on fundamental physical laws and are very robust. Entropic
crowding effects can generate forces in the piconewton
range which are relevant in biological systems since they
are comparable to myosin activity. This statement is
emphasized by the macromolecular content employed for
our experiments, which is well below the macromolecular
content of cells. Furthermore, crowding effects cannot be
switched off and bundle contractions always appear if
filaments can slide against each other. Thus, depletion
forces and accordingly these contractile actin structures
should appear in cellular systems as well. They are
independent of any active structural arrangements and
parameters such as filament orientation.

[1] B. Gentry, D. Smith, and J. Käs, Physical Review E 79
(2009), 10.1103/PhysRevE.79.031916.
[2] D. Strehle, J. Schnauß, C. Heussinger, J. Alvarado,
M. Bathe, J. Käs, and B. Gentry, European Biophysics
Journal 40, 93 (2011).
[3] D. Koch, T. Betz, A. Ehrlicher, M. Gogler, B. Stuhrmann,
J. Kas, K. Dholakia, and G. C. Spalding, in Optical
Science and Technology, the SPIE 49th Annual Meeting,
SPIE Proceedings (SPIE, 2004) pp. 428–436.
[4] H. F. Lodish, Molecular cell biology, 4th ed. (W.H. Freeman, New York, op. 2000).
[5] K. Carvalho, F.-C. Tsai, E. Lees, R. Voituriez, G. H.
Koenderink, and C. Sykes, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 110, 16456 (2013).
[6] J. T. Finer, R. M. Simmons, and J. A. Spudich, Nature
368, 113 (1994).
[7] A. E.-M. Clemen, M. Vilfan, J. Jaud, J. Zhang, M. Bärmann, and M. Rief, Biophysical Journal 88, 4402 (2005).
[8] J. M. Scholey, Motility assays for motor proteins, Methods
in cell biology, Vol. v. 39 (Academic Press, San Diego,
1993).

4
[9] M. R. Stachowiak, P. M. McCall, T. Thoresen, H. E. Balcioglu, L. Kasiewicz, M. L. Gardel, and B. O’Shaughnessy,
Biophysical Journal 103, 1265 (2012).
[10] M. L. Gardel, F. Nakamura, J. H. Hartwig, J. C. Crocker,
T. P. Stossel, and D. A. Weitz, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103, 1762 (2006).
[11] S. Romero, A. Quatela, T. Bornschlogl, S. Guadagnini,
P. Bassereau, and Tran Van Nhieu, G., Journal of Cell
Science 125, 4999 (2012).
[12] T. Bornschlögl, S. Romero, C. L. Vestergaard, J.-F.
Joanny, Van Nhieu, Guy Tran, and P. Bassereau, Proceed-

ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 110, 18928 (2013).
[13] D. Vignjevic, S.-i. Kojima, Y. Aratyn, O. Danciu, T. Svitkina, and G. G. Borisy, The Journal of Cell Biology 174,
863 (2006).
[14] Y. Yamakita, S. Ono, F. Matsumura, and S. Yamashiro,
The Journal of biological chemistry 271, 12632 (1996).
[15] S. Ono, Y. Yamakita, S. Yamashiro, P. T. Matsudaira,
J. R. Gnarra, T. Obinata, and F. Matsumura, The Journal of biological chemistry 272, 2527 (1997).

