A simple biophysical model predicts more rapid accumulation of hybrid
incompatibilities in small populations
Bhavin S. Khatri∗
MRC National Institute for Medical Research
Mathematical Biology Division
The Ridgeway, London, NW7 1AA, U.K.

arXiv:1503.07794v1 [q-bio.PE] 26 Mar 2015

Richard A. Goldstein
Division of Infection and Immunity
University College London
London, WC1E 6BT, U.K.
Speciation is fundamental to the huge diversity of life on Earth. Evidence suggests reproductive
isolation arises most commonly in allopatry with a higher speciation rate in small populations.
Current theory does not address this dependence in the important weak mutation regime. Here,
we examine a biophysical model of speciation based on the binding of a protein transcription factor
to a DNA binding site, and how their independent co-evolution, in a stabilizing landscape, of two
allopatric lineages leads to incompatibilities. Our results give a new prediction for the monomorphic
regime of evolution, consistent with data, that smaller populations should develop incompatibilities
more quickly. This arises as: 1) smaller populations having a greater initial drift load, as there are
more sequences that bind poorly than well, so fewer substitutions are needed to reach incompatible
regions of phenotype space; 2) slower divergence when the population size is larger than the inverse
of discrete diﬀerences in ﬁtness. Further, we ﬁnd longer sequences develop incompatibilities more
quickly at small population sizes, but more slowly at large population sizes. The biophysical model
thus represents a robust mechanism of rapid reproductive isolation for small populations and large
sequences, that does not require peak-shifts or positive selection.

INTRODUCTION

Speciation is of great importance in generating the observed diversity of life, yet it is still poorly understood,
especially at the genetic level. Darwin [1], despite the
title of his magnum opus, struggled with the following
problem, here phrased in a modern context: if hybrid
inviability were due to heterozygote disadvantage at a
single locus with alleles a and A, it is difficult to see how
two species could have evolved from a single homozygotic
ancestor without going through the inviable heterozygotic state. A resolution of this paradox was to propose
that non-linear interactions or epistasis between different
loci can give rise to so-called Dobzhansky-Muller incompatibilities (DMI) [2–4]; for example, two geographically
isolated lineages evolving allopatrically from a common
ancestor ab can fix the allelic combinations aB and Ab
respectively, yet the hybrid genotype AB can be inviable. It has also been recognised that a different sort
of hybrid incompatibility can arise in polygenic systems,
where many loci code for an additive quantitative trait.
Quadratic selection induces epistasis such that divergent
populations, under the action of drift, maintain different
underlying allelic combinations at the many loci [5, 6] for
the same optimal trait value, which when combined in hybrids can lead to incompatibilities [7]. Field data [8–10]
suggest that the dominant mechanism for the evolution
of (postzygotic) reproductive isolation (RI) involves the
accumulation of Dobzhansky-Muller incompatibilities in

geographically isolated populations with no or little gene
flow [11, 12].
Despite many studies of the evolution of RI, very little
attention has been paid to the role of population size;
however, there is indirect evidence that smaller populations develop incompatibilities more quickly. In particular, observations of the large species diversity in small
habitats [13–15], such as cichlids in the East African
Great Lakes [16], contrasted to the lower diversity of
marine animals [14, 17, 18] and birds [19], which have
large ranges and population sizes, suggest that the rate at
which RI develops increases with decreasing populations
size. More directly, cichlids, whose effective population
size is of order 100 − 10000 [20, 21], develop reproductive isolation on a timescale of 1 − 10Myr after divergence [22], whilst domestic chickens (Gallus gallus) can
still hybridize with helmeted guineafowl (Numida meleagris), even after roughly 55Myr divergence [23], where estimates of the effective population size of domestic chickens range between Ne ≈ 105 to 106 [24]. This trend is
further supported [8] by inference of net diversification
rates from phylogenetic trees [25, 26].
Where does current theory stand in light of these observations? There are a number of theoretical models
of allopatric speciation based on the Dobzhansky-Muller
mechanism, which consider independent lineages evolving neutrally or under varying selection pressures on each
lineage [27–33]. Models which involve positive selection
driving divergence are unlikely to be able to explain this
dependence on population size, since larger populations

2
respond more quickly, for a given selection pressure [31].
This leaves models of speciation where populations diverge neutrally or under similar stabilizing selection pressure; the models of Nei et. al [30] and Gavrilets [32] tackle
precisely this question in the strong mutation regime
(nµ0 N ≥ 1, where n is the number of nucleotides or
base-pairs for the loci of interest, µ0 the base-pair mutation rate and N the population size). They find slower
divergence in larger populations due to the lower mating
success of members of the population who have diverged
an amount comparable to the width of the fitness peak,
resulting in a slower rate of developing RI. However, in
neither of these models is there a dependence on population size in the weak mutation, nearly monomorphic
regime, where nµ0 N ≪ 1. Models of hybrid incompatibility that rely on fitness epistasis on quantitative traits,
also predict that smaller populations should develop reproductive isolation more quickly, as drift helps populations shift between stable equilibria more rapidly [7]; but
again by it’s polygenic nature, we expect these results to
be only relevant to the strong mutation regime. Johnson
and Porter [34, 35] examined the evolution of decreased
hybrid fitness for simple models of gene regulation, under
positive and stabilizing selection, in the clonal interference regime (nµ0 N ∼ 1), but did not investigate the
dependence on population size. More recently, they have
extended their work with sequence based models [36],
showing decreased hybrid fitness with decreasing population size, however, these results are again in the regime
where the effect of mutations are not weak (nµ0 N ∼ 1)
and they did not investigate in detail the dynamics of
the growth of DMIs. A model which could give rise to
more rapid RI for small populations is based on founder
events or peak-shifts, where small founder populations
split and become isolated [37–40]; here genetic drift allows smaller populations to pass more easily through a
fitness valley. A major problem with such models is that
for isolation to occur on reasonable timescales the product of the fitness barrier and population size needs to
be sufficiently small. However, this condition also means
that gene flow is relatively unimpeded between peaks [8],
destroying the reproductive isolation the model seeks to
establish. Finally, the work of Orr and co-workers, provided a framework to understand how incompatibilities
might arise in allopatry through sequentially fixing mutations in the weak mutation regime (nµ0 N ≪ 1) [27, 28];
they showed that the number of potential or untested
incompatibilities “snowballs” like ∼ K 2 for interactions
between pairs of loci. However, the starting point of
this model is the assumption of neutral, population-size
independent, divergence between lineages with a fixed
probability that each untested combination is incompatible, and so cannot address the question of the population size dependence. In summary, although the models of Gavrilets, Nei and Barton each predict a decreasing rate of developing RI with increasing population size

when nµ0 N ≥ 1, these models predict no dependence on
population size, or are not applicable in the weak mutation, nearly monomorphic regime where nµ0 N ≪ 1.
This is despite genetic studies which have shown that
traits involved in species differences range from monogenic through to mildly polygenic [41]. For traits which
are not very polygenic, (nµ0 N ≪ 1), we still lack an understanding of the effect of population size on the rate at
which RI arises.
In this paper, we examine how incompatibilities arise
in allopatry for an abstract, yet biophysically motivated
model of binding between two macromolecules, a protein
transcription factor (TF) binding to a specific DNA or
TF binding site (TFBS). Our model is based on the “twostate” approximation [42, 43], which although not capturing the molecular interactions in atomistic detail, can
represent many salient aspects which have been ignored
in previous work on speciation theory. In particular, such
a model allows us to include the effects of drift-selection
balance, due to some phenotypes being coded by more
sequences than others, and the corresponding effect of
population size on the speciation dynamics in the weak
mutation regime (nµ0 N ≪ 1). Recent work has shown
that such mappings from genotype to phenotype give rise
to a number of non-trivial effects [44–49]. Here, we find
this simple genotype-phenotype map predicts an increasing rate of accumulating DMIs for decreasing population
sizes in the weak mutation regime, the appropriate limit
for monomorphically evolving traits, with a robust mechanism that does not require valley crossing by either of
the divergent populations. This dependence on population size arises due to the fact that there are many
more sequences that give weaker binding than good, so
the common ancestor of smaller populations, which are
dominated by genetic drift, are on average closer to the
inviability boundary.
Gene expression divergence has been shown to be a
major factor in driving differences between species [50–
53], providing indirect evidence of a role in speciation.
In particular, compensatory changes at both cis and
trans locations has been shown to be responsible for
the misexpression of many genes in hybrids between
D.melanogaster and D.simulans [54], as well as more
direct evidence of speciation driven by the evolution
of genes related to transcription factors in Drosophila
[55, 56]. With the increasing use of genome level studies
[10] to study the process of speciation, there is a need for
theory and modelling to bridge the gap between sequence
level changes at co-evolving loci and phenotypic determinants of incompatibilities; the binding of transcription
factors to DNA to control gene expression is arguably
one of the most important co-evolving systems for organisms and so makes an ideal case study to examine the
consequences to speciation of a simple biophysical model
and a first mechanistic insight on the way DMIs develop.
The paper is organized as follows: We first introduce

3
a biophysical model of a transcription factor binding to
DNA and the population genetic model of their evolution. We then consider two populations evolving independently, and consider the viability of reproductive
crosses between these populations.

METHODS
Quaternary Model of Transcription Factor-DNA
Binding

The two-state approximation [42, 43] for transcription
factor binding assumes that amino acid nucleotide interactions are either optimal or non-optimal and the contribution of each to the total binding energy is approximately additive. The rationale for this model is the underlying biophysics of protein-DNA interactions, in particular, the fact that an amino acid at a protein DNA
interface will tend to have a preferred nucleotide with
which to hydrogen bond, taking account the approximately fixed orientation of the amino acid as positioned
by the rest of the protein. The other nucleotides tend
to be non-optimal and not able to hydrogen bond [57].
Although each optimal interaction is marginally stabilizing (−0.5kcal/mol [42]), it is the non-optimal nucleotides
that dominate the binding free energy, since they can
neither hydrogen bond to an amino acid nor to water
molecules. Although this suggests a large cost for each
non-optimal interaction, in reality this is highly dependent on the particular protein and DNA sequence; the
cost in free energy per amino acid nucleotide mismatch
can range from 1-2 kcal/mol (2-3kB T ) [57, 58] to 4-5
kcal/mol (6-8kB T ) [42, 59, 60]. This is likely explained
by specific co-operative effects that include electrostatic,
steric and solvent interactions [59, 60] that change the energy scale of binding dependent on a particular proteinDNA binding context. In this paper, for simplicity, we
assume that ǫ = 3kB T .
As mentioned, for each amino acid there tends to a
single nucleotide it prefers to hydrogen bond [57]. If we
designate the category of amino acids by its preferred
partnering base (e.g. an amino acid in group T would
interact preferably with a thymine), and recognize that
only changes of amino acid group affect the binding properties, we can use A, T, C, and G to represent letters from
the quaternary alphabet for both proteins and DNA sequences; for simplicity, this assumes that the amino acids
are equally distributed amongst the four categories. In
this way, the genome corresponding to this binding protein - binding location pair consists of two ‘genes’ of
length ℓ in the standard four letter alphabet of DNA.
For simplicity, we can then let the binding free energy be proportional to the number of amino acidDNA mismatches, equal to the Hamming distance r =
dH (g P , g D ), where the function dH counts the number

of positions where the two sequences g P and g D are not
the same:
∆G = εr,

(1)

where ε is the energy scale for a given transcription factor. This binding free energy corresponds to the specifically bound mode of attachment (which has both specific
and non-specific contributions) and is in thermodynamic
competition with the non-specifically bound mode of attachment, which is purely electrostatic. The free energy
of binding in the electrostatic non-specific mode is,
∆Gns = ℓ∆εns .

(2)

where ∆εns is the effective increase in free energy per
nucleotide in the non-specific mode relative to the best
binder. Thermodynamic studies of Lac repressor binding to DNA suggest that the difference in free energy
between the best specific binding and the non-specific
mode of binding is roughly 15kB T , so as ℓ = 10 for the
Lac respressor, we find ∆εns ≈ 1.5kB T [42, 61]. As the
number of mismatches increases between a DNA binding
site and protein sequence, the probability of the nonspecific mode of attachment increases, which we assume
leads to a decrease in functionality of the site; for simplicity, we model this below using truncation selection
with a critical number of mismatches r∗ .
TF-DNA binding evolution

Relating the binding energy of a TF to its binding site
to the fitness of an organism is in principle very complicated. In general, we would expect that in order for
a TF to find its binding site it would need to minimise
the number of mismatches and so typically we might expect that the fitness will increase with decreasing r. This
is further supported by genome-wide studies of the distribution of binding energies for different TFs in E.coli
[48] and yeast [62, 63], which show that there is a deviation of this distribution from the random/neutral expectation (Eqn.5 below) for the best or lowest affinity
binders. This deviation from the neutral distribution is
related to selection for functional binding sites and has
a character that suggests an effective (Malthusian) fitness landscape for binding energies, which is peaked with
negative curvature. For simplicity, we therefore assume a
quadratic log-fitness landscape, which is equivalent to a
Gaussian fitness landscape (also referred to as a Wrightian fitness landscape or sometimes as a Darwinian fitness
landscape [64]). To model competition between the specific and non-specific modes of attachment, we assume
there is a critical number of mismatches r∗ , where the
probability of binding in each mode is equal; this happens when ∆G(r) = ∆Gns , which from Eqn.1 and Eqn.2

4
gives r∗ = ℓ∆εns /∆ε. This simply says that that as
binding sites increase in length, ℓ, the stability of the
best binder (r = 0) relative to non-specific binding will
increase in proportion to ℓ and hence a larger number
of mismatches will be required before a binding site becomes non-functional. Specifically, for ∆ε = 3kB T and
∆εns = 1.5kB T [42], we get the relation r∗ = ℓ/2. In
the case of short DNA recognition sites for Eco RI endonuclease cleaving DNA, where ℓ = 5, it was found that
r∗ ≈ 3 [59], which agrees well with our approximate relation between r∗ and ℓ. Thus we set the log-fitness to −∞
(Wrightian fitness to 0), for r > r∗ to model the situation
where specific binding to the binding site of interest is no
stronger than the non-specific mode of attachment:
− 1 κ r2 for r ≤ r∗
F (∆G(r)) = { 2 F
−∞ for r > r∗

(3)

where κF is the curvature of the fitness landscape and
biologically, roughly corresponds to the strength of selection of this trait; as κF decreases the fitness landscape
becomes more shallow, and so for a fixed effective population size the landscape becomes more neutral. Our
choice of fitness function, essentially assumes that for
∆G − ∆G∗ > 0, the probability of the TF being bound
to its binding site is zero; this is an approximation to
the more correct functional form for the proportion of
time the TF spends at its TFBS, which will be sigmoidal
in form [43] with transition at the critical binding energy ∆G∗ = ∆εr∗ . However, without a far more detailed
model of how occupancy affects gene expression which affects fitness, which is beyond the scope of this work, we
are left to choose some arbitrary occupancy threshold below which the organism is inviable; for simplicity, we have
chosen ∆G∗ , as this threshold naturally corresponds to
when specific and non-specific binding are equally like at
the site. We expect our qualitative results to be robust to
the choice of such a threshold. Similarly, a more detailed
consideration would include binding of the TF to other
spurious sites in the genome with large sequence similarity; again we expect such consideration will change the
value of ∆G∗ , but not change the scaling relation r∗ ∝ ℓ,
as longer binding sites will always have a larger maximum
affinity.
To simulate the evolution of TF-TFBS sequence evolution we assume a diploid Wright-Fisher population genetic process with 2Ne copies of each gene in the population with a fixed effective population size of Ne . As we are
in interested in the weak mutation regime (nµ0 Ne ≪ 1),
the simulations consist of a single fixed sequence for the
TF-TFBS pair of loci at each time-point, where new mutations either fix or not, decided based on the probability of fixation; this process represents the evolution of
a monomorphic population of effective size Ne . We assume full linkage disequilibrium within the TF and TFBS
loci and linkage equilibrium between loci. In addition,

we assume each loci is always homozygous on each lineage; when considering hybrid incompatibilities, the initial product of any cross mating will be heterozygotic
at all diverged alleles. All post-zygotic DMIs must be
sufficiently deleterious to affect these heterozygotic offspring. There may be many TF-TFBS pairs where the
lack of cross binding in heterozygotes does not appreciably change the offspring’s viability. We will assume,
however, that there are some TF-TFBS pairs that are
sufficiently critical such that r > r∗ is sufficient to decrease the gene expression level to the extent that the
hybrid is inviable; these are the pairs that will be relevant for the speciation process, and therefore are the ones
addressed by our model.
We use the Gillespie algorithm [65], to simulate evolution as a continuous time Markov process; at each step of
the simulation the rate of fixation of all one-step mutations from the currently fixed alleles (wildtype) on both
TF and TFBS loci are calculated, and one of these mutations is selected randomly in proportion to their relative
rate. Time is then progressed by K −1 ln(u), where K is
the sum of the rates of all one-step mutants and u is a
random number drawn independently between 0 and 1,
which ensures the times at which substitutions occur is
Poisson distributed, as we would be expected for a random substitution process. The rates are based upon the
Kimura probability of fixation [66]:

k = 2µ0 Ne

4Ne δF
1 − e−2δF
≈ µ0
,
−4N
δF
e
1−e
1 − e−4Ne δF

(4)

where δF is the change of fitness of a mutation at a particular location and 2µ0 Ne is the rate at which mutations arise for each amino acid or nucleotide position in
a diploid population, where we have assumed that the
effective population size is the same as the number of individuals N ; the latter approximation in Eqn.4 assumes
δF ≪ 1. Note that although in the simulations we use
the full form for the fixation probability, typically we
would expect fitness effects to be small (δF ≪ 1), so the
substitution rates only depends on the population-scaled
fitness changes 4Ne δF which, for a given mutation, is
proportional to 4Ne κF . In the rest of the paper we will
refer to the scaled population size 4Ne κF to make it clear
that either reducing Ne or κF (or both) can change the
evolutionary outcomes from those dominated by selection
to those dominated by drift. For each scaled population
size and sequence length, 1000 replicates were run up to
a time of µ0 t = 500. In addition, simulations were ran
up to a shorter time (dependent on the exact value of
4κF Ne ) with 106 replicates in order to get reliable estimates of the very small probability of a DMI (Fig.6) at
early times.

5

Using the above evolutionary process based on the biophysics of a TF binding DNA, we study allopatric speciation by independently evolving two lineages in the fitness landscape defined by Eqn.3. We create an ancestral
genome containing a protein and a DNA binding site
gene, each of length ℓ, with ∆G drawn from the equilibrium distribution of binding energies. This ancestral
genome is then duplicated, with each copy representing
the start of a different isolated population that subsequently evolves independently. If the evolving protein
D
and DNA sequences in one lineage are g P
1 and g 1 and the
P
D
other g 2 and g 2 , we can at each time point calculate the
D
Hamming distance for each hybrid as h12 = dH (g P
1 , g2 )
P
D
and h21 = dH (g 2 , g 1 ) with corresponding hybrid bindH
ing energies, ∆GH
12 = ∆εh12 and ∆G21 = ∆εh21 . Using
the same fitness function Eqn.3, we can then evaluate
the fitness of the hybrids as a function of time. An incompatibility arises whenever the fitness of the hybrid is
−∞ (h12 > r∗ (ℓ) or h21 > r∗ (ℓ)), i.e. when a hybrid TFTFBS specific binding is weak compared the non-specific
mode of binding and effectively can no longer recognise
its target site. At this point, we assume that the two diverging populations can no longer form viable offspring,
and they are reproductively isolated.
This model of TF-TFBS binding energies is inherently
epistatic, despite the assumption that the contribution of
each pair of interacting pair amino acid and nucleotide
is independent and additive to the total binding energy.
There is epistasis at both the phenotype and fitness level,
the latter due to quadratic selection. Hence, although
there is a similarity between our model and polygenic
models of quantitative traits under quadratic selection,
they are very different as in quantitative traits the phenotype is additive in each loci [5–7]. Here in our model
epistasis arises since at each location, say in the protein
sequence, whether a given amino acid will give rise to a
match or mismatch depends on the particular nucleotide
that it is opposite; the binding energy phenotype is a nonlinear function of the sequences at the TF and TFBS loci.
It is this epistasis that is the source of the DobzhanskyMuller incompatibilities that we find in our simulations
described in the Results section. For example, the common ancestor might be fixed for a pair of sequences
ATCGC
ATAGC , which has a binding energy of ∆GCA = 3kB T ,
as there is only a single mismatch; after a period of divergence, two allopatric populations might be fixed for
ATCGA
TTAGC
ATAGC and ATCGC , each arising from just two substitutions, of compensatory effect, from the common ancestor
sequence, so that ∆G1 = ∆G2 = 3kB T , as there is still
only a single mismatch. However, the hybrid sequences
ATCGA
are TTAGC
ATCGC and ATAGC , which correspond to binding enH
ergies ∆G12 = ∆GH
21 = 6kB T , as they each have two
mismatches. As the number of substitutions increases on

each lineage, we can see that each lineage will maintain
good fitness in a stabilizing landscape through compensatory changes, which each try to minimize the number
of mismatches; however, each lineage fixes different sets
of compensatory mutations, so when combined in a hybrid, the epistasis between pairs of sequences then gives
rise to DMIs.

RESULTS
Evolution under stabilizing selection on each lineage

0.35
0.3

^ŝŵƵůĂƚŝŽŶ
dŚĞŽƌǇ

0.25

Δ

A biophysical model of reproductive isolation

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Δ	஻ 
FIG. 1. Equilibrium neutral distribution of binding energies
∆G for a 2-state model of TF-DNA binding with a quaternary
alphabet for both amino acids and nucleotides. Solid black
squares are KMC simulations of neutral evolution, where
each sequence is of length ℓ = 10 and the binding energy
is ∆G = εr, where r is the Hamming distance between the
two sequences and ε = 3kB T . We see that under neutral evolution the distribution Ω(∆G(r)) is highly non-uniform. The
solid line shows the distribution predicted by Eqn.5, which is
the relative number of sequences corresponding to a Hamming
distance r = ∆G
.
ε

To understand the qualitative properties of TF-DNA
binding evolution, we first consider neutral evolution of
such a system and in particular, the resulting distribution
of binding energies ∆G. The results of KMC simulations
of neutral evolution of sequences g D and g P of length
ℓ = 10, and ε = 3kB T , with κF = 0 and r∗ = ∞ (where
all sequences have equal fitness) are shown by the solid
black squares in Fig.1. We see that even under neutral
evolution of sequences, the distribution of binding energies is non-uniform and roughly Gaussian with a peak
between 22kB T and 23kB T . We can understand this by
considering the many-to-one mapping often characteristic of the relationship of genotype to phenotype. In particular, there will be a large set of sequences that result
in the same binding energy. The number of sequences
Ω(∆G) that correspond to a given Hamming distance or

6
energy is non-uniform and given by the binomial distribution

Ω(∆G(r)) = 42ℓ

   r  ℓ−r
ℓ
3
1
,
r
4
4

(5)

where from Eqn.1 r = ∆G/ε. For example, the number
of sequences that give ∆G = 0 is Ω(∆G = 0) = 4ℓ ≈ 106
(for ℓ = 10), as there is exactly one DNA sequence that
matches to each one of the 4ℓ protein sequences. This
number is very small compared to the number of sequences that have 7 mismatches, Ω(∆G = 21kB T ) ≈
3 × 1011 , which is close to the mean of the distribution
h∆Gi = 3εℓ/4 = 22.5kB T . For neutral evolution, the
resulting distribution of ∆G will match the number of
sequences corresponding to each ∆G value. The distribution Ω(∆G) (normalized) expressed in Eqn.5 is plotted
as a solid line in Fig.1 and we see excellent agreement.
This effect of a non-uniform distribution of binding energies of random sequences on evolutionary dynamics has
been well studied [45–47, 62] and measured empirically
for various TFs in E.coli and yeast [48, 62]; as we will
this has a strong impact on the distribution of binding
energies under selection at different population sizes.

							
4
   0.01
4
   0.1
4
   1
4
   5
4
   10
4
   20

1

Δ

0.8

Theory
Theory
Theory
Theory
Theory
Theory
Theory

Simulation
Simulation
Simulation
Simulation
Simulation
Simulation
Simulation

S(∆G) = ln(Ω(∆G)),

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

The distributions of binding energies resulting from
evolution with the fitness function Eqn.3 at different
scaled population sizes (4Ne κF ) are shown in Fig.2 for
ℓ = 10 and r∗ = ℓ/2 = 5. The distributions are confined to the region 0 ≤ ∆G ≤ ∆G∗ , where ∆G∗ =
εr∗ = 15kB T , is the inviability boundary. Here, it is clear
that fitness is not maximized, but instead there is a balance between selection for higher fitness and the tendency
to undergo drift towards those phenotypes which correspond to the largest number of sequences. For larger population sizes, selection dominates, resulting in sequence
pairs with high fitness. For smaller population sizes,
stochastic effects due to drift are more important, resulting in a shift to weaker (more positive) binding energies,
approaching the neutral distribution as the population
size decreases below the inverse of the overall difference
in fitness on the landscape 21 κF (εr∗ )2 . This results in a
greater effective drift load for smaller population sizes.
The binding energy distributions show that for a general genotype phenotype map fitness is not maximized,
but instead there is a balance between selection for higher
fitness and the tendency to undergo drift towards those
phenotypes which correspond to the largest number of
sequences. A powerful approach to dealing with this
degeneracy is through the concept of sequence entropy
[67, 68], representing the (log) number of sequences encoding a given phenotypic state (e.g. binding energy),

14

16

Δ	஻ 
FIG. 2. Equilibrium distribution of binding energies ∆G as a
result of evolution subject to the quadratic ﬁtness landscape
in Eqn.3, for ℓ = 10; the qualitative results for ℓ = {5, 20} are
similar and not shown. The ﬁtness landscape has a ﬁtness
cliﬀ (inviability boundary) for r > r ∗ = ℓ/2 = 5 mismatches,
or for binding energies greater than ǫr ∗ = 15kB T , which represents when the speciﬁc binding energy to its binding site
is greater than the free energy of binding to the rest of the
genome. The solid squares are results of KMC simulations,
while the solid lines are the expected distribution from Eqn.7,
which we see agree very well. In addition, we see that the distribution shifts from one dominated by ﬁtness F (∆G) at large
population sizes (4κF N ≫ 1) with a peak at the highest ﬁtness binding energy to one dominated by sequence degeneracy
at small population sizes (4κF N ≪ 1), which is peaked at the
inviability boundary, representing the left tail of the neutral
distribution in Fig.1 (shown in black).

(6)

which is closely related to the Boltzmann entropy from
statistical mechanics [69]. This entropy measure, should
be distinguished from entropies of sequences due to polymorphisms in the population (in this paper we have assumed populations are always monomorphic). The precise combination of fitness and sequence entropy that is
maximized during evolution is the function Φ(∆G) =
F (∆G) + S(∆G)/4Ne , termed the free fitness [70, 71],
from which the probability density is given by
p(∆G) =

1 4Ne Φ(∆G)
e
.
Z

(7)

where Z is a normalization
Pℓfactor, known as the partition
function, given by Z = r=0 e4Ne Φ(∆G) . This probability density is plotted as solid lines in Fig.2 for different
population sizes, using Eqns.5,3,6 and 7; we see that the
agreement between the two is excellent.
This greater drift load is also illustrated in Fig.3, which
shows the average binding energy and also the Hamming
distance of the populations to the inviability boundary,
as a function of the scaled population size 4κF N , for
sequence lengths ℓ = {5, 10, 20}; for the corresponding
values of ℓ, we choose r∗ = {3, 5, 10}, so as to approximately satisfy r∗ = ℓ/2. We see the average binding
energy (squares) is larger for smaller population sizes,

7
30

10

4

5

2


10

-1


10

0


10

1

0

^ĐĂůĞĚWŽƉƵůĂƚŝŽŶ^ŝǌĞ4ி ௘

FIG. 3. Average binding energy, h∆Gi = εhri, (left axis,
squares) and average Hamming distance of populations from
inviability boundary, r ∗ − hri, (right axis, circles) as function
of scaled population size 4κF Ne and sequence length ℓ calculated using KMC simulations. We see that as the population
size is decreased the mean hamming distance or binding energy (∼ drift load) increases monotonically and towards the
inviability boundary.

which corresponds to populations being closer to the inviability boundary as shown by the circles in Fig.3, and
hence also a larger drift load. For large population sizes
(4κF Ne ≫ 1), where fitness dominates, the drift load
is zero, independent of Ne , as h∆Gi → 0. This means
that, as shown in Fig.3, the average Hamming distance
to the inviability boundary increases for increasing sequence length – this arises trivially as r∗ ∝ ℓ – however, for small population sizes (4κF Ne ≪ 1) the average
Hamming distance to the boundary is roughly independent of sequence length. To understand this we consider
that for small populations the distribution is neutral and
peaked at the inviability boundary r∗ (ℓ), as shown in
Fig.2 and by the fact the mean binding energy is close
to ∆G∗ = εr∗ , for 4κF N ≪ 1 in Fig.3; at the inviability boundary the number of mutations that increase the
Hamming distance is just the number of locations that
are matched, multiplied by the number of nucleotides
that can give a mismatch, 3(ℓ − r∗ (ℓ)) = 3ℓ/2 and those
that decrease it is just the number of mismatched locations, r∗ = ℓ/2. The ratio of these two quantities is independent of ℓ, showing that there is no net drift bias of
the populations at the inviability boundary as ℓ changes
and so for small populations the average distance to the
inviability boundary is roughly independent of ℓ. As we
will see the initial distance of the common ancestor from
the inviability boundary has a strong impact on the rate
of accumulation of DMIs, as functions of population size
and sequence length.
We can also examine the population size dependence
of the substitution rate per location in the stabilizing
landscape defined by Eqn.3, as shown in Fig.4 by the

10

〈〉/଴

6

∗  

8

15

0 -2

10

0

10
ℓ5
ℓ  10
ℓ  20

;Ϳ

Δ ;ሁͿ

25

20

10

12

10

-1

-2

ℓ  5͗
ℓ  10͗
ℓ  20͗

10

^ŝŵƵůĂƚŝŽŶ
^ŝŵƵůĂƚŝŽŶ
^ŝŵƵůĂƚŝŽŶ

ŶĂůǇƚŝĐĂů
ŶĂůǇƚŝĐĂů
ŶĂůǇƚŝĐĂů

-3
-2

10

10

-1

10

0

10

1

^ĐĂůĞĚWŽƉƵůĂƚŝŽŶ^ŝǌĞ4ி ௘
FIG. 4. Average total substitution rate for both protein
and DNA loci, on a single lineage as function of scaled
population size 4κF N and sequence length ℓ. Substitution rate is plotted in units of the nucleotide mutation rate
µ0 . The solid circles represent KMC simulations, while the
solid lines are the theoretical prediction 
of the average rate

Pr ∗
−
1
e µ0
hki = 2N3ℓ
+ 3(ℓ − r)π + (r) ,
p
(r)
r
π
(r)
+
Ne
r=0 ℓ
where pℓ (r) is the equilibrium distribution of Hamming distances (shown in Fig.2) and π − and π + are the ﬁxation probabilities for the transition r → r −1 and r → r +1, respectively.

solid squares, obtained by simulation for ℓ = {5, 10, 20}.
We see that there is the same qualitative dependence
on population size for each sequence length, which can
be explained by the average size of fitness effects as the
population size changes; at very large population sizes
the distribution of binding energies is peaked at ∆G = 0
and so the average substitution rate will be dominated
by transitions between r = 0 and r = 1; forward transitions to r = 1 happen rarely since the population scaled
difference in fitness, 4Ne δF = −2κF N ε2 , will be negative with magnitude much greater than 1 for 4κF N ≫ 1
and so substitutions will occur significantly slower than
neutral. While at very small populations although the
inverse of the population size is much larger than differences in fitness, since populations spend a large fraction
of the time at the inviability boundary r∗ , the substitution rate is also diminished compared to the expected
neutral rate µ0 , since a fraction (ℓ − r∗ )/ℓ of mutations
at this boundary are inviable and are never accepted in
the population. It is interesting to note that this form
of the population size-substitution rate relation is qualitatively similar to what would be expected in a simple
stabilizing landscape [72], however, here at small populations, sequence degeneracy combined with drift pushes
populations to the inviability boundary giving rise to an
effective substitutional drag relative to the neutral rate.
We find a non-trivial dependence of the substitution
rate on sequence length; at large population sizes, as
expected, the substitution rate per location is indepen-

8

Rate of accumulation of hybrid incompatibilities

To study the speciation process, we perform replicate
simulations of pairs of lineages using the KMC scheme
outlined above, with fitness given by Eqn. 3, where each
simulation starts with two identical sets of sequences with
∆G drawn from the equilibrium distribution of binding
energies as shown in Fig.2. We first plot the average hybrid binding energy as a function of µ0 t in Fig.5. At
zero divergence, the average hybrid binding energies are
equal to the average binding energies for that population
size, as shown in Fig.2. For long divergence times, the
hybrid binding becomes weaker, with the binding energies increasing to a value ∆GH = 22.5kB T , irrespective
of population size, corresponding to the mean of the neutral distribution in Fig.1; this is exactly what we would
expect after a long period of divergence, as protein and
DNA sequences from different lineages should have effectively random interactions. The rate at which this
neutral distribution is reached depends strongly on population size in an approximately monotonic manner, as
would be predicted from the average substitution rate

8

Δ ு 	஻ 

6
5

 0.01
 0.1
1
5
 10
 20

0

10

ߪ୼ீ ಹ

4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 

7

4



~   

-1

10

0

2

10

3

10

ߤ଴ ‫ݐ‬

2
1
0
10

-1

0

10

10

1

2

10

ߤ଴ ‫ݐ‬
FIG. 5. Average hybrid binding energy h∆GH i as a function
of time after divergence from common ancestor µ0 t for ℓ =
10 - the qualitative results for ℓ = {5, 20} are similar and
not shown.
p The inset shows the root mean square deviation
σ∆GH = h(∆GH − h∆GH i)2 i of hybrid binding energies as
a function of divergence time.

seen in Fig.4. The
p inset of Fig.5 shows the root mean
square, σ∆GH = h(∆GH − h∆GH i)2 i of hybrid binding energies vs µ0 t on a log-log scale; we see that
√ in the
limit of large population sizes that σ∆GH ∼ µ0 t, suggesting that the underlying dynamics of the hybrids is
effectively diffusive, as suggested by more coarse-grained
models [68].

10

10

0

-2

ܲூ ሺ‫ݐ‬ሻ

dent of sequence length, but strongly diminished compared to the neutral rate µ0 , as discussed above, due
to the discrete changes in fitness being larger than the
inverse of the population size. For small populations,
we also find that the substitution rate is roughly independent of sequence length; as the distribution of binding energies is peaked at the inviability boundary the
substitution rate will be proportional to the number
of viable substitutions multiplied by the neutral rate,
∼ µ0 r∗ (ℓ)/ℓ = µ0 /2, which as observed in Fig.4 is independent of ℓ. However, for intermediate population sizes,
where 4κF Ne ∼ 1 the average substitution rate decreases
with increasing sequence length. In the large and small
populations size limits, all substitutions are either nonneutral or neutral, respectively, for 0 ≤ r ≤ r∗ . However,
for intermediate population sizes the quadratic fitness
landscape means there is a critical Hamming distance,
∗
2 −1
ref
, below which substitutions are effecf ≈ (4κF Ne ε )
tively neutral (4Ne |δF | ≪ 1) and above are non-neutral
(4Ne |δF | ≫ 1). The effective substitution rate will then
∗
Pref
f
∗
be roughly ∼ α(ℓ)µ0 ref
r=0 pℓ (r)
f /ℓ, where α(ℓ) =
is the proportion of time, at equilibrium, spent in the
∗
nearly neutral region and ref
f /ℓ is the fraction of nearly
∗
neutral substitutions at ref f ; we expect that α(ℓ) will
decrease for increasing ℓ, since we find that pℓ (r) shifts
to larger values of r as ℓ increases (not shown), due to
an increased degeneracy pressure, as the sequence length
is increased. So together with the fact that the fraction
of nearly neutral mutations decreases for increasing ℓ,
∗
like ref
f /ℓ, we see that the average substitution rate is
smaller for larger sequence lengths at intermediate population sizes (4κF Ne = 1).

10

4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 

~ ଴ 

 0.01
 0.1
1
5
 10
 20

ଶ

-4

-6

10 -4
10

-2

10

10

0

2

10

ߤ଴ ‫ݐ‬
FIG. 6. Average probability of a DMI as a function of time
after divergence from common ancestor µ0 t calculated from
KMC simulations for various scaled population sizes, for ℓ =
10; the qualitative results for ℓ = {5, 20} are similar and not
shown, but the trends with sequence length are demonstrated
in Fig.7.

The probability of DMIs PI (t) as a function of µ0 t
is plotted in Fig.6, for various values of 4κF Ne and
for ℓ = 10. The qualitative behavior of the plots for
ℓ = {5, 20} are similar and for clarity not shown; however,
we examine below the dependence of PI (t) on ℓ through

9
the typical time for reproductive isolation to arise in
Fig.7. We see that the model predicts a very strong population size effect for the dynamics of hybrid incompatibilities; as the population size decreases the timescale for
DMIs to arise sharply decreases. This effect saturates for
very small population sizes, but diverges for very large
population sizes, to the point that reproductive isolation
will take extremely long times for very large population
sizes (4Ne κF ≫ 10). This trend can be understood to
arise from two effects: 1) as the population size decreases,
the initial drift load of the common ancestor is on average
larger and so fewer substitutions are required between a
pair of divergent lineages for an incompatibility to arise
in a hybrid (shown by Figs.2&5); 2) as the population
size increases beyond 4κF N ∼ 1 the substitution rate
on each lineage decreases significantly, as seen in Fig.4,
which increases the observed time for incompatibilities to
arise. For small population sizes the increase in DMIs is
quadratic at small times (2ℓµ0 t ≪ 1), while for large population sizes there is a very rapid increase in DMIs, which
does not seem to fit a power law and suggests a finite
negative curvature on a log-log scale. We note that our
prediction at small population sizes and times is the same
as Orr’s [27, 28], but the underlying mechanism in this
2-loci system is very different as it arises from an average over the equilibrium distribution of common ancestor
binding energies (Fig.2). The behavior seen at large population sizes is consistent with theoretical predictions of a
coarse-grained model of TF-DNA binding evolution [68],
where the growth of DMIs is rapid√with √
the asymptotic
form, as t → 0 of PI (t) ∼ erfc(1/ t) ∼ te−1/t , which
cannot be expressed as a power law for small times. This
form arises when considering the distribution of times to
diffuse to the incompatibility boundary starting from a
fixed binding energy; these are the conditions found for
KMC simulations at large population sizes, where hybrid
binding energies show neutral diffusive dynamics (inset
Fig.5) and the equilibrium distribution for the common
ancestor is highly peaked (Fig.2). Finally, we see that at
the intermediate population size of 4κF Ne = 1, there is
a transition from the power-law behavior at short times
and non-power law at long times, with the transition at
approximately µ0 t ∼ 0.1; this would be as expected if
the short-time behavior arises from common ancestors
drawn from the right-tail of the probability distribution,
near the inviability boundary, for 4κF Ne = 1 in Fig.2,
whilst the long-time behavior arises from common ancestors drawn from around the peak of the distribution,
which are further away from the boundary.
In a full genome, where there are many possible interacting genes, it will typically be the short-time behavior
of each interacting pair that will dominate. If we assume roughly m ∼ 10 interaction partners per gene and
nG ≈ 2 × 104 protein coding genes, we have roughly
M = 21 mnG ≈ 105 interaction partners. As only a single
one of these interactions giving rise to a DMI is required

for RI, we would expect the probability that RI has arisen
is PRI (t) = 1−(1−PI (t))M , which at short times is given
by PRI (t) ≈ 1 − e−MPI (t) . In Fig.7 is plotted the time
t∗ at which PI (t∗ ) = 10−5 , for ℓ = {5, 10, 20}. We see
there is a strong population size dependence on the rate
at which RI develops and a weaker, but still significant
one on the sequence length. In particular, we see for
small populations RI can arise quite quickly, on times
where µ0 t∗ ≈ 0.0005, for ℓ = 20, which corresponds to
∼ 250, 000 generations, assuming µ0 = 2 × 10−9 . As
discussed above a major determinant at large population
sizes on the time for RI to develop is the rate of substitutions on each lineage, the inverse of which is plotted as
a dashed line in Fig.7; we see that although the inverse
substitution rate is a good predictor for large population sizes, for small populations it fails. This is due to
the larger drift load for smaller population sizes, which
reduces t∗ further.
We see that the rate of growth of DMIs and the time
for RI to arise has a complicated dependence on the sequence length ℓ; for small populations sizes (4κF Ne ≪ 1),
RI develops more quickly for longer sequences, whilst
for intermediate and large population sizes (4κF Ne ≥ 1)
this trend is reversed and longer sequences mean RI develops more slowly. The divergence rate of the two allopatric populations will be controlled by the total substitution rate for both protein and DNA loci, which is
2ℓhki; for small populations, this trend arises, trivially,
from the fact that the per location substitution rate hki
is roughly independent of sequence length (as shown in
Fig.4), giving a higher rate of divergence for larger sequences, together with the fact that the average number
of substitutions needed to reach the inviability boundary
r∗ (ℓ)−hri is independent of sequence length (as shown by
Fig.3). For large population sizes, RI arises more slowly
for larger sequences, despite the fact that, like at small
population sizes, the overall divergence rate of the two allopatric populations is larger for longer sequences. If we
assume that for large populations the dynamics of the
hybrids is diffusive (as suggested by the inset of Fig.5),
then the mean square Hamming distance should increase
linearly with time hr2 i ∼ 2ℓhkit [73]. We then would
∗ 2
)
ℓ
expect t∗ ∼ (r
2ℓhki ∼ 8hki to increase linearly with ℓ, as
hki is independent of ℓ (as shown in Fig.4); the exact
values of speciation times are t∗ = {37.5, 72.1, 158}, for
ℓ = {5, 10, 20}, so we see that at each doubling of ℓ, t∗ is
roughly doubled, lending support to the diffusive model,
as well as explaining the trend of a longer t∗ for longer
sequences in Fig.7 for large populations. For intermediate populations sizes (4κF Ne = 1), we have the same, but
stronger trend, which is due to the fact that the per location substitution rate hki is smaller for longer sequences,
as shown in Fig.4 and so giving a t∗ which grows faster
than linear with respect to ℓ.

dŝŵĞƚŽ^ƉĞĐŝĂƚŝŽŶߤ ‫∗ ݐ‬

10

10

10

10

2

ℓ5
ℓ  10
ℓ  20
2ℓ  ିଵ 		ℓ  10


0

-2

-4

10 -2
10

10

-1

10

0

10

1

^ĐĂůĞĚWŽƉƵůĂƚŝŽŶ^ŝǌĞ4ி ௘
FIG. 7. Time for reproductive isolation (RI) to arise as a
function of scaled population size 4κF N and sequence length
ℓ, deﬁned as the time t∗ when the average probability of a
DMI crosses a threshold value of 1/M = 10−5 , where M is
the typical number of interaction partners of a protein in a
genome. The black dashed line corresponds to a plot of the
inverse of the average substitution rate shown in Fig.4.

DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS

Dobzhansky, Muller & Bateson [2–4] provided the first
solution to Darwin’s conundrum of how speciation might
arise by suggesting that in allopatry incompatibilities
form between co-evolving loci on an epistatic fitness landscape. Many studies have since suggested that the dominant form of reproductive isolation involves the accumulation of Dobzhansky-Muller incompatibilities in geographically isolated populations with no or little gene
flow [8, 9, 11, 12]. The observation of the large diversity
of species on small young islands, such as Hawaii [14], or
on the island of Cuba [15] and East African Great Lakes
[13, 16], where in the latter two cases each have been subject to historically fluctuating water levels and thus opportunities for allopatric speciation, suggest that smaller
populations speciate more quickly. This is in contrast to
lower levels of reproductive isolation observed in marine
species with large ranges and population sizes; for example, the relatively small fraction of Pacific-Caribbean
species pairs separated by the Isthmus of Panama a few
million years ago compared to those that are not reproductively isolated [14, 17, 18]. There is also evidence that
reproductive isolation arises more slowly in birds compared to mammals [19]. Strikingly, even after roughly
55Myr divergence [23], domestic chickens (Gallus gallus)
can still hybridize with helmeted guineafowl (Numida
meleagris), where estimates of the effective population
size of domestic chickens range between Ne ≈ 105 to 106
[24], whereas in contrast, cichlids develop reproductive
isolation as quickly as 1 − 10Myr after divergence [22]
and have relatively small population sizes (100 − 10000

[20, 21]). This population size trend is further supported
by net rates of diversification [8] inferred from phylogenetic trees [25, 26]. Although, the models of Gavrilets
[32], Nei [30] and [7], predict that very polygenic traits
or those under high mutation rate will tend to show this
population size trend, they predict no population size
dependence, or are not applicable in the weak mutation
regime (nµ0 N ≪ 1). In particular, data on the genetic
nature of species differences, suggest many traits involved
are oligogenic, involving only a few loci [41] and so it is an
open question to explain the population size dependence
of speciation for such monomorphically evolving traits.
Here, we have developed a biophysically motivated
model of how incompatibilities arise in allopatric populations, using a simple model of the co-evolution of transcription factors binding to DNA in the weak mutation,
monomorphic regime. A key aspect which this biophysical model of evolution introduces to the picture of fitness
landscapes is the idea that many sequences can result
in the same phenotype, that is the number of sequences
corresponding to each phenotype can be very different,
and this uneven distribution can have important consequences for the evolutionary process. As described, our
results arise due to a drift-selection balance, which can
be cast in the language of a balance between fitness and
sequence entropy. The maximum of the free fitness landscape, corresponds to the phenotype when these two evolutionary forces are balanced; importantly, this balance
is dependent on the population size. Here, for TF-DNA
binding there are many more sequences that have a large
number of mismatches compared to those few high fitness sequences that have a small number of mismatches;
at smaller population sizes genetic drift dominates pushing the equilibrium towards less fit sequences. This has
an important consequence for the dynamics of reproductive isolation, that smaller scaled populations on average
have common ancestors with a larger drift load and so
a smaller number of substitutions are needed for an incompatibility to arise in hybrids. This leads to the main
prediction of the paper that smaller scaled populations
(4κF Ne ≪ 1) develop incompatibilities more quickly. At
larger scaled population sizes (4κF Ne ≫ 1, but still in
the weak mutation regime, nµ0 N ≪ 1), where fitness
dominates drift we find this trend continues, but for a
different reason; when 4κF Ne ≫ 1 populations no longer
diverge neutrally and instead need to fix deleterious mutants whose difference in fitness is large compared to the
inverse of the effective population size. This means that
the time for reproductive isolation becomes very long for
very large populations. Note however, that although our
theory strictly applies to the monomorphic regime, we
also expect the effect of sequence degeneracy/entropy to
lead to a similar trend of an increasing rate of reproductive isolation for decreasing scaled population size for
polymorphic loci, where in addition the effect would be
reinforced by the slowed divergence of allopatric lineages

11
due to the mechanism of Gavrilets [32] and Nei [30]. In
particular, recent work [36] with a similar sequence based
model, but in the regime where the effect of mutations
will be strong, showed that smaller populations are more
likely to develop poor hybrid fitness, however, no mechanistic cause is given in their work for this trend and the
dynamics of the accumulation of DMIs was not investigated.
We also investigated the effect of sequence length
on the rate of developing reproductive isolation. We
find that TF-DNA binding with a larger number of nucleotides results in reproductive isolation arising more
rapidly for small populations 4κF Ne ≪ 1, but less rapid
at intermediate and large populations (4κF Ne ≥ 1). For
small populations, we find the average Hamming distance
to the inviability boundary and the average substitution
rate are independent of sequence length and so reproductive isolation develops more rapidly because longer
binding sites have a larger overall substitution rate and
so the two allopatric lineages divergence more quickly.
Conversely, when 4κF Ne ≥ 1, despite the same dependence of the average substitution rate on sequence length,
longer binding sites are more stable and so require a
larger number of mismatches to destabilize the TF to
prevent binding to its correct site, we model this simply
by having an inviability boundary r∗ ∝ ℓ. Guided by
our simulation results (inset Fig.5), as well as theoretical
studies [68], which suggest that the hybrid binding energies are diffusive, this then suggests that the time for
reproductive isolation to arise should grow linearly with
sequence length, which we find is in good agreement with
our simulations.
Our model then provides a rationale for the observation in the field that smaller populations develop DMIs
more quickly, with a robust mechanism that does not require that either lineage pass through a fitness valley. It
also, for the first time, provides an insight, through a biophysical model, of the mechanistic causes of how DMIs
develop for co-evolved pair-wise molecular interactions.
While we would not expect quantitative agreement with
biological systems, we can make a rough comparison to
empirical data: our results suggest that reproductive isolation can occur on a timescale of order a few hundred
thousand generations for small scaled population sizes.
Direct studies of interspecific hybrids of African cichlids
[22] show that post-zygotic isolation typically arises over
a timescale of ∼ 4−18Myr, which corresponds to roughly
∼ 1−6 million generations, assuming a generation time of
3 years [74], which suggests the mechanism we present is
consistent with empirical data. Importantly, we see that
this mechanism can provide relatively rapid reproductive isolation between lineages with only nearly neutral
evolution, without having to invoke positive selection or
peak-shifts.
The model studied, however, is simplified compared to
the complexity of gene regulation in eukaryotes with mul-

tiple TFs binding to enhancers to control gene transcription and each TF having multiple binding sites controlling many different genes. Here, we treat TFs and their
binding sites on an equal footing and so for example, the
substitution rate in each is the same. It is commonly
thought that since TFs are under stronger pleiotropic
constraints, they evolve more slowly and so much of the
phenotypic divergence between species is driven by cisregulatory change [53, 75] (and reviewed recently by (author?) [76]). We expect that as pleiotropy will act to
reduce the substitution rate on a TF, the divergence rate
of allopatric lineages will decrease. This suggests that if
pleiotropy is important, our simulations may underestimate the average time to reproductive isolation. However, there is increasing evidence that protein evolution
driven by protein-protein interaction together, for example, with tissue specific TFs can reduce the pleiotropic
constraints on TFs [76].
Previous theoretical work by Orr [27, 28] predicts that
in the weak mutation regime, the number of incompatibilities should increase as ∼ t2 from a fixed common ancestor, due to the combinatorial possibilities over a large
number of pair-wise interacting loci. Here, we predict
the same growth of DMIs with time, but only for small
scaled population sizes (4κF N ≪ 1) and for a single 2loci system. However, the underlying mechanism appears
to be very different here; the quadratic law arises due
to averaging over the distribution of the initial binding
energy (or effective drift load) of the common ancestor,
which is roughly equivalent to averaging over the growth
of DMIs for the different initial drift loads that each pair
of loci will have across the whole genome within a single
common ancestor. On the other hand, for large populations, which have a peaked distribution of common
ancestors relative to the Hamming distance to the inviability threshold r∗ , we observe that the growth of DMIs
does not appear to be described by a simple power law,
but instead the results suggest there is a negative curvature to their growth on a log-log plot. In addition, we
find that the variance of binding energies increases linearly with time in the limit of large populations (inset
Fig.S1), so together with our results that indicate t∗ ∼ ℓ,
this suggests that from a given common ancestor the hybrid binding energies follow neutral diffusive dynamics.
Together, this is as predicted by a simple calculation of
the growth of DMIs due to a continuous diffusion model
for the evolution of TF-DNA binding [68] and arises due
to the fact that from a fixed common ancestor there is a
finite mutational distance that needs to be diffused by hybrids before incompatibilities can arise; in the low scaled
population size limit this behavior turns into a power law
when averaged over a broad distribution of common ancestors. We suggest that more detailed studies of species
divergence, similar to current works [77, 78], which show
a rapid increase in DMIs, should be able to discern between these two qualitatively different behaviors at dif-

12
ferent population sizes. In particular, recent cross-species
ChiP-seq analysis of transcription factor binding [79] suggests a way to explicitly test our predictions at the level
of actual binding affinities of hybrid TF-TFBS combinations for recently diverged species, such in the Drosophila
family.
The process of speciation underlies the vast diversity
of life on Earth. We expect these results to be also seen
in more complex models of co-evolving loci since the balance between sequence entropy and fitness poising populations nearer or further away from incompatible regions
in a population size dependent manner is likely to be
general. Gene expression divergence is thought to underlie many differences between species [50–52], for example, in the Galapagos finches [80], the various species
of Drosophila [53] and with more direct evidence of a
role in speciation through the evolution of genes related
to transcription factors [55, 56]. More recently studies
of crosses between D. melanogaster and D. santomea,
which diverged more than 10 million years ago, have revealed how the cryptic divergence of genetic architecture
of conserved developmental body plans leads to postzygotic isolation [81]. Proteins binding to DNA to control
gene expression is a prototypical co-evolving system and
critical for the proper development of organisms, thus
these results have strong implications for speciation rates
and diversity of populations at small population sizes. In
addition, although our model is motivated by DNA protein binding, the approach could be adapted to any type
of interacting macromolecules, for example, co-evolution
of protein-protein interactions or the interaction of genes
expressed by nucleus and mitochondria, where in particular, such interactions have been shown in yeast to give
rise to cytonuclear incompatibilities [82, 83].

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We acknowledge useful discussions with David Pollock,
University of Colorado and funding from the Medical Research Council, U.K (funding reference U117573805).

bhavin.khatri@physics.org
[1] Darwin, C. R. (1859) The Origin of Species. (J. Murray,
London), p. 273.
[2] Dobzhansky, T. (1936) Genetics 21, 113–135.
[3] Muller, H. (1942) Biol. Symp. 6, 71–125.
[4] Bateson, W. (1909) Darwin and Modern Science. (Cambridge University Press), pp. 85–101.
[5] Wright, S. (1935) Journal of Genetics 30, 243–256.
[6] Wright, S. (1935) Journal of Genetics 30, 257–266.
[7] Barton, N. (1989) Genet Res 54, 59–77.
[8] Coyne, J. A & Orr, H. A. (2004) Speciation. (Sinauer
Associates, Inc.).
∗

[9] Mayr, E. (1963) Animal Species and Evolution. (Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Mass.).
[10] Seehausen, O, Butlin, R. K, Keller, I, Wagner, C. E,
Boughman, J. W, Hohenlohe, P. A, Peichel, C. L, Saetre,
G.-P, Bank, C, BrÃďnnstrÃűm, A, Brelsford, A, Clarkson, C. S, Eroukhmanoﬀ, F, Feder, J. L, Fischer, M. C,
Foote, A. D, Franchini, P, Jiggins, C. D, Jones, F. C,
Lindholm, A. K, Lucek, K, Maan, M. E, Marques, D. A,
Martin, S. H, Matthews, B, Meier, J. I, MÃűst, M, Nachman, M. W, Nonaka, E, Rennison, D. J, Schwarzer, J,
Watson, E. T, Westram, A. M, & Widmer, A. (2014)
Nat Rev Genet 15, 176–192.
[11] Wu, C. I & Beckenbach, A. T. (1983) Genetics 105,
71–86.
[12] Vigneault, G & Zouros, E. (1986) Evolution 40, 1160–
1170.
[13] Santos, M. E & Salzburger, W. (2012) Science 338, 619–
621.
[14] Mayr, E. (1970) Populations, Species, and Evolution.
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.), pp. 347–
350.
[15] Glor, R. E, Giﬀord, M. E, Larson, A, Losos, J. B, Schettino, L. R, Lara, A. R. C, & Jackman, T. R. (2004)
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B:
Biological Sciences 271, 2257–2265.
[16] Owen, R, Crossley, R, Johnson, T, Tweddle, D, Kornﬁeld, I, Davison, S, Eccles, D, & Engstrom, D. (1990)
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. B. Biological
Sciences 240, 519–553.
[17] Mayr, E. (1954) Evolution 8, 1–18.
[18] Rubinoﬀ, R. W & Rubinoﬀ, I. (1971) Evolution pp. 88–
97.
[19] Fitzpatrick, B. M. (2004) Evolution 58, 1865–1870.
[20] Oppen, M, Turner, G, Rico, C, Deutsch, J, Ibrahim, K,
Robinson, R, & Hewitt, G. (1997) Proceedings of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 264, 1803âĂŞ1812.
[21] Fiumera, A, Parker, P, & Fuerst, P. (2000) Conservation
Biology.
[22] Stelkens, R. B, Young, K. A, & Seehausen, O. (2010)
Evolution 64, 617–633.
[23] Cooper, A & Penny, D. (1997) Science 275, 1109–1113.
[24] Sawai, H, Kim, H. L, Kuno, K, Suzuki, S, Gotoh, H,
Takada, M, Takahata, N, Satta, Y, & Akishinonomiya,
F. (2010) PLoS One 5, e10639.
[25] Nee, S. (2001) Evolution 55, 661–668.
[26] Barraclough, T. G & Nee, S. (2001) Trends Ecol Evol
16, 391–399.
[27] Orr, H. A. (1995) Genetics 139, 1805–1813.
[28] Orr, H. A & Turelli, M. (2001) Evolution 55, 1085–1094.
[29] Orr, H & Orr, L. (1996) Evolution 50, 1742–1749.
[30] Nei, M, Maruyama, T, & Wu, C. I. (1983) Genetics 103,
557–579.
[31] Gavrilets, S. (2003) Evolution 57, 2197–2215.
[32] Gavrilets, S. (1999) The American Naturalist 154, 1–22.
[33] Gavrilets, S. (2004) Fitness Landscapes and the Origin
of Species. (Princeton University Press).
[34] Johnson, N. A & Porter, A. H. (2000) J Theor Biol 205,
527–542.
[35] Johnson, N. A & Porter, A. H. (2007) Genetica 129,
57–70.
[36] Tulchinsky, A. Y, Johnson, N. A, Watt, W. B, & Porter,
A. H. (2014) Genetics.
[37] Lande, R. (1979) Evolution pp. 234–251.

13
[38] Lande, R. (1985) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 82, 7641–
7645.
[39] Barton, N. H & Charlesworth, B. (1984) Annual Review
of Ecology and Systematics 15, 133–164.
[40] Barton, N & Rouhani, S. (1987) Journal of theoretical
biology 125, 397–418.
[41] Orr, H. A. (2001) Trends in Ecology & Evolution 16,
343–350.
[42] von Hippel, P. H & Berg, O. G. (1986) Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 83, 1608–1612.
[43] Gerland, U, Moroz, J. D, & Hwa, T. (2002) Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 99, 12015–12020.
[44] Fontana, W. (2002) Bioessays 24, 1164–1177.
[45] Force, A, Lynch, M, Pickett, F. B, Amores, A, Yan, Y. L,
& Postlethwait, J. (1999) Genetics 151, 1531–1545.
[46] Berg, J, Willmann, S, & Lässig, M. (2004) BMC Evol
Biol 4, 42.
[47] Khatri, B. S, McLeish, T. C. B, & Sear, R. P. (2009)
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106, 9564–9569.
[48] Mustonen, V & Lässig, M. (2005) Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102, 15936–15941.
[49] Goldstein, R. A. (2011) Proteins 79, 1396–1407.
[50] King, M. C & Wilson, A. C. (1975) Science 188, 107–
116.
[51] Wolf, J. B, Lindell, J, & Backström, N. (2010) Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 365, 1717–1733.
[52] Wray, G. A. (2007) Nature Reviews Genetics 8, 206–216.
[53] Wittkopp, P. J, Haerum, B. K, & Clark, A. G. (2008)
Nature genetics 40, 346–350.
[54] Landry, C. R, Wittkopp, P. J, Taubes, C. H, Ranz, J. M,
Clark, A. G, & Hartl, D. L. (2005) Genetics 171, 1813–
1822.
[55] Ting, C.-T, Tsaur, S.-C, Wu, M.-L, & Wu, C.-I. (1998)
Science 282, 1501–1504.
[56] Brideau, N. J, Flores, H. A, Wang, J, Maheshwari, S,
Wang, X, & Barbash, D. A. (2006) science 314, 1292–
1295.
[57] Takeda, Y, Sarai, A, & Rivera, V. M. (1989) Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 86, 439–443.
[58] Stormo, G. D & Fields, D. S. (1998) Trends Biochem Sci
23, 109–113.
[59] Lesser, D. R, Kurpiewski, M. R, & Jen-Jacobson, L.
(1990) Science 250, 776–786.
[60] Baldwin, R. L. (2003) J Biol Chem 278, 17581–17588.

[61] Revzin, A & Von Hippel, P. H. (1977) Biochemistry 16,
4769–4776.
[62] Mustonen, V, Kinney, J, Callan, C. G, & Lässig, M.
(2008) Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
105, 12376–12381.
[63] Haldane, A, Manhart, M, & Morozov, A. V. (2014) PLoS
Comput Biol 10, e1003683.
[64] Hartl, D. L & Clark, A. G. (2007) Principles of Population Genetics. (Sinauer Associates, Inc.).
[65] Gillespie, D. T. (1976) Journal of Computational Physics
22, 403–434.
[66] Kimura, M. (1962) Genetics 47, 713–719.
[67] Barton, N. H & Coe, J. B. (2009) J Theor Biol 259,
317–324.
[68] Khatri, B. S & Goldstein, R. A. (2013) arXiv:1303.7006.
[69] Reif, F. (1965) Fundamentals of Statistical and Thermal
Physics. (McGraw-Hill Book Company).
[70] Iwasa, Y. (1988) Journal of Theoretical Biology 135, 265
– 281.
[71] Sella, G & Hirsh, A. E. (2005) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 102, 9541–9546.
[72] Lanfear, R, Kokko, H, & Eyre-Walker, A. (2014) Trends
Ecol Evol 29, 33–41.
[73] Gardiner, C. (2009) Stochastic Methods: A Handbook for
the Natural and Social Sciences. (Springer).
[74] Nagl, S, Tichy, H, Mayer, W. E, Takahata, N, & Klein,
J. (1998) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95, 14238–14243.
[75] King, M.-C & Wilson, A. C. (1975) Science 188, 107–
116.
[76] Lynch, V. J & Wagner, G. P. (2008) Evolution 62, 2131–
2154.
[77] Matute, D. R, Butler, I. A, Turissini, D. A, & Coyne,
J. A. (2010) Science 329, 1518–1521.
[78] Moyle, L. C & Nakazato, T. (2010) Science 329, 1521–
1523.
[79] Schmidt, D, Wilson, M. D, Ballester, B, Schwalie, P. C,
Brown, G. D, Marshall, A, Kutter, C, Watt, S, MartinezJimenez, C. P, Mackay, S, Talianidis, I, Flicek, P, &
Odom, D. T. (2010) Science 328, 1036–1040.
[80] Abzhanov, A, Kuo, W. P, Hartmann, C, Grant, B. R,
Grant, P. R, & Tabin, C. J. (2006) Nature 442, 563–567.
[81] Gavin-Smyth, J & Matute, D. R. (2013) Ecol Evol 3,
1580–1589.
[82] Chou, J.-Y, Hung, Y.-S, Lin, K.-H, Lee, H.-Y, & Leu,
J.-Y. (2010) PLoS Biol 8, e1000432.
[83] Chou, J.-Y & Leu, J.-Y. (2010) Bioessays 32, 401–411.

