Liquids that form due to dynamics of the molecules that depend on the local
density
Richard P. Sear1, a)

arXiv:1503.06963v2 [cond-mat.soft] 26 Mar 2015

Department of Physics, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, United Kingdom

RNA molecules in living cells form what look like liquid droplets formed by liquid/liquid phase separation. But
unlike the molecules in conventional phase separating mixtures, RNA molecules are transported by molecular
motors that consume energy and so are out of equilibrium. Motivated by this we consider what sort of
simple rules for the dynamics of model mRNA molecules lead to liquid/liquid phase separation. We find that
dynamics that slow as the local density of molecules increases, drive the formation of liquids. We also look at
the analogous separation of the two blocks of a block copolymer, in which the monomers of one block have
dynamics that depend on the local density of monomers of that block. We find that this block condenses and
separates from the monomers of the other block. This is a simple model of the out-of-equilibrium domain
formation found in the chromatin in the nucleus of cells.
The contents of living cells are in the liquid state. But
these contents are not in one liquid phase, they appear
to be in a number of coexisting liquid phases. There are
what look like liquid droplets in both the cytoplasm and
the nucleus1–12 . For example, in the cytoplasm mRNA
molecules can undergo what looks like liquid/liquid phase
separation, to produce droplets enriched in the mRNA
molecules1–7 . But these droplets cannot be at thermodynamic equilibrium. They are affected when the
molecular motors dynein or kinesin are knocked down13 .
These motors consume energy and actively move mRNA
molecules14 . This suggests that mRNA molecules do not
simply diffuse into and out of these liquid droplets, they
are actively transported into or out of these droplets.
Inspired by this, we wanted a simple model of densitydependent dynamics that generates condensation. These
dynamics should be via hops from one point to another;
the hops do not conserve momentum, and there is no
well defined velocity. This is our simple model of a motor translating mRNA molecules along microtubules in a
cell. It turns out that very simple models show condensation. Rather generically, liquids appear whenever the
hopping rate of a molecule decreases as the local density
of molecules increases. These out-of-equilibrium dynamics are illustrated in a schematic in Fig. 1. The dynamics stabilise liquid droplets as evaporation of molecules
from a droplet’s surface is reduced by the slow hopping
rate of molecules out of the dense liquid. Attractions
slow hopping rates but any non-equilibrium mechanism
that also slows hopping out of dense regions will tend
to have a similar effect, whether or not that are any attraction energies directly involved. The Edinburgh group
and others15–22 , have extensively studied a system with
rather different microscopic dynamics; in their systems
the particles have a well-defined velocity. However, despite the differences in the microscopic dynamics, here we
are studying models in which the mobility decreases as
density increases, just as they have, and so we see qualitatively very similar condensation into liquid-like droplets.

a) Electronic

mail: r.sear@surrey.ac.uk

FAST
SLOW
FAST

FIG. 1. Schematic illustrating out-of-equilibrium dynamics
that depend on the local density of molecules. Molecules are
shown as blue discs, the lines with arrows indicate the path
the top molecule has taken. It slowed down when it was near
the bottom molecule.

We start with the familiar 2D lattice gas23–25 . Our
lattice is L by L lattice sites and has N molecules in
total. This is a very simple model of mRNA molecules
in a cell, where we effectively integrate over all other
molecules, to allow us to explicitly consider only these
mRNA molecules. The interactions are then of mRNA
molecules in the presence of all these other molecules,
and the dynamics are those in the presence of these other
molecules, including motor proteins. As we integrate over
these other molecules liquid/liquid separation becomes
condensation of the one species we explicitly consider.
We start with the familiar Kawasaki dynamics23,24 .
They of course obey detailed balance. For Kawasaki dynamics, time is measured in cycles, and in each cycle L2
lattices sites are selected at random, one after another.
When a site is selected then one of its four neighbouring sites is chosen at random. If one of the pair of sites
is occupied by a molecule and the other is empty, then
we attempt to move the molecule from one site to the
other. This is done as follows. The change in the number of neighbours of the molecule, ∆n, is computed. If
∆n ≥ 0 the move is always accepted as then the energy
decreases or stays the same, but if ∆n < 0 the move is
rejected with probability 1 − exp[∆n/kT ]. Here  is an
interaction energy.
When the ratio /kT > 1.7624,25 , a liquid phase forms.
The attractions between the molecules cause them to
condense into a liquid phase. Droplets of liquid nucleate
and grow until there is a single large droplet coexisting
with a vapour.

2

FIG. 2. Snapshot of configurations of systems of L = 100 by
L = 100 sites, with 15% of the sites occupied by molecules.
This is for our out-of-equilibrium model; αD = 2.5 and rM =
8, which corresponds to the Ising lattice gas at /kT = 2.5 .
We have imposed periodic boundary conditions.

We now introduce a simple model of dynamics where
the rate a molecule hops at depends on the local environment at the start position of its move. At first sight
these dynamics may look as though they violate detailed
balance, but we will show that they do not. The dynamics are as follows. Select a lattice site at random. If it
is occupied by a molecule, attempt to move it to a randomly selected site within a radius rM . If the site chosen
is already occupied the attempt is always rejected. If the
chosen site is empty the move is made with probability
p = exp[−αD nn ], for nn the number of neighbours of the
molecule in its starting position. Here αD > 0 is a parameter that couples the dynamics to the local density
of molecules. In this model the higher the local density
of molecules the slower the hopping rate of a molecule.
This could be for a number of reasons, such as neighbouring molecules inhibiting motor transport via mechanisms
such as direct binding or signalling. Alternatively, even if
motors are not involved, then a local density-dependent
slow down could be caused by an out-of-equilibrium process such as a phosphorylation/dephosphorylation cycle
that modulates binding and so diffusion rates.
Our density-dependent dynamics map onto the standard Ising lattice gas, as can be seen as follows. To do
this we need to consider the transition probability between state i and state j, pij ; these states i and j correspond to two positions of a molecule on the lattice. For
transition between a state i with a molecule surrounded
by nn (i) neighbours and a state j where the molecule has
nn (j) neighbours, the ratio of the transition probabilities
i to j, and j to i are
pij
exp[−αD nn (i)]
=
= exp [−αD [nn (i) − nn (j)]] (1)
pji
exp[−αD nn (j)
These satisfy detailed balance, and map to the Ising
lattice gas with /kT = αD . Thus, for example, our
model has the usual Ising critical point at αD = 1.76,
and a reduced surface tension γ 0 = γ/kT given by Onsager’s expression25 but with αD replacing /kT : γ 0 =
αD /2 − ln ([1 + exp(−αD /2] / [1 − exp(−αD /2]).
The result of a simulation run at αD = 2.5 is shown in
Fig. 2. We see that, as it must, it shows the usual Ising
lattice gas vapour/liquid coexistence. We fix rM = 8, as

varying it over a wide range of values (2 to 24) is found
to have little effect on the dynamics, and cannot change
the phase behaviour as varying rM does not alter the
mapping to the Ising lattice gas.
In terms of studying vapour/liquid coexistence in
energy-consuming systems, the studies closest to this
work are those of the Edinburgh group15–18,21,22 , who
model active Brownian particles with motilities that depend on the local density of these particles, but no attractions. Redner et al.19 and Mognetti et al.20 also study
systems with local slow down in the dynamics that show
condensation. In the Edinburgh group’s work, the particles condense into a liquid phase coexisting with a dilute
phase. Our models behave in a qualitatively identical
way, the fact that for the model here high densities decease a hopping rate whereas it decreases a velocity in
the model studied in Edinburgh appears to make little
difference.
However, our motivation is different. The Edinburgh
group focus on showing that a specific out-of-equilibrium
model shows equilibrium-like vapour-liquid phase separation, whereas we are interested in constructing the
simplest possible models model the liquid droplets inside cells. There are also similarities between our model,
the models studied by the Edinburgh group and others,
and cooling granular media. In cooling granular media
locally high rates of inelastic collisions in dense regions
slow the particles in these dense regions, which in turn
causes clustering that is partly analogous to condensation into a liquid-like phase. See Paul and Das26 and
references therein for recent work in this area. However,
there are differences, these clusters are not at steady state
and there may well not be a well-defined surface tension
there26 .
mRNA-rich droplets in the cytoplasm of cells are
not the only example of self-organised domains in cells.
There is a huge amount of self-organised structure in
the chromatin in the nuclei of cells. Chromatin is the
DNA of our genes, together with associated proteins and
RNA2,4,8–11 . Examples of this structure are domains
called nucleoli where ribosomes are made2,10,11 , Cajal
bodies where RNA splicing occurs2,10 , and what is effectively microphase separation between chromatin that is
being transcribed and chromatin that is not active8–10,12 .
So chromatin, which includes huge polymers of DNA,
exhibits behaviour reminiscent of the microphase separation seen in block copolymers with immiscible blocks27 .
The nucleus is microphase separated in the sense that
lengths of chromatin that have a common feature, e.g.,
are making ribosomal RNA in the case of nucleoli, have
separated out from the rest of the DNA. However, the
dynamics of the chromatin depends on energy consuming processes28,29 , unlike in block copolymers where the
monomers move via thermal diffusion. In conventional
block copolymers the microphase separation is driven by
intermolecular attractions between like monomers being
stronger than between unlike monomers. The mechanism
may be different for chromatin.

3

FIG. 3. Snapshot of a configuration of a 2D lattice block
copolymer of length M = 100, with 50 of each monomer type.
The monomers in green (type D) have dynamics that slow in
the presence of other monomers, whereas those in red (type E)
interact only via excluded volume. The parameter αDP = 0.6.

Nuclear self-organisation is a very active field of
research2,4,8–11 and we cannot answer all the many unsolved questions here. However we can see if densitydependent dynamics of the monomers of a block copolymer, can result in microphase separation. This would
be a very simple model of separation between active and
inactive chromatin, or between a nucleolus and the surrounding chromatin that is not involved in the making of
ribosomes.
We introduce a simple out-of-equilibrium block copolymer model. The polymer consists of a linear chain of M
monomers on a 2D square lattice. The monomers are
held together by bonds. If the x and y coordinates of
monomer i are xi and yi then the bonds along the backbone are enforced by insisting that |xi+1 − xi | ≤ 1 and
|yi+1 − yi | ≤ 1 for i = 1, M − 1. The monomers are
of two types: Type E which just interact via excluded
volume interactions, and type D which in addition have
dynamics that depend on the local density.
A simulation cycle consists of M attempted moves, in
each of which one of the M monomers is selected and an
attempt is made to move it to one of the eight neighbouring lattice sites. These eight are the sites above, above
right, right, below right, etc, of the central site. If a type
E monomer has been selected, that move is always successful unless it would move the monomer to an already
occupied site, in which case it is always rejected. If a type
D monomer is selected then the move is also rejected if
it would move the monomer to an already occupied site.
But if the site is vacant, the move is only made with a
probability p = exp[−αDP nM N ]. Here nM N is the total number of monomers (excluding the monomers it is
bonded to) in the eight lattice sites that surround the
site the molecule would be moved from. The parameter αDP controls the density dependence of the dynamics. The polymer is simulated on a large lattice; periodic boundary conditions are not used. Note that this
model for density dependent dynamics also satisfies detailed balance, for the same reason as for our monomeric
model. The model has hard constraints, both restricting the molecules to no more than one per site and restricting the bond length between successive monomers.

For two states i and j that are allowed as they satisfy these requirements the transition probabilities satisfy
pij /pji = exp [−αDP [nM N (i) − nM N (j)]], and so satisfy
detailed balance.
For a block copolymer of the two types of monomer,
the two halves of the polymer separate, with the type D
monomers forming a condensed globule, while the type
E monomers form an extended chain. A snapshot of this
is shown in Fig. 3.
Note that our model for microphase separation is different to Ganai et al.12 ’s model for separation of chromatin that is being transcribed from chromatin that is
not being transcribed. In their work domain formation is driven by a large increase in effective temperature in chromatin that is being transcribed, without a
direct mechanism for density-dependence of the dynamics. Within our model, transcriptionally active regions of
chromatin separate if the active dynamics of these regions
are such that their motion slows when in contact with
other active regions. Similarly, applied to a nucleolus,
our model predicts that the nucleolus separates from the
surrounding chromatin due to ribosome-producing chromatin slowing its mesoscale motion in the presence of
other ribosome-producing chromatin — perhaps because
it is sharing factors or due to direct attractive interactions.
We have studied very simple models and found that
molecules whose hopping rate decreases strongly when
the local density is high, condense into liquid droplets.
The simplicity of our model, and the fact that condensation is also seen in very different models in which the velocity decreases when the local density is high15,16,19–21 ,
suggests that this condensation is quite generic. The
model is an equilibrium one in the sense that it obeys
detailed balance, but is for out-of-equilibrium systems
that consume energy. Thus to the extent that it models the microscopic dynamics of mRNA molecules in cells
correctly, their behaviour will be qualitatively that of an
equilibrium liquid. Although the model maps to the Ising
lattice gas, an equilibrium model, the energy driving the
dynamics does not have to be kT . For mRNA molecules
in cells, a better candidate, at least for long distance
motion14 , is the much larger forces that molecular motors can provide. This has consequences. For example
the effective surface tension that limits the fluctuations
of the liquid surface is then not ∼ kT /a2 , it is presumably ∼ wM /a2 , with wM the work done by one or a few
motors on one of the molecules of the liquid. Here a is a
molecular diameter.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

It is a pleasure to acknowledge Steve Whitelam for
pointing out the mapping to the Ising model, and helpful discussions with Ignacio Pagonabarraga and Daan
Frenkel.

4

1 C.

P. Brangwynne, C. R. Eckmann, D. S. Courson, A. Rybarska,
C. Hoege, J. Gharakhani, F. Jülicher, and A. A. Hyman, Science
324, 1729 (2009)
2 C. P. Brangwynne, Soft Matter 7, 3052 (2011)
3 M. G. Thomas, M. Loschi, M. A. Desbats, and G. L. Boccaccio,
Cell. Signalling 23, 324 (2011)
4 R. P. Sear, I. Pagonabarraga, and A. Flaus, BMC Biophys ??,
in press (2015)
5 J. R. Buchan and R. Parker, Mol. Cell 36, 932 (2009)
6 C. F. Lee, C. P. Brangwynne, J. Gharakhani, A. A. Hyman, and
F. Jülicher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 088101 (2013)
7 N. Kedersha, P. Ivanov, and P. Anderson, Trends Biochem. Sci.
38, 494 (2013)
8 T. Misteli, Cell 128, 787 (2007)
9 N. F. Cope, P. Fraser, and C. H. Eskiw, Genome Biol 11, 204
(2010)
10 Y. S. Mao, B. Zhang, and D. L. Spector, Trends Genetics 27,
295 (2011)
11 C. P. Brangwynne, T. J. Mitchison, and A. A. Hyman, Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 108, 4334 (2011)
12 N. Ganai, S. Sengupta, and G. I. Menon, Nucleic Acids Res. 42,
4145 (2014)
13 M. Loschi, C. C. Leishman, N. Berardone, and G. L. Boccaccio,
J. Cell Sci. 122, 3973 (2009)
14 D. Fusco, N. Accornero, B. Lavoie, S. M. Shenoy, J.-M. Blanchard, R. H. Singer, and E. Bertrand, Curr. Biol. 13, 161 (2003)

15 J.

Stenhammar, A. Tiribocchi, R. J. Allen, D. Marenduzzo, and
M. E. Cates, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 145702 (2013)
16 R. Wittkowski, A. Tiribocchi, J. Stenhammar, R. J. Allen,
D. Marenduzzo, and M. E. Cates, Nature Comm. 5, 4351 (2014)
17 J. Stenhammar, D. Marenduzzo, R. J. Allen, and M. E. Cates,
Soft Matter 10, 1489 (2014)
18 J. Stenhammar, R. Wittkowski, D. Marenduzzo, and M. E.
Cates, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 018301 (2015)
19 G. Redner, A. Baskaran, and M. Hagan, Phys. Rev. E 88, 012305
(2013)
20 B. Mognetti, A. Šarić, S. Angioletti-Uberti, A. Cacciuto, C. Valeriani, and D. Frenkel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 245702 (2013)
21 M. E. Cates and J. Tailleur, arXiv, 1406.3533v1(2014)
22 A. P. Solon, Y. Fily, A. Baskaran, M. E. Cates, Y. Kafri, M. Kardar, and J. Tailleur, arXiv, 1412.3952v1(2014)
23 K. Binder and D. W. Heermann, Monte Carlo Simulation in Statistical Physics: An Introduction (Springer Verlag, Heidelberg,
2010)
24 D. Chandler, Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics (Oxford University Press, New York, 1987)
25 L. Onsager, Phys. Rev. 65, 117 (1944)
26 S. Paul and S. K. Das, EPL 108, 66001 (2014)
27 F. S. Bates and G. H. Fredrickson, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 41,
525 (1990)
28 D. K. Sinha, B. Banerjee, S. Maharana, and G. Shivashankar,
Biophys. J. 95, 5432 (2008)
29 M. Dundr, J. K. Ospina, M.-H. Sung, S. John, M. Upender,
T. Ried, G. L. Hager, and A. G. Matera, J. Cell Biol. 179, 1095
(2007)

