arXiv:1503.07215v1 [q-bio.PE] 24 Mar 2015

MULTILAND: a neutral landscape generator
designed for theoretical studies
Lionel Roques

1

Presentation of the software

The main goal of Multiland is to generate neutral landscapes made of several
types of regions, with an exact control of the proportions occupied by each type
of region (see Gaucherel et al., 2014, for a review of current landscape modelling
approaches). An important feature of the software is that it allows a control of
the landscape fragmentation. It is intended to theoretical studies on the effect
of landscape structure in applied sciences. The user-friendly interface contains 6
entries (Fig. 1).

Figure 1: User interface of the Multiland software.

1

Inputs
Landscape parameters:
• grid size: an integer k ≥ 2. The landscape is described by a lattice of size
k × k;
• proportions: a vector V = (v1 , . . . , vM ) of length M ≥ 2. The length M
of the vector gives the number of different regions in the landscape. The
proportion of the lattice occupied
! by the region associated with a value p ∈
M
X
[1, M ] is equal to µp = vp /
whenever k 2 µp is an integer. Otherwise,
j=1

the number of cells np corresponding to region p < M is given by the floor of
M
−1
P
k 2 µp : bk 2 µp c. The number of cells in the last region is given by k 2 −
np .
p=1

• fragmentation index: a real in [0, 1]. The value 0 corresponds to the most
aggregated landscapes; the value 1 corresponds to the most fragmented
landscapes.

Computation parameters:
• max. comput. time: number of seconds allowed for the generation of 1
landscape. Default value is 5s. Computation time depends on the grid
size; on the value of the fragmentation index (longer times are necessary for
values close to 0 or 1); and on the tolerance (see below);
• tolerance: the computation is stopped when the maximum computation
time is reached or when the algorithm has generated a landscape with the
desired fragmentation index ± the tolerance.

Landscape generation:
• Number of landscapes: once the button “Generate landscape(s)” is pressed,
the indicated number of landscapes is generated. The matrixes describing
the landscapes are save in a file “U.txt”. The corresponding fragmentation
indexes are save in a file “fr.txt”.

2

L

ξ1
ξ1

ξ2

ξ

ξ2

ξ4

ξ

ξ4

ξ3

ξ3

0

L

Figure 2: The 4-neighbourhood system: an element ξ of Ξ and its four neighbours
ξi , i = 1 . . . 4.

2

Theoretical aspects

The software Multiland is based on a stochastic landscape model with M types
of regions. This model should:
- allow an exact control of the proportion attributed to each region;
- lead to more or less fragmented landscapes, with a control of the degree of
fragmentation.

State space. Let Ξ be the lattice made of the of the cells (i, j), i ∈ {1, . . . , k},
i ∈ {1, . . . , k}, equipped with a neighboring system VΞ . We consider the random
field ω defined on the lattice Ξ. This random field assigns each site ξ = (i, j)
(ξ ∈ Ξ) a value p in {1, 2, . . . , M }, while the number np = card{ωξ = p, ξ ∈ Ξ},
takes a pre-fixed value. Under these assumptions let Ω be the corresponding state
space.
Neighborhood system. We adopt a 4-neighborhood system as shown in Fig. 2.
In order to take account of the periodicity of the environment, the domain is
considered wrapped on a torus.
Fragmentation index. For each ω in Ω, we set
s(ω) =

X
1
1{ωξ = ωη },
2 η,ξ∈Ξ, η∈V
ξ

the number of pairs of neighbors ξ, η ∈ Ξ such that ωξ = ωη (1{·} is the indicator
function). The statistic of the model, s(ω), is directly linked to the habitat
3

fragmentation: a landscape pattern is all the more aggregated as s(ω) is high,
and all the more fragmented as s(ω) is small. This statistic will be used below in
the construction of the landscape model.
In order to obtain a fragmentation index which belongs to [0, 1] (0: most
aggregated landscapes, 1: most fragmented landscapes), we proceed as follows.
First, we choose q in {1, 2, . . . , M } such that nq ≥ np for all p ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}.
The region associated with the value q corresponds to the “background” of our
landscape. Then, for each other region z associated with a value in I = {1, . . . , q−
1, q + 1, . . . n}, we define the fragmentation level
fz = 1 −

sz (ω)
,
B(nz )

(2.1)

X
1
1{ωξ = ωη = z}, corresponds to the number of pairs of
2 η,ξ∈Ξ, η∈V
ξ
√
similar neighbors in the region z and B(nz ) = 2 nz − ceil(2 nz ) corresponds to
the maximum possible number of similar neighbors in a region made of nz cells.
Thus, fz ∈ [0, 1]. Finally, we set
where sz (ω) =

F(ω) =

1 X
fz ∈ [0, 1],
n − 1 z∈I

(2.2)

and we say that F(ω) is the fragmentation index of the landscape ω.
Gibbs measure. The landscape model is based on the Gibbs measure P , defined
over Ω by
1
P (X = ω) = e−U (ω) ,
(2.3)
Z
X
with the partition function Z =
e−U (ω) and the Gibbs energy function U :
ω∈Ω

Ω → R,
U (ω) = −βs(ω),

(2.4)

with β ∈ R; thus, the probability density becomes
P (X = ω) =

1 βs(ω)
e
.
Z

(2.5)

The proposed landscape model favours the pairs of neighbours with the same
value, while β increases. Hence, β directly controls the topology of the landscape
patterns.
Generation of the landscapes. Samples from the distribution (2.5) are obtained by using a Metropolis-Hastings algorithm. More precisely, starting from
4

a random initial landscape, a Metropolis-Hastings algorithm is run until (1) the
maximum allowed computation time is reached or (2) the distance between the
fragmentation index of the current state and the desired fragmentation index is
smaller than the tolerance (see Section 1). The parameter β is adjusted during
the algorithm in order to increase or decrease the fragmentation index, depending
on the desired fragmentation index.

3

References and contact

A simpler version of the algorithm was used in Roques and Stoica (2007) to generate binary landscapes. This new version has been developed in the framework
of the PEERLESS ANR project “Predictive Ecological Engineering for Landscape Ecosystem Services and Sustainability”. For more information, contact the
author at lionel.roques@avignon.inra.fr.

4

Downloading the software

The Matlabr source code is available at http://multiland.biosp.org.

References
Gaucherel, C., F. Houllier, D. Auclair, and T. Houet (2014). Dynamic landscape
modelling: The quest for a unifying theory. Living Rev. Landscape Res. 8.
Roques, L. and R. S. Stoica (2007). Species persistence decreases with habitat fragmentation: an analysis in periodic stochastic environments. J Math
Biol 55 (2), 189–205.

5

