Gyrification from constrained cortical expansion
Tuomas Tallinena, Jun Young Chungb, John S. Bigginsc, and L. Mahadevand,e,f,1
a
Department of Physics and Nanoscience Center, University of Jyväskylä, FI-40014 Jyväskylä, Finland; bSchool of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138; cCavendish Laboratory, Cambridge University, Cambridge CB3 0HE, United Kingdom; dWyss Institute for
Biologically Inspired Engineering, eKavli Institute for Bionano Science and Technology, and fSchool of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Department
of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, and Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138

brain morphogenesis

| elastic instability

T

he mammalian brain is functionally and anatomically complex. Over the years, accumulating evidence (1, 2) shows
that there are strong anatomical correlates of its informationprocessing ability; indeed the iconic convoluted shape of the
human brain is itself used as a symbol of its functional complexity. This convoluted (gyrified) shape is associated with the
rapid expansion of the cerebral cortex. Understanding the evolutionary and developmental origins of the cortical expansion
(1–6) and their mechanistic role in gyrification is thus an important question that needs to be answered to decipher the
functional complexity of the brain.
Historically there have been three broad hypotheses about the
origin of sulci and gyri. The first is that gyri rise above sulci by
growing more (7), requiring the pattern of sulci and gyri to be
laid down before the cortex folds, presumably by a chemical
morphogen. There is no evidence for this mechanism. The second hypothesis considers that the outer gray matter consists of
neurons, and the inner white matter is largely long thin axons
that connect the neurons to each other and to other parts of the
nervous system and proposes that these axons pull mechanically,
drawing together highly interconnected regions of gray matter to
form gyri (8–10). However, recent experimental evidence (11)
shows that axonal tension when present is weak and arises deep
in the white matter and is thus insufficient to explain the strongly
deformed gyri and sulci. The third hypothesis is that the gray
matter simply grows more than the white matter, an experimentally confirmed fact, leading to a mechanical buckling that
shapes the cortex (11–14). Evidence for this hypothesis has recently been provided by observations of mechanical stresses in
developing ferret brains (11), which were found to be in patterns
irreconcilable with the axonal tension hypothesis. In addition,
experiments show that sulci and gyri can be induced in usually
smooth-brained mice by genetic manipulations that promote
cortical expansion (15, 16), suggesting that gyrification results

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1406015111

from an unregulated and unpatterned growth of the cortex relative to sublayers.
Nevertheless, there is as yet no explicit biologically and physically plausible model that can convincingly reproduce individual
sulci and gyri, let alone the complex patterns of sulci and gyri
found in the brain. Early attempts to mechanically model brain
folding (13) were rooted in the physics of wrinkling and assumed
a thin stiff layer of gray matter that grows relative to a thick soft
substrate of white matter. This model falls short in two ways. First,
the gray matter is neither thin nor stiff relative to the white matter
(17, 18). Second, this model predicts smooth sinusoidal wrinkling
patterns, sketched in Fig. 1A, whereas even lightly folded brains
have smooth gyri but cusped sulci. More complicated mechanical
models including, e.g., elasto-plasticity and stress-related growth
(14, 19, 20), lead to varying morphologies, but all produced simple
smooth convolutions rather than cusped sulci.
A fundamentally different mechanical instability that occurs
on the surface of a uniformly compressed soft solid (21, 22) has
recently been exposed and clarified, theoretically, computationally, and experimentally (23–26). This sulcification instability
arises under sufficient compression leading to the folding of the
soft surface to form cusped sulci via a strongly subcritical transition. In Fig. 1B, we show a geometry dual to that associated
with wrinkling: A soft layer of gray matter grows on a stiff whitematter substrate. Unlike wrinkling, this instability can produce
the cusped centers of sulci, but the flat bottom of the gray matter
is not seen in the brain. This is a consequence of the assumption
that the gray matter is much softer than the white matter—in
reality the two have very similar stiffnesses (17, 18). We are thus
led to the final simple alternate, sketched in Fig. 1C, where the
stiffnesses of the gray and white matter are assumed to be
identical. Such a system is subject to a cusp-forming sulcification
Significance
The convolutions of the human brain are a symbol of its
functional complexity and correlated with its informationprocessing capacity. Conversely, loss of folds is correlated with
loss of function. But how did the outer surface of the brain, the
layered cortex of neuronal gray matter, get its folds? Guided
by prior experimental observations of the growth of the cortex
relative to the underlying white matter, we argue that these
folds arise due to a mechanical instability of a soft tissue that
grows nonuniformly. Numerical simulations and physical
mimics of the constrained growth of the cortex show how
compressive mechanical forces sculpt it to form characteristic
sulci and gyri, consistent with observations across species in
both normal and pathological situations.
Author contributions: T.T., J.Y.C., J.S.B., and L.M. designed research; T.T., J.Y.C., J.S.B., and
L.M. performed research; T.T., J.Y.C., J.S.B., and L.M. analyzed data; T.T. and J.Y.C. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; and T.T., J.Y.C., J.S.B., and L.M. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
*This Direct Submission article had a prearranged editor.
1

To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: lm@seas.harvard.edu.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1406015111/-/DCSupplemental.

PNAS | September 2, 2014 | vol. 111 | no. 35 | 12667–12672

BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY

The exterior of the mammalian brain—the cerebral cortex—has
a conserved layered structure whose thickness varies little across
species. However, selection pressures over evolutionary time scales
have led to cortices that have a large surface area to volume ratio in
some organisms, with the result that the brain is strongly convoluted into sulci and gyri. Here we show that the gyrification can
arise as a nonlinear consequence of a simple mechanical instability
driven by tangential expansion of the gray matter constrained by
the white matter. A physical mimic of the process using a layered
swelling gel captures the essence of the mechanism, and numerical
simulations of the brain treated as a soft solid lead to the formation
of cusped sulci and smooth gyri similar to those in the brain. The
resulting gyrification patterns are a function of relative cortical expansion and relative thickness (compared with brain size), and are
consistent with observations of a wide range of brains, ranging
from smooth to highly convoluted. Furthermore, this dependence
on two simple geometric parameters that characterize the brain
also allows us to qualitatively explain how variations in these
parameters lead to anatomical anomalies in such situations as polymicrogyria, pachygyria, and lissencephalia.

APPLIED PHYSICAL
SCIENCES

Edited* by John W. Hutchinson, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, and approved July 15, 2014 (received for review April 1, 2014)

A

B

C

D

E

F

the z direction, although folding can only occur in the x – y plane;
we find that when transversely isotropic tangential expansion
exceeds g = gx = gz ≈ 1.29 sulcification of the gray matter becomes
energetically favorable over a smooth surface, and the gray matter
forms cusped folds largely internal to the gray matter and reminiscent of the folds in lightly sulcified brains such as the porcupine
(Fig. 2A). As gx is increased further (for simplicity gz = 1.29 was
fixed) the gray matter folds down into the white matter forming
a big cusped sulcus and smooth gyrus, reminiscent of the sulci and
gyri found in more folded brains such as a cat (Fig. 2B). Our plots
also indicate regions of compressive and tensile stress, which agree
with observations in developing ferret brains (11).
We plot the geometric characteristics of the sulcus, such as
depth and width, as a function of gx in Fig. 2C, which allow us to
establish several nontrivial similarities between our geometry
and actual brains (Fig. S2). After the transition from smooth to

Fig. 1. Wrinkling and sulcification in a layered material subject to differential growth. (A) If the growing gray matter is much stiffer than the white
matter it will wrinkle in a smooth sinusoidal way. (B) If the gray matter is
much softer than the white matter its surface will invaginate to form cusped
folds. (C) If the two layers have similar moduli the gray matter will both
wrinkle and cusp giving gyri and sulci. Physical realizations of A, B, and C,
based on differential swelling of a bilayer gel (Materials and Methods),
confirm this picture and are shown in D, E, and F, respectively.

instability discussed earlier, and can lead to an emergent pattern
very reminiscent of sulci and gyri in the brain.
Results
A physical experiment to mimic these patterns can be easily created
using a hemispherical polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) gel coated
with a layer of PDMS that can swell by absorbing a solvent such
as hexanes (Materials and Methods). By varying cross-linking densities we can prepare samples with different ratios of the moduli of
the two layers and capture both the wrinkled morphology shown in
Fig. 1D (when the outer layer is stiffer) and the sulcified morphology shown in Fig. 1E (when the outer layer is softer). In particular, we see the appearance of brainlike morphologies with deep
sulci when the modulus ratio is close to unity (Fig. 1F).
To study gyrification quantitatively, we first construct a numerical model in two dimensions. We start with a rectangular
domain consisting of a layer of gray matter on top of a deep layer
of white matter, both having the same uniform shear modulus μ.
The material is assumed to be neo-Hookean with volumetric
strain energy density
W=

i K
μ h  T  −2=3
− 3 + ðJ − 1Þ2 ;
Tr FF J
2
2

A

B

C

[1]

where F is the deformation gradient, J = det(F), and the bulk
modulus K = 103μ makes the tissues almost incompressible. To
model growth of the gray matter relative to the white matter, we
apply a tangential growth profile,
gðyÞ = 1 +

α
1 + e10ðy=T−1Þ

;

[2]

so that g = 1 in the white matter and g = 1+ α in the gray matter,
with a smoothed step at the interface (Fig. S1). Here, y is distance from the top surface in material coordinates, T is the undeformed thickness of the gray matter, and α controls the
magnitude of expansion. Later on we denote g ≡ 1 + α ≈ g(0).
We use a custom finite element method to minimize the elastic
energy (details Please select the in Materials and Methods). Our
2D plane-strain calculations also include constrained expansion in
12668 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1406015111

Fig. 2. Formation of a minimal sulcus. The 2D sulci with tangential expansion
ratio of (A) g = 1.30 and (B) g = 2.25 of the gray matter (Eq. 2 and Fig. S1).
Coloring shows radial and circumferential tensile stress in the left and right sulci,
respectively. The stress is compressive in the noncolored areas. Grid lines correspond to every 20 rows or columns of the numerical discretization with nodes.
The width W, depth D, and thickness of the gray matter in the sulcus (Ts) and
gyrus (Tg) are indicated in B. For comparison with observations of brains, we also
show sections of porcupine and cat brains, taken from www.brainmuseum.org.
(C) Scaled dimensions of the simulated sulcus (solid lines) as a function of g
compared with those in porcupine (triangles), cat (dots), and human (squares)
show that our model can capture the basic observed geometry. Width and depth
are given relative to the undeformed thickness T of the gray matter (for details
of the measurements and error bars, see Fig. S2).

Tallinen et al.

Tallinen et al.

physical size R ≈ 36 mm) we find GI ≈ 2.8, which can be compared
with the modestly larger human brain that has GI ≈ 3 in regions
that exclude the sylvian fissure (31). Most actual brain shapes deviate from spherical so that sulci, especially in small- and mediumsized brains, tend to align with the direction of least curvature. By
repeating our calculations on an ellipsoidal geometry (Fig. 3) we
capture this qualitative trend. The numerical brain shapes are
complemented by experimental realizations in Fig. 3. Our bilayer
gel brain models (Materials and Methods) capture the realistic
sulcal spacing of about 4T and the qualitative trends in variation of
sulcal patterns with R/T up to modest-size brains.
Because many brain atlases show different sections of the brain
to highlight the anatomical complexity of the folds, we show
sections of our simulated patterns in Fig. 4A. For comparison, we
show sections from a raccoon brain, which has a similar size to the
simulated brain, and see that the two appear very similar. An
important observation that becomes apparent is that cutting
through gyri and sulci with various alignments with respect to the
section plane gives the impression of rather complex gyrification
and exaggerates depths of sulci, especially when the section plane
is off the center of curvature (plane 2; Fig. 4A). Simulated cross
sections display features such as buried gyri and regions with
disproportionally thick cortices seen in sections of real brains, but
they are really just geometric artifacts of sectioning.
As can be observed, the calculated gyri are rounded rather than
flattened as in, e.g., brain samples that have been fixed before removal. Experimental evidence suggests, in agreement with our
model, that the compressive constraint of the skull or meninges is
not required for gyrification (30), but it could affect the appearance
by flattening the gyral crowns. Our simulation of a brain confined by
a rigid shell that mimics the skull confirms this (Fig. 4B).
PNAS | September 2, 2014 | vol. 111 | no. 35 | 12669

APPLIED PHYSICAL
SCIENCES

Fig. 3. Known empirical scaling laws for gray-matter volume and thickness
are mapped on a g2 vs. R/T diagram. Corresponding simulations for spherical
brain configurations, with images shown at a few points, show that the
surface remains smooth for the smallest brains, but becomes increasingly
folded as the brain size increases. We also show patterns for ellipsoidal
configurations (major axis = 1.5 × minor axes) that lead to anisotropic gyrification. Images of rat, lemur, wolf, and human brains illustrate the increasingly prominent folding with increasing size in real brains. Also shown
are images of our physical mimic of the brain using a swelling bilayer gel of
PDMS immersed in hexanes. The smooth initial state gives rise to gyrified
states for different relative sizes of the brain R/T = 10, 15 (see also Fig. 5). All
of the brain images are from www.brainmuseum.org.

BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY

sulcified, the sulcal depth increases continuously although the
width between sulci is always finite, agreeing with observations in
weakly convoluted brains. In the high g regime, the optimal spacing
is about 4T whereas depth continues to increase, in agreement with
observations in highly folded brains. Finally, the deformed thickness of the gray matter varies such that, at the gyrus, it is nearly
twice that at the base of the sulcus; the same pattern as seen in all
real brains. Our 2D model thus captures the essential features of
individual sulci and gyri and the intersulcal spacing.
Although sulci are fundamentally different from wrinkles,
a qualitative understanding of our results follows by using the
classical formula λ = 2πt[μ/(3μs)]1/3 for the wrinkling wavelength
of a compressed stiff film (modulus μ, thickness t) on a soft
substrate (modulus μs) (27). Extrapolating this to the case here
(μs = μ) yields λ ≈ 4.36t in rough agreement with the simulated
sulcal spacing. A rigorous analytical treatment of gyrification is,
however, presently out of reach due to the subcritical nature of
the instability that is accompanied by finite strains and cusplike
features. Although the underlying mechanical principle is that
the gray matter folds to relax its compressive stress and that is
balanced by deforming the white matter, we emphasize that the
details are quite different from wrinkling and buckling, because
sulcification is a scale-free nonlinear subcritical instability (24).
We now explore the patterns of sulci and gyri in 3D by modeling the brain as a thick spherical shell, with outer radius R and
inner radius Ri = R/2, including both the gray and white matter;
we note that for such geometries the resulting gyrification patterns are independent of the (presence or absence of a) core. As
in the 2D model above, the domain is assumed to be of uniform
elastic material described by Eq. 1, but for numerical convenience we now adopt modest compressibility with K = 5μ, corresponding to Poisson’s ratio ν ≈ 0.4. Brain tissues actually show
time-dependent compressibility owing to poroelasticity (28), but
this is irrelevant over the long times associated with morphogenesis, when we may safely limit ourselves to considering just
elastic effects. We assume that tangential expansion, given by Eq. 2,
is transversely isotropic so that the area expansion is given by g2.
We model small brains as complete thick spherical shells and
patches of large brains as patches of thick spherical shells with
periodic boundary conditions along the edges, and discretize
them using tetrahedral elements (Materials and Methods).
Our 3D model of the brain has three geometrical parameters,
brain radius (size) R, cortical thickness T and the tangential expansion g2 with experimentally observable analogs. Indeed, in
mammals the cortical thickness T, gray-matter volume VG and
white-matter volume VW are linked by robust scaling laws that relate
brains varying over a millionfold range in weight (29, 30). These laws
can be written, in dimensionless units, as T ∼ VG0:1 and VW ∼ VG1:23
(29). Using the spherical geometry of our model, we can relate these
quantities to our model parameters as VG ∼ g2[R3 − (R − T)3] and
VW ∼ (R − T)3 − (R/2)3. These empirical scaling laws, together with
an estimate that g2 = 5 for R/T = 20, eliminate two degrees of
freedom from the model, leaving us with a single parameter
family of models describing brains of different sizes. This is shown
in Fig. 3 where we plot g2 against relative brain size R/T and
display images of real brains as well as numerically simulated
brain shapes for a range of representative relative sizes.
Our model correctly predicts that brains with R/T K 5 (corresponding to physical size of R ≈ 5 mm) should be smooth as g is
insufficient to cause buckling. Intermediate-size brains are correctly predicted to have isolated sulci that are largely localized
within the gray matter. Larger brains become increasingly folded,
with sulci penetrating the white matter and the brain surface
displaying complicated patterns of branched sulci, similar to
those in large real brains (Fig. 3). The degree of folding is conventionally quantified by the gyrification index (GI), the ratio of
the surface area to the area of the convex hull. For the largest
brain that we simulate (R/T = 20, g2 = 5, corresponding to

A

B

C

D

Fig. 4. (A) Sections of a simulated brain (section planes indicated at right)
are compared with coronal sections of a raccoon brain (from www.brainmuseum.org). Cuts through the center of the brain (Upper) and the off the
center (Lower) show that we can capture the hierarchical folds but emphasize how misleading sections can be in characterizing the sulcal architecture. (B) Confining our simulations with a uniform pressure of 0.7μ to
mimic the meninges and skull leads to a familiar flattened sulcal morphology. (C) Changing the gray matter thickness in a small patch of the growing
cortex leads to morphologies similar to polymicrogyria in our simulations.
Here g2 = 5 and R/T = 20 except in the densely folded region where R/T = 40.
(D) A simulated brain of same physical size as that in C but with a thickened
cortex (R/T = 12) and reduced tangential expansion (g2 = 2) displays wide
gyri and shallow sulci reminiscent of pachygyric brains.

The empirical scaling laws we used to restrict the parameter
space of our model describe normal brains. Deviations from the
scaling laws relating gyrification index to the relative cortical
thickness are known to lead to some pathological morphologies in
brains. Our model can reproduce these variations by considering
deviations in the parameters R/T and g. For example, polymicrogyria is typically associated with the gray matter having only
four layers rather than six (32), and hence being thinner. In the
context of our model, reducing T while maintaining g for a fixed
brain size results in more and smaller sulci and gyri, as shown in Fig.
4C, consistent with observations. Pachygyria and lissencephalia are
associated with reduced neuronal migration to the cortex and thus
less surface expansion leading to smaller values of g (33). In the
context of our model, smaller surface expansion g or a thicker cortex
T leads to fewer sulci and wider gyri, as shown in the simulations
in Fig. 4D, consistent with observations.
Discussion
Our mechanical model for gyrification based on biological observations and physical constraints uses realistic but simplified geometries, growth profiles, and mechanical properties. Real brain tissues
are known to change their growth rates in response to stress (20),
and other mechanisms lead to relaxation of elastic stresses over
time. Nevertheless, our simple elastic description suffices to explain
the essentials of gyrification while more complicated inelastic
12670 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1406015111

material behavior has a minor role. Our theory naturally leads to
cusped sulci and smooth gyri, and shows that gray-matter thickness
should vary by about a factor of two between gyral crowns and sulcal
fundi, and that sulcal depths should vary substantially relative to
gray-matter thickness whereas gyral spacings should be always about
4 times the gray-matter thickness; these are consistent with numerous experimental observations (12, 30). Furthermore, the model
captures the variations in the patterns of sulci as a function of brain
size showing that small brains should be smooth and large brains
should have complex branched sulcal networks, in line with observations. Finally, our model predicts that gray matter is under compression and white matter is under radial tension beneath gyri and
circumferential tension beneath sulci, also consistent with recent
observations (11). From a broader perspective, our study complements other recent studies that highlight the role of mechanical
forces on morphogenesis in such instances as gut patterning (34)
where patterns similar to gyri and sulci yield villi in the gut lumen.
The shape of the mammalian brain has a number of prominent
large-scale features: the longitudinal fissure, the sylvian fissure, and
many specific gyri and sulci with important functional correlates that
we cannot capture with our minimal model. Thus, our approach
should be seen as complementing the detailed variations in proliferation patterns, cell migration, shape change, etc., that give rise to
cortical expansion and in turn are regulated by it. Indeed, the
growing insight into regulatory mechanisms of neuronal proliferation
and migration (3, 4, 5, 6) implicates genetic mutations responsible for
brain size (e.g., ASPM, CENPJ for microcephaly), cortex thickness
(e.g., GPR56 for polymicrogyria), and the gyrification index (e.g.,
RELN for lissencephaly), and thus links naturally to the parameters
in our model for brain morphology. Simultaneously, comparative
phylogenies that look at expression profiles for these genes (6) may
also provide an evolutionary window into brain gyrification, wherein
proximal genetic causes lead to pathways that allowed for the
growth of the brain and the expansion of the cortex, turning primitive smooth brains to current gyrified brains, leaving open the
possibility that the process is now significantly regulated. Finally, our
geometric mechanics approach to gyrification might also serve as
a template for brain morphometrics in terms of experimentally
measurable geometrical parameters that vary across individuals,
complementing current geometric statistics approaches (35) by accounting for the underlying physical processes.
Materials and Methods
Physical Models. To create a simulacrum of the brain, we used a poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) elastomer bilayer consisting of an outer layer coated on
the surface of a hemispherical core. Differential swelling of the top layer when
exposed to a solvent (hexanes) mimics constrained cortical expansion and leads
to a variety of surface morphologies. The hemispherical core is fabricated with
PDMS elastomer (Sylgard 184; Dow Chemical Co., Midland, MI) using replica
molding, using a 30:1 mass ratio of base monomer to cross linker that is mixed
and poured over a concave lens-shaped silicone mold with r ≈ 11 mm. The
mixture is left at room temperature to allow trapped air bubbles to escape
and then cured at 75 °C for about 30 min to produce a partially cured contact
surface. After cooling, the PDMS core is carefully peeled off from the mold.
The partially cured PDMS surface is sticky and thus is used to enhance the
interfacial bonding between the top layer and the core for the preparation of
a bilayer specimen; μ0c ≈ 100 kPa in the fully cured state (36). The specimen
geometry and the experimental setup are illustrated in Fig. 5.
The top layers are prepared with different compositions of the PDMS
mixture by a drop coating technique, in which layer thickness is controlled by
adjusting the amount and viscosity of uncured PDMS mixture deposited on
the hemispherical core in a preheated oven. The selected elastomer composition is first thoroughly mixed and degassed to eliminate air bubbles.
Then, drops of a mixture are deposited and uniformly spread onto the surface
of a preprepared PDMS core using a pipette. Finally, the specimen is completely cured at 75 °C overnight. The thickness of the prepared top layers
T0 is determined by comparing the optical images before and after layer
coating using an image analysis program.
The prepared bilayer specimen is fully immersed in a Petri dish filled with
hexanes (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for a period t typically less than

Tallinen et al.

Numerical Simulations. Our finite element model for brain folding is based on
constant strain triangle (2D) or tetrahedron (3D) elements and an explicit
solver for quasistatic equilibration of the system and allows simulation of the
large strains and highly nonlinear mechanics involved in gyrification, but
necessitates the use of high density meshes.
In 2D simulations the domain is discretized into a rectangular lattice of 150 ×
600 nodes (width × depth) and filled with plane-strain triangle elements
forming a mesh of crossed triangles. The top surface of the gray matter is free
and we apply symmetric boundary conditions along the lateral sides of the
domain. Owing to symmetry, the simulation domain contains only one half of
the sulcus/gyrus. The domain is 10 times the gray-matter thickness (i.e., 60

Tallinen et al.

A = ½ x1

x2

^,
x 3  = FGA

[3]

where x1, x2, and x3 are the deformed basis vectors and F is the elastic deformation gradient. The growth tensor
^s
^s ⊗ n
G = gI + ð1 − gÞn

[4]

^ s , with
describes tangential expansion perpendicular to the surface normal n
g given by Eq. 2. At each time step we obtain F from Eq. 3 by using
^ −1 . The Cauchy stress, i.e., the force per unit area in the deformed
F = AðGAÞ
configuration, is derived from the strain energy density WðFÞ (Eq. 1) by
σ=

1 ∂W T
F ,
J ∂F

[5]

where J = det(F). Surface traction of each deformed face (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) of the
tetrahedron is given by si = −σni, where ni are normals with lengths proportional to the deformed areas of the faces. Nodal forces are obtained by
distributing the traction of each face equally for its three vertices.
Self-avoidance of the surface is implemented by preventing nodes penetrating element faces at the surface. If a separation d between a node and
face is less than the contact offset h (we use h = a/3, where a is the mesh
spacing in the initial configuration)
it is considered a contact and penalized

by an energy 4Ka2 h −h d 2 . The contact force from this potential is interpolated to the vertex nodes of the face and an opposite force is given to
the node in contact with the face.

Fig. 6. Cross-section views of 3D simulation geometries for small and large
brains in their initial undeformed states. The gray-matter thickness T, brain
radius R, and boundary conditions are indicated. A detailed image of the
regular mesh structure of the large brain domain shows the reflection
symmetry between every pair of elementary cubes that share a face.

PNAS | September 2, 2014 | vol. 111 | no. 35 | 12671

APPLIED PHYSICAL
SCIENCES

10 min. This exposure time is short enough to prevent the solvent from penetrating into the core, but is sufficient to swell the top layer. Immediately after
solvent exposure, the bilayer specimen is withdrawn from the bath and subsequently imaged with a digital camera (Nikon D80) equipped with a zoom lens
(Sigma 105 mm f/2.8 EX DG Macro). Less polar solvents such as chloroform and
toluene (both having a similar high PDMS swelling coefficient; ref. 37) yield
similar results, but hexanes has a relatively low evaporation rate, which makes
the deswelling process slow enough to capture the surface patterns.
The shear modulus of the outer layer in the swollen state μt is lower than that
in the initial dry state (μ0t), but the modulus of the core remains unchanged over
the short period of solvent exposure time (μc ≈ μ0c). We consider three classes of
models, sketched in Fig. 1 A–C, where μt/μc > 1, μt/μc < 1, and μt/μc ≈ 1. If μ0t 
μ0c, even the swollen modulus μt of the top layer remains considerably greater
than μc, so that μt/μc > 1. If however μ0t ≈ μ0c, after swelling of the top layer
μt/μc < 1. An intermediate situation is when the initial μ0t is slightly greater than
μ0c. If this bilayer is immersed in a solvent, then the modulus of the top layer in
the swollen state is comparable to that of the core, i.e., μt/μc ≈ 1 as in the brain.
The above three situations are experimentally tested by varying the modulus of
the outer layer (μ0t ≈ 1 MPa, ≈ 500 kPa, and ≈ 100 kPa, monomer to cross-linker
ratios 5:1, 10:1, and 30:1, respectively; ref. 36) while keeping the core modulus
constant (μ0c ≈ 100 kPa). The resulting instability patterns are shown in Fig. 1 D–F.
We also experimentally examine the effects of varying the thickness of the top
layer T0 while keeping all other properties fixed (μ0t ≈ 500 kPa, μ0c ≈ 100 kPa,
and r ≈ 11 mm) by using a set of nine bilayer specimens with top layers of three
different thicknesses, namely ≈300 μm, ≈800 μm, and ≈1.2 mm (hence, the
relative initial radius R/T0 ≈ 38, 15, and 10, respectively, where R = r + T0). Each
specimen is immersed in hexanes for a specific period t, and the resulting surface
morphologies induced by differential growth and mechanical buckling are
im-ﬃ
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
aged (Fig. S3). The absorption of solvent is a diffusive process, with T = 4Dt ,
where T is the penetration depth (or thickness) of solvent into a top layer and D
is the diffusion coefficient. Assuming D ≈ 6 × 10−10 m2/s for hexanes in PDMS (38,
39), the estimated T (and R/T) for t = 1 min, t = 4 min, and t = 9 min is found to
be ≈380 μm (30), 760 μm (15), and 1.1 mm (10), respectively. Highlighted images
along a diagonal line in Fig. S3 show the case where the initial radius R/T0 closely
matches the estimated relative radius R/T. Two of these images are compared
with the corresponding images of real and simulated brain shapes in Fig. 3.

BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY

Fig. 5. A physical model of brainlike instability. To mimic the growth of the
gray matter in the brain, a hemispherical elastomer (radius r, shear modulus
μ0c) is coated with a top elastomer layer (thickness T0, shear modulus μ0t) that
swells by absorbing solvent over time t. Representative images of a bilayer
specimen in the initial (dried) state and swollen state (modulus ratio μt/μc ≈ 1)
are shown at right.

topmost rows of elements are included in the gray matter), to minimize the
effect of substrate thickness on the sulcus and gyrus. At each simulated value
of tangential expansion the sulcus is initiated by applying a downward force
to the surface node of a lateral boundary, and self-contact of the sulcus is
accounted for by preventing the surface crossing the vertical line that defines
the boundary. The initiating force is then removed, the system allowed to
relax, and the aspect ratio of the domain is adjusted quasistatically (by
sweeping the height of the domain over a finite interval enclosing the energy
minimum) to find the energetically optimal relative width of the gyrus.
The 3D simulations are based either on irregular tetrahedral meshes (small
brain simulations that implement a full spherical or ellipsoidal thick shell) or
a curved cubical mesh where each cube is divided to five tetrahedrons (large
brain simulations that implement a patch of a spherical thick shell), see Fig. 6.
Inner surfaces of the thick shells are clamped, but the use of free boundary
conditions or simulations with full solid spheres would yield similar results. The
irregular 3D meshes consist of ≈ 2 × 106 nodes (about 107 elements) and the
regular meshes consist of 320 × 320 × 80 nodes (about 4 × 107 elements). In
each case the mesh density is such that the gray-matter layer contains at least
eight layers of elements through its thickness. The spherical patch spans an
angle of π/2 about the x and z axes, with periodic boundary conditions so that
if a copy of the domain is rotated by an angle π/2 about the x or z axis, it would
connect seamlessly to the original domain. The simulations based on regular
meshes have small random spatial variations in growth to break the otherwise
perfect rotational symmetry. These random perturbations do not affect the
shape or size of sulci and gyri or qualitative features of the sulcal pattern, but
different perturbation fields produce different patterns because they are the
only mechanism breaking the symmetry in the system. In the simulations based
on irregular meshes, the mesh provides sufficient randomness.
Ahstress-free initial
configuration of a tetrahedron is defined by the matrix
i
^= x
^ 3 are vectors describing the tetrahe^ 1 , x^ 2 and x
^ 2 x^ 3 , where x
^1 x
A
dron, assuming a Cartesian coordinate system. The deformed configuration
of the tetrahedron, including growth and elastic deformation, is defined by

The energy of the system is minimized by damped second-order dynamics,
using an explicit scheme,

a node, respectively. The 2D simulations are implemented similarly but with
triangular elements instead of tetrahedra.

xðt + ΔtÞ = xðtÞ + vðt + ΔtÞΔt:
[7]
pﬃﬃﬃﬃ
3
Here Δt = 0:05a= K is the time step, m = a mass of a node, and γ = 10 m
viscous damping. Vectors f, v, and x are force, velocity, and position of

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Teijo Kuopio for discussions. Computations
were run at CSC–IT Center for Science, Finland. The brain images were
obtained from the collections of the University of Wisconsin, Michigan State,
and the National Museum of Health and Medicine, funded by the National
Science Foundation and the National Institutes of Health. We thank the
Academy of Finland (T.T.), the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering (J.Y.C. and L.M.), the Royal Society (J.S.B.), the Singleton Foundation
(L.M.), and the MacArthur Foundation (L.M.) for partial financial support.

1. Striedter GF (2005) Principles of Brain Evolution (Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA).
2. Lui JH, Hansen DV, Kriegstein AR (2011) Development and evolution of the human
neocortex. Cell 146(1):18–36.
3. Gabi M, et al. (2010) Cellular scaling rules for the brains of an extended number of
primate species. Brain Behav Evol 76(1):32–44.
4. Neal J, et al. (2007) Insights into the gyrification of developing ferret brain by magnetic resonance imaging. J Anat 210(1):66–77.
5. Lancaster MA, et al. (2013) Cerebral organoids model human brain development and
microcephaly. Nature 501(7467):373–379.
6. Bae BI, et al. (2014) Evolutionarily dynamic alternative splicing of GPR56 regulates
regional cerebral cortical patterning. Science 343(6172):764–768.
7. Lefèvre J, Jean-François M (2010) A reaction-diffusion model of human brain development. PLoS Comp Biol 6:e1000749.
8. Van Essen DC (1997) A tension-based theory of morphogenesis and compact wiring in
the central nervous system. Nature 385(6614):313–318.
9. Hilgetag CC, Barbas H (2006) Role of mechanical factors in the morphology of the
primate cerebral cortex. PLoS Comp Biol 2:146–159.
10. Herculano-Houzel S, Mota B, Wong P, Kaas JH (2010) Connectivity-driven white
matter scaling and folding in primate cerebral cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(44):
19008–19013.
11. Xu G, et al. (2010) Axons pull on the brain, but tension does not drive cortical folding.
J Biomech Eng 132(7):071013.
12. Bok ST (1959) Curvature of the cerebral cortex. Histonomy of the Cerebral Cortex
(Elsevier, Amsterdam).
13. Richman DP, Stewart RM, Hutchinson JW, Caviness VS, Jr (1975) Mechanical model of
brain convolutional development. Science 189(4196):18–21.
14. Toro R, Burnod Y (2005) A morphogenetic model for the development of cortical
convolutions. Cereb Cortex 15(12):1900–1913.
15. Chenn A, Walsh CA (2002) Regulation of cerebral cortical size by control of cell cycle
exit in neural precursors. Science 297(5580):365–369.
16. Stahl R, et al. (2013) Trnp1 regulates expansion and folding of the mammalian cerebral cortex by control of radial glial fate. Cell 153(3):535–549.
17. Prange MT, Margulies SS (2002) Regional, directional, and age-dependent properties
of the brain undergoing large deformation. J Biomech Eng 124(2):244–252.
18. Kaster T, Sack I, Samani A (2011) Measurement of the hyperelastic properties of ex
vivo brain tissue slices. J Biomech 44(6):1158–1163.
19. Nie J, et al. (2010) A computational model of cerebral cortex folding. J Theor Biol
264(2):467–478.

20. Bayly PV, Okamoto RJ, Xu G, Shi Y, Taber LA (2013) A cortical folding model incorporating stress-dependent growth explains gyral wavelengths and stress patterns
in the developing brain. Phys Biol 10(1):016005.
21. Biot MA (1965) Mechanics of Incremental Deformations (Wiley, New York).
22. Southern E, Thomas AG (1965) Effect of constraints on the equilibrium swelling of
rubber vulcanizates. J Polym Sci A 3(2):641–646.
23. Trujillo V, Kim J, Hayward RC (2008) Creasing instability of surface attached hydrogels. Soft Matter 4:564–569.
24. Hohlfeld E, Mahadevan L (2011) Unfolding the sulcus. Phys Rev Lett 106(10):105702.
25. Hohlfeld E, Mahadevan L (2012) Scale and nature of sulcification patterns. Phys Rev
Lett 109(2):025701.
26. Tallinen T, Biggins JS, Mahadevan L (2013) Surface sulci in squeezed soft solids. Phys
Rev Lett 110(2):024302.
27. Chen X, Hutchinson JW (2004) Herringbone buckling patterns of compressed thin
films on compliant substrates. J Appl Mech 71(5):597–603.
28. Cheng S, Bilston LE (2007) Unconfined compression of white matter. J Biomech 40(1):
117–124.
29. Zhang K, Sejnowski TJ (2000) A universal scaling law between gray matter and white
matter of cerebral cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97(10):5621–5626.
30. Welker W (1990) Why does cerebral cortex fissure and fold: a review of determinants
of gyri and sulci. Cereb Cortex 8B:3–136.
31. Ronan L, et al. (2014) Differential tangential expansion as a mechanism for cortical
gyrification. Cereb Cortex 24(8):2219–2228.
32. Nieuwenhuijse P (1913) Zur Kenntnis der Mikrogyrie. Psychiat Neurol B1(17):9–53.
33. Chang BS, et al. (2007) The role of RELN in lissencephaly and neuropsychiatric disease.
Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 144B(1):58–63.
34. Shyer AE, et al. (2013) Villification: How the gut gets its villi. Science 342(6155):
212–218.
35. Mumford D, Desolneux A (2010) Pattern Theory (A.K. Peters, Natick, MA).
36. Nase J, Lindner A, Creton C (2008) Pattern formation during deformation of a confined viscoelastic layer: From a viscous liquid to a soft elastic solid. Phys Rev Lett
101(7):074503.
37. Lee JN, Park C, Whitesides GM (2003) Solvent compatibility of poly(dimethylsiloxane)based microfluidic devices. Anal Chem 75(23):6544–6554.
38. Favre E, Schaetzel P, Nguygen QT, Clement R, Neel J (1994) Sorption, diffusion and
vapor permeation of various penetrants through dense poly(dimethylsiloxane)
membranes: A transport analysis. J Membr Sci 92:169–184.
39. Guo CJ, De Kee D, Harrison B (1992) Effect of molecular structure on diffusion of
organic solvents in rubbers. Chem Eng Sci 47:1525–1532.

vðt + ΔtÞ = vðtÞ +

f ðtÞ − γvðtÞ
Δt,
m

12672 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1406015111

[6]

Tallinen et al.

Supporting Information
Tallinen et al. 10.1073/pnas.1406015111

Fig. S1. Tangential growth profiles for α = 0.3 and α = 1.25 applied in simulations of Fig. 2 A and B, respectively.

Fig. S2. Geometric parameters from brain sections of a porcupine, cat, and human. Brain radius R is indicated by the red arcs. Gyral widths in the porcupine
and cat are determined as the length of the red arc over each gyrus. In the human the sulcal geometry is more complicated and some gyri are inclined with
respect to the sectioning plane. Therefore, in the human gyral widths are determined more selectively as indicated by magenta line segments. Sulcal depths are
indicated by blue line segments (the sylvian fissure and sulci that are clearly inclined with respect to the sectioning plane are excluded in the human). The
thickness of the gray matter at the gyri is indicated by the yellow line segments, and thickness of the gray matter at the sulci by the green line segments (not
shown for the human). The undeformed thickness of the gray matter is approximated by T = Tg/1.5 using the mean thickness Tg of the gray matter at the gyri.
Tangential expansion g is estimated by dividing the length of the surface contour by the length of the red arc (excluding the sylvian fissure in the human). The
data shown for W/T, D/T, and Tg/Ts are given as the mean ± SD. All images are cell-stained (porcupine and cat) or fiber-stained (human) coronal sections from
www.brainmuseum.org.

Tallinen et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/1406015111

1 of 2

Fig. S3. For the swelling gel model that mimics the growing brain, we show the sulcal patterns as a function of the scaled initial radius R/T0 and solvent
exposure time t. The sulcal spacing of the patterns increases with decreasing R/T0 and increasing t in qualitative agreement with our theoretical predictions.
The images highlighted with a blue border represent states where the solvent penetration depth is comparable with the upper layer thickness.

Tallinen et al. www.pnas.org/cgi/content/short/1406015111

2 of 2

