This is a pre-print of the journal paper:
Coupling models of cattle and farms with models of badgers for
predicting the dynamics of bovine tuberculosis (TB)
Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment, March 2015, Volume
29, Issue 3, pp 623-635
Aristides Moustakas1,* and Matthew R. Evans1
1. School of Biological and Chemical Sciences
Queen Mary University of London
Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS, UK
* Corresponding author

Abstract
Bovine TB is a major problem for the agricultural industry in several countries. TB can be
contracted and spread by species other than cattle and this can cause a problem for disease
control. In the UK and Ireland, badgers are a recognised reservoir of infection and there has
been substantial discussion about potential control strategies. We present a coupling of
individual based models of bovine TB in badgers and cattle, which aims to capture the key
details of the natural history of the disease and of both species at approximately county
scale. The model is spatially explicit it follows a very large number of cattle and badgers on a
different grid size for each species and includes also winter housing. We show that the
model can replicate the reported dynamics of both cattle and badger populations as well as
the increasing prevalence of the disease in cattle. Parameter space used as input in
simulations was swept out using Latin hypercube sampling and sensitivity analysis to model
outputs was conducted using mixed effect models. By exploring a large and computationally
intensive parameter space we show that of the available control strategies it is the
frequency of TB testing and whether or not winter housing is practised that have the most
significant effects on the number of infected cattle, with the effect of winter housing
becoming stronger as farm size increases. Whether badgers were culled or not explained
about 5%, while the accuracy of the test employed to detect infected cattle explained less
than 3% of the variance in the number of infected cattle.

Keywords
Agent based model; IBM; simulation and modelling; confronting models with data; animal
movement; winter housing; epidemiology; mixed effects models; Latin hypercube sampling.

Introduction
Historically, bovine tuberculosis (TB, also abbreviated as bTB) was once almost
eradicated from Great Britain, with a minimum in the number of cattle herds that contained
an individual that reacted positively to a test for TB being reached in the late 1970s (Krebs et
al., 1997). Since this time the disease has been steadily increasing in both its prevalence in
the cattle herd and its spread around the country (Gilbert et al., 2005). Concern about the
increasing prevalence of TB led to the Krebs Review, which concluded that there was
compelling evidence for badgers acting as a wild reservoir host and implicating them in the
transmission of TB to cattle (Krebs et al., 1997).
The Krebs Review proposed a large-scale field trial, the Randomised Badger Culling
Trial (RBCT), to quantify the impact of culling badgers on the incidence of TB in cattle and
the effectiveness of alternative culling strategies. The RBCT was implemented and took place
between 1998 and 2007. The results of this experimental trial were analysed and published
by the Independent Scientific Group (ISG) (Bourne et al., 2007; Godfray et al., 2004). The ISG
concluded that badgers contribute significantly to increasing the incidence of the disease in
cattle and that there is a cycle of infection between cattle and badgers. The ISG suggested
that it would be difficult to eradicate TB completely as the test employed to detect TB in
cattle produced false negative results (i.e. some individuals test negative despite being
infected with TB) (Claridge et al., 2012; Szmaragd et al., 2012), and disease was reintroduced by badgers (i.e. badgers acted as a reservoir of infection). The ISG and
subsequent analyses have suggested that proactive culling of badgers (killing badgers within
an area whether or not there were any recorded outbreaks of TB) would be highly likely to
reduce the incidence of TB within and around the culled area as long as the culled area was
at least 141km2 (Godfray et al., 2004; Jenkins et al., 2010). However, the estimated costs of
culling at this scale have been regarded as too large to justify the likely economic benefits
(Wilkinson et al., 2009). In addition, badgers within culling areas may show post-cull
perturbation resulting in higher motility that risks spreading the disease further than in the
un-culled state (Woodroffe et al., 2006a). In 2007, the then Chief Scientific Advisor for the
UK, produced a report focussing on the scientific issues relating to the role that badger
culling could play in controlling and reducing the levels of cattle TB. The conclusion of this
report was that the removal of badgers was the best option available at that time to reduce
the reservoir of infection (King et al., 2007). In 2011 the UK Government decided to permit
low cost badger culls in some regions of England (DEFRA, 2011). The first such badger culls
took place in 2013.
TB is a complex disease with dynamic coupling of infection both within and between
at least two species – in the UK badgers and cattle (Krebs et al., 1997). Recent genetic
evidence has demonstrated the persistence of TB strains on or near farms for several years
despite clear whole herd tests over the same period with ongoing infection in the local
badger population with strains closely related to those that had been seen on the farms
(Biek et al., 2012). While this is compelling evidence that the same strains exist in sympatric
cattle and badgers, it is equally as supportive of badgers transmitting TB to cattle as it is of
cattle transmitting TB to badgers. There is evidence that both cattle and badgers transmit TB
to individuals of their own species; there is experimental evidence that cattle-to-cattle
transmission of TB occurs (Goodchild and Clifton-Hadley, 2001), and that TB is transmitted
both among and between social groups of badgers (Goodchild et al., 2012). Cattle transmit
TB to each other even at early stages of infection (Kao et al., 2007) as well as to badgers
(Woodroffe et al., 2005). There is a long established programme of cattle testing against TB
with immediate slaughter of animals giving a positive test, which should remove infective

animals from the population. Despite this, a significant number of cases of TB are first
detected at slaughter (Gibbens, 2009).
It is likely that TB circulates within both the badger and the cattle populations, as
well as between the two species; and that a fraction of cattle infected with TB test falsely
negative on the standard tests and therefore persist in the herd for long enough potentially
to transmit the disease to other cattle and to badgers. The standard test for TB has a
reported median accuracy of 80% and thus will be expected to miss approximately two out
of every ten TB infected cattle (DEFRA, 2009). A recent analysis has demonstrated that if the
common heminth, Fasciola hepatica, is present then the likelihood of detecting TB, if it is
present, in a herd drops by about a third (Claridge et al., 2012). This suggests that at least in
areas where this parasite is abundant, such as in the west of the UK (Claridge et al., 2012),
the accuracy of the standard TB test will be reduced below, possibly substantially below,
80%. These observations are consistent with the fact that approximately 25% of TB cases are
first identified at slaughter (Gibbens, 2009), i.e. some TB infected cattle remain in the herd
because they are not detected by the tests used to detect the disease. The existence of
cattle-to-cattle transmission of TB and a failure to detect an animal as infected with TB when
it does harbour the disease are both necessary to explain the observation that the spread of
TB in the cattle population is better described by cattle movement data than by other
factors (Gilbert et al., 2005), i.e. cattle which were believed to be clear of TB are in fact
harbouring the disease and move it to new areas when they are moved between farms.
The task of quantifying and modelling dynamics of TB between and within badgers
and cattle is not trivial (Godfray et al., 2013). While statistical and analytical methods
provide a rigorous way of analysing existing data, they are often poor at predicting scenarios
and a computational approach is likely to be more desirable (Evans et al., 2013a).
Computational models provide a valid alternative to expensive experimental approaches
(Godfray et al., 2004) as a method of testing the likely effects of various strategies designed
to control or eradicate TB in cattle. To be useful such models need to represent the
modelled system in sufficient detail to allow realistic predictions to be made about the
outcome of any control strategy (Evans et al., 2013b). Individual and Agent based models
(IBMs) link individuals with populations through fitness maximisation, energetics, and
behavioural decisions of individuals that influence population-level outcomes (Evans et al.,
2013a; Moustakas and Evans, 2013; Moustakas and Silvert, 2011; Zhang et al., 2014). Model
coupling (Verdin et al., 2014) of multiple dynamically acting animals can provide powerful
predictive tools (Evans et al., 2013a).
We have developed a computational model of TB that includes both badgers and
cattle with details of both the natural history of badgers and the husbandry of cattle. We
have used this model to explore the effects of different potential control strategies (badger
culling, changing the TB testing interval and accuracy), and also to investigate spatiotemporal epidemiological effects (Christakos and Hristopulos, 1998; Lin et al., 2014) such as
the effects of cattle movements, the rates of transmission both between and within the two
species, the effects of farm (and hence herd) sizes as well as winter housing (bringing all the
cattle on a farm into one area during the winter months). This model is run on grid of cells
such that cell sizes scale to the mean badger territory area, badger culling and culled
induced migration areas, farm area, cattle movement distances between farms, cattle
winter housing, and the scale of cattle movements between farms.
Methods
Overview

The model is spatially explicit and is run on a lattice of cells, it is based on agent-based
models following in detail the annual cycle of individuals of two agents, badgers and cattle.
Model description is comprised by two sections: A description of the model is provided here
while technical descriptions, the rationale behind each model section and a detailed
referenced parameter space explored is provided in Supp. 1. A schematic representation of
the model is shown in Fig. 1. In order to account for dynamics of TB within and between
badgers and cattle, we have explored N=465 simulation scenarios in total; N1=157 simulation
scenarios with badgers and cattle, N2=154 simulations scenarios with cattle but without
badgers, and N3=154 simulation scenarios with badgers but without cattle. An explicit list of
all model input variables and the parameter space explored for each variable in simulation
scenarios performed is provided in Supp. 2.
Model description
Grid
It has been reported that on average badgers spend more than 95% of their time in
their group territory (Roper and Lüps, 1993). Further around 80% of the population are
reported to be within their natal group four years after their birth(Woodroffe et al., 2005). In
general, badgers usually do not move from their home range area if population sizes are
constant and in the absence of culling (Riordan et al., 2011). We thus decided to set the
mean cell size to be equal to the mean badger home range area in the UK, which is reported
to be 0.7 km2 (Cheeseman et al., 1981; Krebs et al., 1997) corresponding to 0.84 km on a
side of each cell. Having determined the surface area of each cell the initial number of
badgers and cattle included in the simulation was determined using published data of the
mean number of badgers and mean number of cattle per km2.
Grid: The total simulation area covers 16384 cells x 0.7 km2 cell-1 = 11,468.8 km2. The
cell size of 0.7 km2 cell-1 was chosen in order to correspond to the mean home range area in
the UK of a group of badgers (see ‘badger movement’). The model is run on a lattice of 128 x
128 cells (totalling 16384 cells). No periodic boundary conditions were employed. Farms are
initially distributed on the grid with farm sizes consisting of a number of cells forming blocks.
The eight cells adjacent to the current cell are considered as neighbouring cells on each time
step.
Badgers: Badger density is determined by the availability of food and settlement
sites (Kruuk and Parish, 1982). In the UK badger density is known to vary with latitude and it
is reported to be higher in the south than in the north (Table 3.3 in (Krebs et al., 1997)). We
chose to initialise the model with 5.7 adult badgers per km2 a value corresponding to Bristol
area (Table 3.3 in (Krebs et al., 1997)). This resulted in 5.7 badgers km-2 x 0.7 km cell-1 x
16384 cells = 65,372 badgers. Each badger was followed individually throughout the
simulation period on each simulation scenario.
Cattle: Cattle data followed dairy cattle whenever data were available, while when
data were not available for dairy cattle explicitly we used data that did not distinguish
between beef and dairy cattle. According to (Eurostat, 2009) the mean dairy farm size in the
UK is 75 ha (= 0.75 km2), and the mean number of cattle per farm is 91, corresponding to
1.21 cattle per ha and thus 121 cattle per km2. As cell size on the grid is 0.7 km2 this
corresponds to 84.7 cattle per cell and in total 16384 cells x 84.7 cattle cell-1= 1,387,725
cattle. Each cattle was followed individually throughout the simulation period on each
simulation scenario.
All simulation scenarios were replicated three times, (i) with badgers and cattle with
population numbers as described above, (ii) with all other parameters been identical but
without badgers, (iii) all else been equal but without cattle, in order to investigate dynamics
of TB within and between the cattle and badger population. An exhaustive number of
simulation runs with all parameters space explored here would require over 600,000

simulations which are very computationally demanding. We applied the input sensitivity
analysis method Latin Hypercube sampling to save processing time while covering as much
parameter space as possible (McKay et al., 1979). Latin hypercube sampling generates an
unbiased parameter subset of the entire parameter space and it is commonly employed in
several disciplines to analyse large computationally intensive datasets (Marrel et al., 2014).
We included all the variables of the model and the feasible values for each variable (listed in
Supp. 2). For each parameter, 11 values covering the whole range of the parameter space
(defined by the min and max value of the variable, values specified in ‘parameter space and
rationale’ in Supp. 1 for each variable) were specified and reordered randomly generating 10
input parameter sets (Meyer et al., 2007). This procedure was replicated three times. The
model was run 10 times for each set of parameters (Meyer et al., 2007). The simulation
length during this process was set to 222 time steps (months) equal to the time span of the
publicly available data (Jan 1996 – June 2014) regarding infected cattle and total cattle tests
(DEFRA, 2014a, c).As the data were on a different scale than the model we analysed
percentage of infected cattle by dividing infected cattle with total cattle tests. This is a crude
estimate as infected herds are tested more often, there are geographic differences in testing
frequency and other biases (DEFRA, 2014a). Infected cattle in the model are cattle that have
been detected infected (i.e. cattle that the test detected infected) and total cattle tests
include all cattle tests in each time step including regular tests and pre-movement tests. The
resulting % of infected cattle was averaged over time and over the simulation runs. After a
successful check of normality and independence of errors, a linear regression model was
applied with percentage of infected cattle as response variable and all the input variables as
explanatory variables (Meyer et al., 2007). To obtain a measure for the relative importance
of the remaining parameters with respect to % of infected cattle, the standardized
regression coefficients were calculated as the absolute ratio of the coefficient and the
corresponding standard error (Meyer et al., 2007). This process was repeated twice, one
with badgers and cattle in the model and a second with cattle only. As deduced by Latin
hypercube sampling for (i) badgers and cattle N1 = 157 simulations were required, (ii) for
cattle only N2 =154. We were unable to conduct this analysis for badgers only as we had no
access to a badger time series dataset. We arbitrarily used an equal number of simulations
for the badgers only (so N3 = N2 =154) simulations as for the cattle only simulations. The
standardised regression coefficients derived from cattle only were used for badgers only
simulations too. Thus 465 simulations in total were explored with each simulation being
replicated 10 times. Observed and simulated average values were compared with t-tests
with Welch correction (Welch, 1947) for unequal variances (Meyer et al., 2007).
Time step
All parameters related to time are defined on an annual basis. The model time step was set
to one month. Time step was set to one month as there was no biological process that we
could identify in badgers and cattle acting in a time frame shorter than a month. Each
simulation scenario was run for 30 years (360 months).
Badgers
Badger demographics
Badgers demographics are defined by a birth and death rate as well as a maximum life
expectancy that differs between healthy and infected individuals. Birth rates are
implemented deterministically while death rates are stochastic, and both vary ±2% between
years from the input value. Birth occurs only in spring months while death continues
throughout the year (Neal and Harbison, 1958). In our model badgers reproduce clonally but
accounting for a 50:50 % ratio of male to female individuals within the population: Each year
only (the female) half of the population may give birth to offspring. Individuals that give

birth produce from one to five (mean = three) cubs per litter (Byrne et al., 2012). Badgers
live according to a maximum life expectancy when healthy and a reduced maximum life
expectancy when infected (Little et al., 1982). Deaths of infected badgers are not counted in
the annual death rate of healthy badgers (i.e. the two death rates are different). Deaths are
implemented as following: Badgers from the oldest age-class die during the year. If there are
insufficient healthy or infected badgers in the oldest age-class to fulfil the relevant annual
death rate for the population as a whole, or infected badgers, badgers from the next oldest
age-class are killed randomly in space until the badger death rate for total, or infected
badgers is fulfilled for that year. If during current year after fulfilling the annual death rates
for healthy and infected badgers some badgers remain in the oldest age class for either
healthy, or infected badgers, these individuals are killed and so the death rate during that
year will be higher than the typical annual death rate. Badgers located on culling cells suffer
culling mortalities in scenarios during which culling is applied (Smith et al., 2012). Culling
mortalities are not part of the death rate of badgers i.e. culling mortality is additive to death
rate.
Badger movement
For each time step 95% of badgers within each group do not move while the remaining 5%
move (Roper and Lüps, 1993). The 5% of moving badgers will move to the 8 neighbouring
cells and return back on current cell where their home group is located during the next time
step. When in one of the 8 neighbouring cells, the moving badgers can both infect and get
infected by badgers and/or cattle of the neighbouring cell. Badgers also move between cells
based on minimum and maximum group sizes (Cheeseman et al., 1988; Kruuk and Parish,
1982), and culling (Woodroffe et al., 2006b); If the number of badgers on the current cell is
smaller than the maximum number of badgers per cell, newly born badgers stay on current
cell. Newly born badgers move to other cells to form groups when the number of badgers on
the current cell is larger than the maximum number of badgers per group size (Rogers et al.,
1998; Roper et al., 2003) a year after their birth (i.e. not during the year that were born).
These solitary badgers keep on moving until they find a group populated with lower number
of badgers than the maximum group size or until they encounter another solitary badger
and form a new group. A detailed technical description of badger movement
implementation is provided in Supp. 1 ‘badger movement’.
Culling
In scenarios in which culling is applied, it is implemented by removing a proportion of the
badgers within a number (block) of cells forming a square. The proportion of badgers
removed within a culling block(s) is defined by culling intensity (Wilkinson et al., 2009). The
model assumes that culling-induced migration happens always as long as there is a single
badger killed by culling in the badger group (Bielby et al., 2014). Once at least one badger is
removed due to culling in culling cells, culling causes badger migration with badgers located
in the current cell (located within culled areas) migrating to neighbouring cells (Karolemeas
et al., 2012). A full technical description of the implementation of culling is provided in Supp.
1 ‘Culling’. This is implemented as follows: Badgers move within the next time step away
from current cell into a new cell located within the culling-induced migration distance. The
culling-induced migration distance is up to four cells from current cell per time step
corresponding to a distance close to 7.5 km from their home settlement (Sleeman, 1992).
Culling induced migrating badgers seek to form a new group in the neighbourhood of cells
located within the maximum migration distance (Riordan et al., 2011).
Cattle
Winter housing and Cattle movement

Within the farm, cattle can move only on the blocks of cells that comprise the farm. In
scenarios in which winter housing is applied, during the winter months all cattle are
summoned to one cell of the farm were winter housing takes place (Brennan and Christley,
2012). Note that the cattle-to-cattle infection rate per se does not vary whether winter
housing is applied or not. In addition badgers from the current cell (coinciding with the cell
of winter housing) can enter the farm buildings where winter housing is applied (Tolhurst et
al., 2009). During non-winter months (and during all months in scenarios in which winter
housing is not applied) cattle perform random walks on farm cells. Cattle are bought from
other farm owners and can move between farms on every time step (Gilbert et al., 2005).
Cattle movement between farms is defined by two parameters: the percentage of the total
population of cattle moving (sold) every year, and the mean distance between the
originating farm and the destination farm that the sold cattle move every year (Gilbert et al.,
2005). Cattle that move into a new farm are removed from the population of the originating
farm and added to the cattle population of the destination farm. New cattle are initially
placed on the cell of the new farm where winter housing takes place (central cell) and can
random walk within the new farm if no winter housing applies or stays on that cell if the
movement into the new farm was made during winter months. Cattle moving between
farms (sold) are tested prior to moving into the new farm (AHVLA, 2013), see section 'cattle
testing'.
Cattle demographics
Cattle demographics are defined by a birth and death rate as well as a maximum life
expectancy that differs between healthy and infected individuals. Birth rates are
implemented deterministically while death rates are stochastic and both vary ±2% between
years from the input value. Reproduction is clonal but accounting for the ratio of male to
female individuals within the population (Thibier and Wagner, 2002) see Supp. 1 ‘cattle
demographics for more details. The proportion of the total population of cattle that gives
birth each year produces on average one calf. Cattle live according to a maximum life
expectancy when healthy (NSF, 2010) and a reduced maximum life expectancy when
infected (Costello et al., 1998). Deaths of infected cattle are not counted in the annual death
rate of healthy cattle (i.e. the two death rates are different). Deaths are implemented as
following: All cattle from the oldest age-class die during that year. If there is insufficient
numbers of healthy or infected cattle from the oldest age-class to fulfil the annual death rate
for either healthy, or infected cattle, a number of individuals from the next oldest age-class
are killed randomly in space until the cattle death rate for healthy and infected cattle is
fulfilled for that year. If during the current year there are more cattle in the maximum oldest
age class of either healthy, or infected cattle than are required to fulfil the annual death rate
these individuals are killed and death rate during that year will be higher than the typical
annual death rate.
Cattle testing
Cattle are tested with a frequency defined by an interval of months based on the initial
cattle infection ratio (DEFRA, 2014a); (e.g. every 48 months - 4 years - when the initial % of
infected cattle was < 0.2%). The cattle test is characterised by a testing accuracy defined as a
percentage of false negative detections (Szmaragd et al., 2012); (i.e. a testing accuracy of
80% means that for every 100 infected cattle tested, 80 cattle will be detected infected).
Detected infected cattle are slaughtered and removed from the population. Cattle that
move between farms are tested prior to moving with the same testing accuracy. Cattle that
are infected, and detected while moving into a new farm are slaughtered and removed from
the population (AHVLA, 2013). Cattle moving onto a new farm that are tested, and found to
be uninfected, or are infected but are undetected are moved onto the new farm.

Infections
Badger to cattle
Badgers infect cattle located on current cell (Benham and Broom, 1991; Smith et al., 2001)
with a probability defined by the badger-to-cattle infection rate. The implementation is
stochastic & density-dependent (Wilkinson et al., 2009): For every infected badger on the
current cell let the infection rate be a number Ib2c and rnd a uniform random number drawn
in [0, 1]. If rnd  Ib2c the infected badger will infect a cow on current cell. The process is
repeated during every time step for every cell for every infected badger with every noninfected cattle individual on current cell. The time of infection is recorded for every cow. The
mean life expectancy of newly infected cattle is adjusted from mean healthy life expectancy
to mean infected cattle life expectancy from the time of infection.
Badger to badger
Badgers infect other badgers located on current cell (Jenkins et al., 2012) with a probability
defined by the badger to badger infection rate. The model has the option for different
infection rates between and within badger groups however this option was not explored
here see ‘badger to cattle’ section and full technical implementation and rationale in Supp.
1.
Cattle to badger
Cattle infect badgers located on the current cell (Woodroffe et al., 2006b; Woodroffe et al.,
2005) with a probability defined by the cattle-to-badger infection rate. The process is
implemented as described in ‘badger to cattle’ section and full technical implementation is
provided in Supp. 1 ‘cattle to badger’.
Cattle to cattle
Cattle infect other cattle located on their current cell (Conlan et al., 2012; Goodchild and
Clifton-Hadley, 2001) with a probability defined by the cattle-to-cattle infection rate. The
process is implemented as described in ‘badger to cattle’ section and full technical
implementation is provided in Supp. 1 ‘cattle to cattle’.
Initialisation
The number of farms is calculated by dividing the total number of cells on the grid by the
mean farm size (Goodchild and Clifton-Hadley, 2001). Farm structure is implemented on the
grid in blocks of cells equal to the mean farm size. Cattle are initially uniformly distributed
over the farms by dividing the initial number of cattle by the number of farms. Initially,
infected cattle are randomly distributed over the farms. In scenarios in which farm size is
larger than one cell (farm sizes are identical within each scenario but they vary between
scenarios with sizes spanning from one to four cells corresponding to 70 – 280 ha) the cell
closest to the upper left corner of the farm is selected as a winter housing cell location
(Brennan and Christley, 2012). Badger groups (setts) are initially randomly distributed on the
grid by dividing the total initial number of badgers by the max badger group size defining the
initial badger groups on the grid. Note that farm sizes vary from one to four cells while
badger home range is always one cell and depending on the initial number of badgers there
are several cells without a group of badgers. In the scenarios explored here the initial
number of badgers is 65,372 divided by 21 = 3,113 initial badger groups. Thus only 3,113
cells out of 16,384 cells contain badgers initially. Infected badgers are initially distributed on
the grid in an aggregated way defined by the percentage (%) of cells containing at least one
infected badger and the percentage (%) of badgers from the total initial badger population
been initially infected (Delahay et al., 2000). In scenarios in which culling applies, culling

takes place in a number of culling areas (Bourne et al., 2007) defined by the upper left and
lower right coordinate of the cells defining a square block of cells.
Statistical Analysis
Linear mixed effects models were used in order to conduct sensitivity analysis of
model outputs between the number of infected cattle (dependent variable), and all the
input parameters explored as independent variables (Pinheiro and Bates, 2000). The total
number of cattle was used as a random effect in the model in order to account for potential
larger numbers of infected cattle in large sized herds that could bias the analysis towards
larger herd sizes. The most parsimonious model structure was selected using the Akaike
Information Criterion (AIC). Sequentially, we implemented hierarchical variance partitioning
(Matsinos et al., 2011) of the covariates of the most parsimonious mixed effects model to
account for the contribution of each explanatory variable to the total variance of infected
cattle. For details in statistical analysis see Supp. 1.
Confronting model outputs with data
We have identified three potential patterns to compare model outputs with data: (i)
Effects of culling over time in TB prevalence in cattle within culling areas. (ii) Population
increase of badgers over time (iii) Compare model outputs with published studies regarding
the main results derived. Details on these three modelling scenarios are provided in Supp. 1
‘Confronting model outputs with data’.
Results
Sensitivity analysis of model input parameters (Latin hypercube sampling) indicated
that observed and simulated values in terms of percentage of infected cattle were not
significantly different from each other (t-test statistic = -1.26, P = 0.45).ANOVA results of the
most parsimonious mixed model with the number of infected cattle as a dependent variable,
show that there were significant effects of the percentage of cattle that are moved in a year
(F4, 156 = 54.62, P < 0.0001), the distance which cattle were moved (F4, 156 = 7.74, P = 0.006),
both the cattle-to-badger and badger-to-cattle infection rates (F3, 156 = 4.46, P = 0.036; F3, 156 =
8.59, P < 0.004), the inter-test interval (F4, 156 = 59.80, P < 0.0001) and the accuracy of the
test (F3, 156 = 3.81, P = 0.053), badger culling (F2, 156 = 8.91, P = 0.003) and the initial number of
infected badgers (F2, 156 = 16.08, P = 0.0001). These results are shown in detail in Table 1 of
Supp. 1 and the text therein. Of these effects the ones that explain the most variance (>10%
of the total variance) in the number of infected cattle are: percentage of cattle moved – as a
greater proportion of the cattle are moved the number of infected cattle increases; the
frequency of TB testing, which results in more infected animals being detected when the
inter-test interval is short; and the badger-to-cattle infection rate. Of the remaining factors,
badger culling explained about 5%, while test accuracy explained less than 3% of the
variance in the number of infected cattle (Fig. 2). Of the significant factors only badger
culling, cattle testing and controls on cattle movement are potential TB control strategies.
We investigated some extreme scenarios in which all the badgers in the region had
been eradicated completely – this might be seen as the logical endpoint of a culling strategy,
or the situation that might be found in the centre of a large badger culling zone. In this case
we found that the significant independent variables were mean farm size (F2, 153 = 5.47, P =
0.021), whether winter housing was practised (F1, 153 = 36.26, P < 0.0001) (Fig. 3), the intertest interval (F4, 153 = 36.73, P < 0.0001), the percentage of cattle that are moved (F4, 153 =
82.73, P < 0.0001) and the distance that cattle move (F4, 153 = 26.15, P < 0.0001). These
results are shown in detail in Table 2 of Supp. 1 and text therein. For results regarding
simulations following badgers only (no cattle) see Table 3 of Supp. 1 and text therein.

Confronting model outputs with data showed that the model outputs for infections
in cattle within culling areas after 5 y were slightly lower than the data (Fig. 4i) potentially
due to the fact that culling area was modelled as a square rather than the circle that is
implemented in reality (and so the model had higher edge effects). Model outputs in terms
of changes in the size of the badger population over time showed values very close to the
actual population increase observed in the Bristol area and values between the actual
population increases seen in Wytham (Oxfordshire) and in Gloucestershire areas (Fig 4ii).
However model outputs were at least three-fold lower than the average badger population
increase in several areas in the UK recorded by (Wilson et al., 1997) that suggested a 77%
increase in the population of badgers in the UK. A scenario in which the impact of the FMD
epidemic on TB was mimicked including the interruption in cattle testing interruption and
movement restrictions showed similar patterns to the available data (Fig 4iii).
All scenarios leading to TB eradication in cattle included cattle testing frequency of
at least once per year (we explored testing frequency of up to 6 months). Time series model
outputs of the monthly number of infected cattle in the population are provided in Fig. 5.
These outputs were generated with parameter space as in lines 13-21 in Supp. 2. These five
scenarios were run for a fifty-year period from ten years into a run (to exclude initial
transitional effects). The outputs included the following scenarios: (1) badgers not culled,
cattle tested every year; (2) badgers culled + cattle tested every year; (3) badgers eradicated
completely + cattle tested every year; (4) badgers culled + cattle tested every six months; (5)
badgers not culled + cattle tested every six months (Fig. 5). Testing accuracy was 80% (Supp.
2).
Discussion
Model complexity & uncertainty
We have developed a reasonably detailed computational model to follow TB
transmission between cattle and badgers by coupling IBMs of the two species. TB is a
complex disease (Godfray et al., 2013) and complex questions merit models of levels of
complexity similar to the problem addressed (Evans et al., 2014; Evans et al., 2013b). In
doing so we are facing a number of challenges: As the number of model components and
ultimately model input parameters increases, it is difficult to perform a sensitivity analysis
not due simply to the computational time, but mainly to the non-linearities arising from
coupling of two animals (Bithell and Brasington, 2009). This is further stressed by the fact
that several parameters have rarely been measured. For example the cattle-to-badger
infection rate is, as far as we can determine, unknown because most studies quantifying
infection rates have focused on cattle infecting cattle (Conlan et al., 2012) or badgers
infecting cattle (Benham and Broom, 1991; Smith et al., 2001) but not cattle infecting
badgers. Studies providing strong inference (Woodroffe et al., 2006b; Woodroffe et al.,
2005) that cattle are infecting badgers do not provide infection rates. We thus do not
pretend that all results derived in simulation scenarios here are necessarily real case
scenarios. However we have explored computationally a large number of scenarios (465)
derived from published parameter space and thus some combinations of this parameter
space are likely to have some merit in reality.
Confronting model outputs with data & published studies
The current concern about TB stems from the increase in its incidence and
geographical spread since the late 1970s. It is true that the badger population appears to
have increased during this period (Harris and Yalden, 2008) but farm sizes have also

increased and the practice of winter housing is more common now than it was in the 1970s
(Goodchild and Clifton-Hadley, 2001). Model outputs are in agreement with these
observations and suggest that all these factors could contribute to increasing the incidence
of TB in cattle. Model outputs are also in agreement with reports that the false negative
rate of the standard TB test (Claridge et al., 2012), combined with relatively infrequent
testing (Krebs et al., 1997) allows cattle with TB to persist in the herd and pass their infection
to other cattle. Testing animals that move between farms is a good step and probably
reduces the spread of the disease but it must be recognised that the false negative rate of
the test will mean that some of these animals continue to pose an infection risk to the herds
into which they move. The variance partitioning results derived here are consistent with
(Gilbert et al., 2005) who found that cattle movements explained the spread of TB more
completely than any other environmental or anthropogenic factor. In addition we found that
winter housing accounts for a large percentage of cattle-to-cattle TB transmission as
discussed (but not quantified) in recent reports (Bourne et al., 2007; Krebs et al., 1997). To
provide a test of the ability of our model to mimic the result of an event that is known to
have changed the dynamics of TB in cattle, we explored a simulation scenario where initial
conditions were as in line 9 of Supp. 2 and after 20 simulated years the model’s output in
terms of total and infected cattle and badgers was used as input to a simulation scenario in
which all else was the same as the previous scenario but cattle testing was interrupted for
one year as occurred during the 2002 FMD epidemic in the UK (Fig. 4). This simulation
shows that the brief stop in cattle testing which occurred during the FMD epidemic would
have increased the number of infected cattle by about 33%, which is comparable with
published data (DEFRA, 2014b). Note that we are comparing here the pattern of infections
and not the actual numbers, because the data cannot account for cattle that are infected
but not detected and model and data differ in scale; We also note that the data are at a
national level while the model is simulating the equivalent of a county, and spatio-temporal
regional differences could be important but are not considered here (Christakos and
Hristopulos, 1998). This figure was produced with a single simulation run and not averaged
across a large parameter space as was done in results presented in Figures 2 & 3 and thus
there is more uncertainty in parameter space than for the other results presented. The
patterns we observed was not sensitive to test accuracy: In a simulation using identical
parameters space with the one used to produce Fig. 4iiia but with test accuracy set to 50% a
similar trend was produced (Fig. 6). Note that while the pattern of time series is similar the
number of (detected) infected cattle was lower when testing accuracy was set to 50%.
Models on TB & model coupling
Several models have been built and employed for TB but despite those efforts, models have
not yet facilitated informed decisions towards TB eradication – for a review and criticism on
models until 1997 see also section 4.5 in (Krebs et al., 1997). Several models built after 1997
have either included only badgers (Shirley et al., 2003; Smith and Cheeseman, 2002) or only
cattle (Green et al., 2008). Such models could account for TB transmission within each
species but not between species (see also Annex 3 in (King et al., 2007)). Other models
included badgers and cattle but cattle did not move between farms, did not infect other
cattle, and did not infect badgers (Smith et al., 2001; Wilkinson et al., 2004) - these models
did include both badgers and cattle but the coupling was not dynamic: badgers could infect
cattle and other badgers, but could not be infected by cattle, and cattle could not infect each
other, in addition cattle movement was not included. More recent papers have included
cattle movement, cattle-to-cattle, cattle-to-badger infections, and cattle testing (Smith et al.,
2012; Wilkinson et al., 2009). However this model was run on a 100 x 100 grid each cell
representing just 200 x 200 m, giving a small total grid area of 400 km2, using also periodic
boundary conditions (the grid was wrapped to form a torus to eliminate edge effects)
(Wilkinson et al., 2009). Furthermore culling was applied by assuming if at least 10% of a

social group territory was accessible for culling, then badgers could be removed at the same
rate as if 100% was accessible (Wilkinson et al., 2009). We argue that spatial scale is highly
critical when coupling models. First the size of the simulation box must be large enough to
prevent periodic artefacts from occurring due to the topology of the simulation. In a cell that
is too small, an individual may interact with its own image in a neighbouring cell: the model
simulates cattle that are almost exclusively infecting cattle of the same herd and farm. A cell
size of 200 x 200 m is far too small to provide a model replicate for cattle in a larger scale
such as a county or a country. The mean farm size in the UK varies from < 10 ha to > 200 ha
per farm (see ‘Initialisation’ in Supp. 1 and references therein). In a grid that is too small
cattle movement between farms, (mean distance travelled per moving individual in the UK
was 75.6 km year-1 with a standard deviation of 84.13 km year-1 (Gilbert et al., 2005)), and
culling that needs to span over at least an area of 141km2 (Godfray et al., 2004; Jenkins et
al., 2010) cannot be scaled and thus accounted for. We propose that model coupling need
not have the same cell size for each life form but it needs to scale at the minimum area
requirements for cattle and farms on the one side and badgers on the other. On the other
hand grid size needs to be large enough to allow for large-scale phenomena such as cattle
movement and culling. Using periodic boundary conditions in a small grid is based in the
silent presupposition that a land patch equal to the grid size is representative of the actual
situation. We argue that processes such as cattle movement or culling are acting on large
scales and thus require a larger total surface area modelled. For a view on scaling issues in
gridded models and model structure with scenario boundary conditions see also (Bithell and
Macmillan, 2007; Millington et al., 2011). As far as we are aware this is the first model to
include the effects of winter housing, and the first ‘predictive’ TB model (i.e. a model
calibrated with data that can be used to investigate hypothetical scenarios (Evans et al.,
2013a)) in which model outputs are compared with data.
Main model outputs- Conclusions
Our results imply that of all the factors explored here the ones that explain the most
variance (>10% of the total variance) in the number of infected cattle are: cattle movement;
the frequency of TB testing; and the badger-to-cattle infection rate. Badger culling explained
about 5% of the variance in the number of infected cattle while test accuracy explained less
than 3% (Fig. 2). Of the significant factors only badger culling, cattle testing and cattle
movement are potential TB control strategies.
We investigated an extreme scenario in which all the badgers in the region had been
eradicated completely and there were no badgers present. In this case we found that the
significant independent variables were mean farm size, whether winter housing was
practised, the inter-test interval, the percentage of cattle that are moved and the distance
that cattle move. In particular the interplay between winter housing and mean farm size
(Fig. 3) has a predominant role on the spread of the cattle-to-cattle disease dynamics. When
winter housing is practised there is considerably higher disease spread (as there is a higher
density of cattle and contact rates become higher) and this becomes more pronounced with
increasing farm size as more cattle are brought within the same winter housing facility and
the number of animals that any one individual is in contact with rises. A potential way to
surmount this problem would be to have several winter housing units with increasing farm
sizes in order to spread the cattle population during winter months. It would be easier to
eradicate TB from ten herds each of 30 cattle than from one herd of 300.
Culling of badgers does seem to be a strategy that will eventually lead to a lower
incidence of TB in cattle but does not seem capable of eradicating the disease – in our
scenarios in which badgers had been removed completely TB remained endemic in the cattle

herd even with regular testing and testing on movement (Fig. 2 & Fig. 5). A strategy that
removes TB more quickly is frequent testing of cattle, which was equally true whether
badgers were culled or unculled or even absent, TB declined in cattle more rapidly with
regular six monthly tests than with any other strategy for TB control explored here. In fact
there was almost no difference between the number of infected cattle in a scenario in which
badgers were culled or not culled as long as testing was sufficiently frequent (Fig. 5). This is
result is valid even if the test has imperfect detection accuracy. Thus, our results imply that
more frequent testing would facilitate the eradication of the disease despite the imperfect
test detection. One possible problem with frequent testing would be the creation of
immunity to the testing agent, we have assumed that an infected individual is as likely to be
detected on test n+1 as on test n.
Our results suggest also that two little studied variables play an important role in the
disease: The cattle-to-badger and the badger-to-cattle infection rates. In addition
experimental studies should examine if indeed there is a difference in the actual values of
badger-to-badger infection rates between and within badger groups (see also Supp. 1
badger-to-badger infection rates). We suggest that experimental field studies either in situ
or in laboratories should be set up to quantify the infection rates between cattle and
badgers, and local trapping experiments to provide geographic variation of the percentage
of infected badgers.

Acknowledgements
We thank Ian Boyd for comments on an earlier draft, and William Wint for providing us data
on cattle movement. We also thank Harry Constantinides for invaluable help during model
coding in C#. Comments from two anonymous reviewers considerably improved an earlier
manuscript draft.

References

AHVLA, 2013. Pre-Movement and Post-Movement testing of cattle in Great Britain.
Animal Health and Veterinary Laboratory Agencies. Publication number AGTBYHE-04.
Benham, P.F.J., Broom, D.M., 1991. Responses of dairy cows to badger urine and
faeces on pasture with reference to bovine tuberculosis transmission. British
Veterinary Journal 147, 517-532.
Biek, R., O'Hare, A., Wright, D., Mallon, T., McCormick, C., Orton, R.J., McDowell,
S., Trewby, H., Skuce, R.A., Kao, R.R., 2012. Whole genome sequencing reveals
local transmission patterns of Mycobacterium bovis in sympatric cattle and
badgers. PloS Pathogens 8, e1003008.
Bielby, J., Donnelly, C.A., Pope, L.C., Burke, T., Woodroffe, R., 2014. Badger
responses to small-scale culling may compromise targeted control of bovine
tuberculosis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, 9193-9198.
Bithell, M., Brasington, J., 2009. Coupling agent-based models of subsistence farming
with individual-based forest models and dynamic models of water distribution.
Environmental Modelling and Software 24, 173-190.
Bithell, M., Macmillan, W.D., 2007. Escape from the cell: Spatially explicit
modelling with and without grids. Ecol. Model. 200, 59-78.
Bourne, J., Donnelly, C.A., Cox, D.R., Gettinby, G., McInerney, J.P., Morrison, W.I.,
Woodroffe, R., 2007. Bovine TB: The Scientific Evidence. DEFRA, London, p.
289.
Brennan, M.L., Christley, R.M., 2012. Biosecurity on Cattle Farms: A Study in
North-West England. PloS One 7, e28139.
Byrne, A.W., O’Keeffe, J., Green, S., Sleeman, D.P., Corner, L.A.L., Gormley, E.,
Murphy, D., Martin, S.W., Davenport, J., 2012. Population Estimation and
Trappability of the European Badger (<italic>Meles meles</italic>): Implications
for Tuberculosis Management. PloS One 7, e50807.
Cheeseman, C.L., Cresswell, W.J., Harris, S., Mallinson, P.J., 1988. Comparison of
dispersal and other movements in two Badger (Meles meles) populations.
Mammal Review 18, 51-59.
Cheeseman, C.L., Jones, G.W., Gallagher, J., Mallinson, P.J., 1981. The Population
Structure, Density and Prevalence of Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium bovis) in
Badgers (Meles meles) from Four Areas in South- West England. Journal of
Applied Ecology 18, 795-804.
Christakos, G., Hristopulos, D.T., 1998. Spatiotemporal Environmental Health
Modelling: A Tractatus Stochasticus. Springer.
Claridge, J., Diggle, P., McCann, C.M., Mulcahy, G., Flynn, R., McNair, J., Strain, S.,
Welsh, M., Baylis, M., Williams, D.J.L., 2012. Fasciola hepatica is associated
with the failure to detect bovine tuberculosis in dairy cattle. Nature Comms. 3.
Conlan, A.J.K., McKinley, T.J., Karolemeas, K., Pollock, E.B., Goodchild, A.V.,
Mitchell, A.P., Birch, C.P.D., Clifton-Hadley, R.S., Wood, J.L.N., 2012.
Estimating the Hidden Burden of Bovine Tuberculosis in Great Britain. PLoS
Comput Biol 8, e1002730.
Costello, E., Doherty, M.L., Monaghan, M.L., Quigley, F.C., O'Reilly, P.F., 1998. A
study of cattle-to-cattle transmission of Mycobacterium bovis infection.
Veterinary journal (London, England : 1997) 155, 245-250.

DEFRA, 2009. Bovine tuberculosis in England: Towards eradication. Final Report of
the Bovine TB Advisory Group, London.
DEFRA, 2011. The Government's policy on Bovine TB and badger control in
England., London.
DEFRA, 2014a. Annex. Background and methodologies to the National Statistics on
the Incidence of Tuberculosis (TB) in cattle in Great Britain, Latest statistics on
the incidence of tuberculosis (TB) in cattle in Great Britain.
DEFRA, 2014b. Incidence of TB in cattle in Great Britain – GB dataset, last access
10.04.2014 ed, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/incidence-oftuberculosis-tb-in-cattle-in-great-britain.
DEFRA, 2014c. Monthly publication of National Statistics on the Incidence of
Tuberculosis (TB) in Cattle to end June 2014 for Great Britain.
Delahay, R.J., Langton, S., Smith, G.C., Clifton-Hadley, R.S., Cheeseman, C.L.,
2000. The spatio-temporal distribution of Mycobacterium bovis (bovine
tuberculosis) infection in a high-density badger population. Journal of Animal
Ecology 69, 428-441.
Eurostat, 2009. Farm Structure Survey in the United Kingdom - 2007 Statistics in
Focus, http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/cache/ITY_OFFPUB/KS-SF-09081/EN/KS-SF-09-081-EN.PDF.
Evans, M.R., Benton, T.G., Grimm, V., Lessells, C.M., O’Malley, M.A., Moustakas,
A., Weisberg, M., 2014. Data availability and model complexity, generality, and
utility: a reply to Lonergan. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 29, 302-303.
Evans, M.R., Bithell, M., Cornell, S.J., Dall, S.R.X., Díaz, S., Emmott, S., Ernande,
B., Grimm, V., Hodgson, D.J., Lewis, S.L., Mace, G.M., Morecroft, M.,
Moustakas, A., Murphy, E., Newbold, T., Norris, K.J., Petchey, O., Smith, M.,
Travis, J.M.J., Benton, T.G., 2013a. Predictive systems ecology. Proceedings of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 280.
Evans, M.R., Grimm, V., Johst, K., Knuuttila, T., de Langhe, R., Lessells, C.M.,
Merz, M., O Malley, M.A., Orzack, S.H., Weisberg, M., Wilkinson, D.J.,
Wolkenhauer, O., Benton, T.G., 2013b. Do simple models lead to generality in
ecology? Trends in ecology & evolution 28, 578-583.
Gibbens, N., 2009. Progress through partnership: The UK Chief Veterinary Officer's
2009 report on animal health and welfare., London.
Gilbert, M., Mitchell, A., Bourn, D., Mawdsley, J., Clifton-Hadley, R.S., Wint, W.,
2005. Cattle movements and bovine tuberculosis in Great Britain. Nature 435,
491-496.
Godfray, H.C.J., Curnow, R.N., Dye, C., Pfeiffer, D., Sutherland, W.J., Woolhouse,
M.E.J., 2004. Independent Scientific Review of the Randomised Badger Culling
Trial and Associated Epidemiological Research., London.
Godfray, H.C.J., Donnelly, C.A., Kao, R.R., Macdonald, D.W., McDonald, R.A.,
Petrokofsky, G., Wood, J.L.N., Woodroffe, R., Young, D.B., McLean, A.R.,
2013. A restatement of the natural science evidence base relevant to the control of
bovine tuberculosis in Great Britain†. Proceedings of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences 280.
Goodchild, A.V., Clifton-Hadley, R.S., 2001. Cattle-to-cattle transmission of
Mycobacterium bovis. Tuberculosis 81, 23-41.
Goodchild, A.V., Watkins, G.H., Sayers, A.R., Jones, J.R., Clifton-Hadley, R.S.,
2012. Geographical association between the genotype of bovine tuberculosis in
found dead badgers and in cattle herds. The Veterinary record 170, 259.

Green, D.M., Kiss, I.Z., Mitchell, A.P., Kao, R.R., 2008. Estimates for local and
movement-based transmission of bovine tuberculosis in British cattle.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 275, 1001-1005.
Harris, S., Yalden, D., 2008. Mammals of the British Isles., 4th ed. Mammal Society,
London.
Jenkins, H.E., Cox, D.R., Delahay, R.J., 2012. Direction of Association between Bite
Wounds and <italic>Mycobacterium bovis</italic> Infection in Badgers:
Implications for Transmission. PloS One 7, e45584.
Jenkins, H.E., Woodroffe, R., Donnelly, C.A., 2010. The duration of the effects of
repeated widespread badger culling on cattle tuberculosis following cessation of
culling. PloS One 5, e9090.
Kao, R.R., Gravenor, M.B., Charleston, B., Hope, J.C., Martin, M., Howard, C.J.,
2007. Mycobacterium bovis shedding patterns from experimentally infected
calves and the effect of concurrent infection with bovine viral diarrhoea virus.
Journal of The Royal Society Interface 4, 545-551.
Karolemeas, K., Donnelly, C.A., Conlan, A.J.K., Mitchell, A.P., Clifton-Hadley, R.S.,
Upton, P., Wood, J.L.N., McKinley, T.J., 2012. The Effect of Badger Culling on
Breakdown Prolongation and Recurrence of Bovine Tuberculosis in Cattle Herds
in Great Britain. PloS One 7, e51342.
King, D., Roper, T.J., Young, D., Woolhouse, M.E.J., Collins, D.A., Wood, P., 2007.
Tuberculosis in cattle and badgers: a report by the Chief Scientific Advisor, Sir
David King., London.
Krebs, J.R., Anderson, R., Clutton-Brock, T., Morrison, I., Young, D., Donnelly,
C.A., Frost, S., Woodroffe, R., 1997. Bovine tuberculosis in cattle and badgers.,
London, p. 191.
Kruuk, H., Parish, T., 1982. Factors affecting population density, group size and
territory size of the European badger, Meles meles. Journal of Zoology 196, 3139.
Lin, C.-H., Wen, T.-H., Teng, H.-J., Chang, N.-T., 2014. The spatio-temporal
characteristics of potential dengue risk assessed by Aedes aegypti and Aedes
albopictus in high-epidemic areas. Stoch Environ Res Risk Assess, 1-10.
Little, T., Naylor, P., Wilesmith, J., 1982. Laboratory study of Mycobacterium bovis
infection in badgers and calves. Veterinary Record 111, 550-557.
Marrel, A., Perot, N., Mottet, C., 2014. Development of a surrogate model and
sensitivity analysis for spatio-temporal numerical simulators. Stoch Environ Res
Risk Assess, 1-16.
Matsinos, Y.G., Wolff, W.F., Moustakas, A., 2011. Adapting foraging to habitat
heterogeneity and climate change: an individual-based model for wading birds.
Ethology Ecology & Evolution 24, 209-229.
McKay, M.D., Beckman, R.J., Conover, W.J., 1979. Comparison of three methods for
selecting values of input variables in the analysis of output from a computer code.
Technometrics 21, 239-245.
Meyer, K.M., Wiegand, K., Ward, D., Moustakas, A., 2007. SATCHMO: A spatial
simulation model of growth, competition, and mortality in cycling savanna
patches. Ecol. Model. 209, 377-391.
Millington, J.D.A., Demeritt, D., Romero-Calcerrada, R., 2011. Participatory
evaluation of agent-based land-use models. Journal of Land Use Science 6, 195210.

Moustakas, A., Evans, M.R., 2013. Integrating Evolution into Ecological Modelling:
Accommodating Phenotypic Changes in Agent Based Models. PloS One 8,
e71125.
Moustakas, A., Silvert, W., 2011. Spatial and temporal effects on the efficacy of
marine protected areas: implications from an individual based model. Stoch
Environ Res Risk Assess 25, 403-413.
Neal, E.G., Harbison, R., 1958. Reproduction in the European badger (Meles meles
L.). The Transactions of the Zoological Society of London 29, 67-130.
NSF, 2010. Dairy Cow Welfare Strategy.
Pinheiro, J.C., Bates, D.M., 2000. Mixed-Effects Models in S and S-PLUS. Springer
Verlag, New York.
Riordan, P., Delahay, R.J., Cheeseman, C., Johnson, P.J., Macdonald, D.W., 2011.
Culling-Induced Changes in Badger (<italic>Meles meles</italic>) Behaviour,
Social Organisation and the Epidemiology of Bovine Tuberculosis. PloS One 6,
e28904.
Rogers, L., Delahay, R., Cheeseman, C., Langton, S., Smith, G., Clifton-Hadley, R.,
1998. Movement of badgers (Meles meles) in a high–density population:
individual, population and disease effects. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London. Series B: Biological Sciences 265, 1269-1276.
Roper, T.J., Lüps, P., 1993. Disruption of territorial behaviour in badgers Meles
meles. Zeitschrift fur Saugetierkunde - International Journal of Mammalian
Biology 58, 252–255.
Roper, T.J., Ostler, J.R., Conradt, L., 2003. The process of dispersal in badgers Meles
meles. Mammal Review 33, 314-318.
Shirley, M.D.F., Rushton, S.P., Smith, G.C., South, A.B., Lurz, P.W.W., 2003.
Investigating the spatial dynamics of bovine tuberculosis in badger populations:
evaluating an individual-based simulation model. Ecol. Model. 167, 139-157.
Sleeman, D., 1992. Long-distance movements in an Irish badger population. Wildlife
telemetry, 670-676.
Smith, G.C., Cheeseman, C.L., 2002. A mathematical model for the control of
diseases in wildlife populations: culling, vaccination and fertility control. Ecol.
Model. 150, 45-53.
Smith, G.C., Cheeseman, C.L., Wilkinson, D., Clifton-Hadley, R.S., 2001. A model
of bovine tuberculosis in the badger Meles meles: the inclusion of cattle and the
use of a live test. Journal Of Applied Ecology 38, 520-535.
Smith, G.C., McDonald, R.A., Wilkinson, D., 2012. Comparing Badger
(<italic>Meles meles</italic>) Management Strategies for Reducing Tuberculosis
Incidence in Cattle. PloS One 7, e39250.
Szmaragd, C., Green, L.E., Medley, G.F., Browne, W.J., 2012. Impact of Imperfect
Test Sensitivity on Determining Risk Factors: The Case of Bovine Tuberculosis.
PloS One 7, e43116.
Thibier, M., Wagner, H.G., 2002. World statistics for artificial insemination in cattle.
Livestock Production Science 74, 203-212.
Tolhurst, B.A., Delahay, R.J., Walker, N.J., Ward, A.I., Roper, T.J., 2009. Behaviour
of badgers (< i> Meles meles</i>) in farm buildings: Opportunities for the
transmission of< i> Mycobacterium bovis</i> to cattle? Applied Animal
Behaviour Science 117, 103-113.
Verdin, A., Rajagopalan, B., Kleiber, W., Katz, R., 2014. Coupled stochastic weather
generation using spatial and generalized linear models. Stoch Environ Res Risk
Assess, 1-10.

Welch, B.L., 1947. The generalisation of student's problems when several different
population variances are involved. Biometrika 34, 28-35.
Wilkinson, D., Bennett, R., McFarlane, I., Rushton, S., Shirley, M., Smith, G.C.,
2009. Cost-benefit analysis model of badger (Meles meles) culling ot reduce
cattle herd tuberculosis breakdowns, with particular reference to badger
perturbation. J. Wildlife Diseases 45, 1062-1088.
Wilkinson, D., Smith, G.C., Delahay, R.J., Cheeseman, C.L., 2004. A model of
bovine tuberculosis in the badger Meles meles: an evaluation of different
vaccination strategies. Journal Of Applied Ecology 41, 492-501.
Wilson, G., Harris, S., McLaren, G., Species, P.s.T.f.E., 1997. Changes in the British
Badger Population, 1988 to 1997. People's Trust for Endangered Species.
Woodroffe, R., Donnelly, C.A., Cox, D.R., Bourne, F.J., Cheeseman, C.L., Delahay,
R.J., Gettinby, G., McInerney, J.P., Morrison, W.I., 2006a. Effects of culling on
badger Meles meles spatial organisation: implications for the control of bovine
tuberculosis. Journal Of Applied Ecology 43, 1-10.
Woodroffe, R., Donnelly, C.A., Jenkins, H.E., Johnston, W.T., Cox, D.R., Bourne,
F.J., Cheeseman, C.L., Delahay, R.J., Clifton-Hadley, R.S., Gettinby, G., Gilks,
P., Hewinson, R.G., McInerney, J.P., Morrison, W.I., 2006b. Culling and cattle
controls influence tuberculosis risk for badgers. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 103, 14713-14717.
Woodroffe, R., Donnelly, C.A., Johnston, W.T., Bourne, F.J., Cheeseman, C.L.,
Clifton-Hadley, R.S., Cox, D.R., Gettinby, G., Hewinson, R.G., Fevre, A.M.L.,
McInerney, J.P., Morrison, W.I., 2005. Spatial Association of Mycobacterium
bovis Infection in Cattle and Badgers Meles meles. Journal of Applied Ecology
42, 852-862.
Zhang, H., Jin, X., Wang, L., Zhou, Y., Shu, B., 2014. Multi-agent based modeling of
spatiotemporal dynamical urban growth in developing countries: simulating
future scenarios of Lianyungang city, China. Stoch Environ Res Risk Assess, 116.

Figure 1. A schematic representation of the model following population dynamics of cattle
and badgers and the spread of bovine tuberculosis (TB) between and within the two species.
Different acting processes are marked with different colours: red is disease transmission,
orange are factors that only apply if there is disease, green are demographic processes, and
black are demographic processes that will influence the disease.

Variance partitioning
95% CI for the Mean

35

Total variance (%)

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

si
m
r
Fa

ze

lli
Cu

ng
s
Te

te
tin

rv
st
Te

r
cu
c
a
f
In

b
te
a
r

2c
In

a
fr

c
te

2b
Ca

ov
m
e
tt l

d
t le
t
Ca

t
is

e
dg
a
fb
in
i
In

r

Figure 2. The percentage of total variance in the number of infected cattle explained by the
significant independent variables in the mixed model ANOVA. Data show the mean
percentage (± 95% confidence interval) of the total variance explained by each factor. Mean
calculated over 156 simulations (badgers and cattle). Note the total number of cattle was
used as a random effect and so the number of infected cattle is unaffected by the total
number of cattle in the population.

12000

Number of infected cattle

10000

8000
6000

4000

2000

0
Winter housing
Farmsize (ha)

No

Yes
140

No

Yes
210

No

Yes
280

Figure 3. Number of infected cattle as a function of winter housing across different farm
sizes in the absence of badgers (simulations run with cattle only). The practice of housing all
cattle on a farm together over winter increases the number of infected cattle in the
population especially when the farms are large. Figure shows the mean and 95% confidence
intervals for three farm sizes (140, 210 and 280 Ha) each with and without winter housing.

i. TB prevalence in cattle after 5 y in proactive culling area
95% CI for the Mean

TB preva;ence reduction

-15.00%

-20.00%

-25.00%

-30.00%

-35.00%

-40.00%
Model

Data

ii. Percentage of change in the number of badgers
Badger population change (%)

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Model

Woodchester

Wytham

Bristol

Wilson 1998

Study location

(iii) a. Testing interrupted during the foot and mouth epidemic - model

Number of infected cattle

24000
22000
20000
18000
16000
14000
12000
10000
100

120

140

160

Time (months)

180

200

220

Number of slaughtered infected cattle

(iii) b. Testing interrupted during the foot and mouth epidemic - data
5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

0

0

20

40

60

80
100
Time (months)

120

140

160

Figure 4. Confronting model outputs with three published patterns: (i) Impact of five years
of culling on badgers within culling areas of 100 km2. (ii) Percentage of change in the
population of badgers over time regarding model’s outputs vs. three locations in the UK and
the mean of several locations in the UK (Wilson 1997). Reference line shows model output.
(iii). (a) A scenario simulating TB cattle testing interruption as it occurred in the UK during
the foot-and-mouth epidemic. Vertical lines indicate the period of cattle testing interruption.
(b) Time series of TB detected infected cattle slaughtered - data from DEFRA on infected
cattle during the foot-and-mouth epidemic. Vertical lines indicate the period of cattle testing
interruption. For details and references regarding all comparisons between model outputs
vs. published data see Supp. 1 ‘Confronting model outputs with data’.

Number of infected cattle

50000

40000

30000

20000

10000

0
100

200

300

400
Months

500

600

700

Figure 5. Output from five scenarios for a fifty year period running from ten years into a run
(to exclude initial transitional effects). Lines show the monthly number of infected cattle in
the population. All scenarios are similar and have the same basic parameters for the biology
of badgers, the transmission of the disease and the husbandry of cattle with the following
differences: Scenario 1 (Black): badgers not culled, cattle tested every year; Scenario 2 (red):
badgers culled + cattle tested every year; Scenario 3 (orange): badgers eradicated
completely + cattle tested every year; Scenario 4 (green): badgers culled + cattle tested
every six months; Scenario 5 (blue): badgers not culled + cattle tested every six months. The
parameter space used for generating those time series is listed in Supp. 2, lines 13-21.

Testing interrupted during the FMD with varying testing accuracy

Number of infected cattle

25000

Variable
80% Test accuracy
50% Test accuracy

20000

15000

10000

5000

0
100

120

140

160

180

200

220

Time (months)

Figure 6. Simulating TB cattle testing interruption as it occurred in the UK during the footand-mouth epidemic (FMD) with varying testing accuracy. Identical parameters space with
the one used to generate Fig. 4iiia was employed but testing accuracy was set to 50%
instead of 80%. Vertical lines indicate the period of cattle testing interruption.

Supplement 1
Coupling models of cattle and farms with models of badgers for predicting
the dynamics of bovine tuberculosis (TB)
Authors: Aristides Moustakas and Matthew R. Evans
Technical model description, rationale behind each model section &
parameter space explored
In this document the rationale behind model building on each model section is
explained and the parameter space that was explored is described. Some parts of
the model description that were either too technical or too long for the main text
are listed in this document under ‘Model description’ prior to ‘Rationale &
Parameter space’ text of each model section. The model was coded in C#.
Simulations were performed on a cluster of computers comprised of 106
machines that each have 12 cores and 24 gigabytes of RAM, and two machines
that each have 48 cores and 512 gigabytes of RAM.
Badgers
Badger demographics
Rationale & Parameter space
Badger life expectancy when healthy was set to 5 years as given by Harris and
Cresswell (1987) and Cheeseman et al. (1988b) for the Bristol area. Badger life
span when infected with TB is known to be less than when not infected, however,
although it is known that TB is not necessarily immediately fatal, the time from
infection to death is reported to vary between studies spanning from 'a rapid
course' up to 709 days (Clifton-Hadley 1993) and up to 3.5 years when in
captivity (Little et al. 1982). We thus used the median value (two years) as a
predominant value and used also one year and three years in simulation
parameter space. Badgers give birth in late winter with mid-February been most
common (Cresswel et al. 1992). We have thus used February as badger birth
month. Badger population is reported to overall increase in the UK (Wilson et al.
1997). We have used mean annual death rate of 34.5 % (Harris and Cresswell
1987; Cheeseman et al. 1988; Table 3.3 in Krebs et al. 1997) corresponding to
Bristol area. Mean annual birth rate for the same area is reported to be 41.4%
(Harris and Cresswell 1987; Cheeseman et al. 1988; Table 3.3 in Krebs et al.
1997). However this value is unlikely to hold true for the rest of the UK as this
would imply a mean net annual growth rate of 6.9% and thus the badger
population in the UK would have doubled in 10 years. (Doubling time is
determined by dividing the growth rate into 70. The number 70 comes from the
natural log of 2, which is 0.70 and thus 70/6.9 = 10.14 years). While there is
evidence that the population of badgers in the UK is increasing (Wilson et al.
1997; Bourne et al. 2007), there are no data verifying specific growth rates at a
country scale. We have thus used growth rates in parameter space spanning
from 33 to 38 % year-1 with increments of 1%, resulting in a net annual growth
rate -1% to 3.5%. Death rates were always 34.5%, while birth rates varied
accordingly as described.
Badger movement

Model description
Badger movement is implemented as following: Badgers seek to form groups
within the nearest 8 neighbouring cells. If these cells do not fulfil the criteria for
forming or joining a group, badgers move to the next-nearest cells (the nearest
cells of the 8 neighbouring cells consist of a neighbourhood of 16 cells) and
badgers seek to join or form a group. If the criteria for joining or forming a group
are still not fulfilled (too few or too many badgers on cell) then badgers seek to
form or join a group in the nearest 32 cells. If badgers cannot form or join a
group in the nearest 32 cells keep on seeking in the nearest 64 cells until they
can for or join a group within the neighbourhood of cells defined by the
maximum culling induced migration distance (Woodroffe et al., 1995). Badgers
stop seeking to form or join groups of other badgers when the criteria of forming
or joining groups cannot be fulfilled, and settle on a cell from the 64-cell
neighbourhood other than the current cell with equal probability. This process
(seeking for a cell to form or join a group) occurs on the same time step that the
badger was born. When culling activities take place on current cell, badgers
move to neighbouring cells to form new groups, see section 'culling'.
Rationale & Parameter space
Badgers live in social groups (Kruuk and Parish 1982; Cheeseman et al. 1987).
Group size is dependent upon prey biomass per unit area (Kruuk and Parish
1982) but there is no correlation between group size and territory size (Kruuk
and Parish 1982). In a six-year-study it was reported that a badger home range
area may support between two and 21 badgers (Cheeseman et al. 1987; Krebs et
al. 1997). We have thus parameterised the model to include as minimum badger
group size = 2 badgers and maximum badger group size = 21 badgers. In terms of
movement it is hard to distinguish between death and emigration in badgers
since carcases are rarely found (Krebs et al. 1997). However, it is known that a
proportion of cubs are migrating to form or join different groups (da Silva et al.
1994). Badgers that leave their natal territories typically join neighbouring
groups, and seldom move more than 2 km (Cheeseman et al. 1988a; Woodroffe
et al. 1995). We have parameterised the model so that badgers can move up to
three cells from current cell in any possible direction resulting in a maximum
dispersal distance of 3 cells x 0.84 km = 2.54 km.
Culling
Model description
This is implemented as following: Badgers move within the next time step away
from current cell into a new cell located within the culling-induced migration
distance. The culling-induced migration distance defines a neighbourhood of
near cells (not necessarily only the nearest adjacent cells) where badgers
migrate within the next time step. Culling induced migrating badgers seek to
form a new group in the neighbourhood of cells located within the max migrating
distance (Riordan et al., 2011). This is implemented as follows: Badgers seek to
form groups within the nearest 8 neighbouring cells. If these cells do not fulfil the
criteria for forming or joining a group, badgers move to the nearest cells of the
previous 8 cells (the nearest cells of the 8 neighbouring cells consist of a
neighbourhood of 16 cells) and badgers seek to join or form group. If the criteria
for joining or forming a group are not fulfilled (too few or too many badgers on
cell) then badgers seek to form or join a group in the nearest 32 cells. If badgers

cannot form or join a group in the nearest 32 cells keep on seeking in the nearest
64 cells until they can for or join a group within the neighbourhood of cells
defined by the maximum culling induced migration distance (Carter et al., 2007).
The above described process (seeking a cell to form or join a group) is performed
within the next time step after the first culling activity on current cell occurred.
Badgers stop seeking to form or join groups of other badgers when the criteria of
forming or joining groups cannot be fulfilled, and settle on a cell from the 64-cell
neighbourhood other than the current cell with equal probability. If the settled
cell (regardless upon whether the badger formed or joined a group or not) is a
culling cell, the process is repeated during every time step for a ratio of badgers
within the culling block of cells. All culling activities are pro-active i.e. in
scenarios that culling is applied, culling takes place in culling areas regardless
upon whether there are TB incidents or not.
Rationale & Parameter space
Badger culling causes migration and increases badger motility (Carter et al.
2007; Riordan et al. 2011). In a study using telemetry it was reported that when
persecuted badgers may move up to 7.5 km from their home settlement
(Sleeman 1992) and that this movement has been attributed to badgers being
social animals – when group sizes become too small badgers move to other areas
seeking to form a group (Woodroffe et al. 1995). We have parameterised the
model so that badgers may migrate up to 4 cells from the current cell in order to
form or join groups within one time step (month) corresponding to 4 x 0.84 km =
3.36 km a value close to the mean reported by Sleeman (1992). It has been
reported that to be 97.5% confident that culling will be beneficial it must be
carried out over an area of at least 141 km2 (Jenkins et al. 2010). In the model, in
scenarios in which culling was applied culling takes place in blocks of cells
comprising of 14 x 14 cells resulting in 196 cells x 0.7 km2 cell-1 = 137.2 km2 a
value close to the 141 km2 reported by Jenkins et al. (2010). Simulation scenarios
included no culling, culling in one block of 14 x 14 cells or culling in three nonadjacent to each other blocks of 14 x 14 cells each. Culling intensity is reported to
be an important factor on the total efficacy of culling as a control measure and
different culling techniques such as shooting, caging, trapping and gassing have
been proposed and applied (Krebs et al. 1997; Wilkinson et al. 2009). Some
techniques such as gassing have been reported to be very efficient in removing
badgers (p79 in Krebs et al 1997) and have the lowest reoccurrence of TB
breakdowns (Table 5.3 in Krebs et al. 1997). We have explored culling intensity
of 50, 60, 70, 80, and 90% year-1 in culling blocks.
Cattle
Winter housing and Cattle movement
Rationale & Parameter space
Cattle are sold between farms every year and this has been associated with the
spread of TB between farms (Gilbert et al. 2005). W. Wint kindly provided the
data from 2000 to 2006 for cattle movement between farms in the UK (W. Wint
unpublished data). Part of this dataset was used in the Gilbert et al (2005) study.
The dataset lists mean and standard deviation values of 'number of events' per
year where an event is a case where at least one cattle selling transaction
occurred implying that at least one cow was sold and moved between farms as
well as the mean and standard deviation values of the distance between the

starting and ending farm. The dataset comprises of total cattle (dairy and beef)
transactions per year in the UK. Mean distance that cattle moved throughout the
UK was 75.6 km year-1 corresponding to 75.62 km year-1 / 0.84 km  90 cells
year-1. The standard deviation of the mean distance that cattle moved in the UK
during those years was 84.13 km year-1 corresponding to 84.13 km year-1 / 0.84
km  100 cells year-1. We thus explored mean annual cattle distance movement
parameter space of 0, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150 cells, with 0 distance been a
hypothetical scenario with no cattle movement. In the same dataset the mean
number of selling transactions per year was 7.5 % implying that at least 7.5% of
cattle change farms every year and the standard deviation of that value was 1%.
As these numbers describe the mean number of transaction events, the actual
number of cattle moving between farms is almost certainly larger we explored a
parameter space of 0, 7.5, 8.5, 10, 12 mean percentage (%) number of total cattle
moving every year. Value 0 represents a hypothetical scenario with no cattle
movement. Winter housing is a common practise in farms (Brennan and
Christley, 2012) and takes place during the months that are too cold for grass to
grow. We have parameterised the model to apply winter housing from
November to April i.e. months 11 to 4 (Food Standards Agency 2007). All
simulation scenarios explored using the model have been replicated twice, with
winter housing and without winter housing.
Cattle demographics
Rationale & Parameter space
The majority of dairy cattle in Europe (60% or more) are inseminated using
artificial insemination even if a bull is kept on a farm (Thibier and Wagner 2002).
It is thus unlikely that a herd needs more than one bull. As mean herd size is 91
cattle per farm in the UK, the sex ratio within each herd is 1/91 = 0.011, or
around 1.1% males and 98.9% females. We thus used a sex ratio of 99% females
to 1% males within the population. If all females produce one calf per year then
the birth rate (assuming that females are 99% of the population) is 99% per
year. However half of the calves will be males, and thus killed. Thus, the active
population in giving birth to calves that enter the population each year is
99/2=49.5%. However there is a pre-weaning mortality of up to 9.56% (FAO,
available at http://www.fao.org/wairdocs/ilri/x5522e/x5522e0a.htm). We have
used the median of that value 4.78%≈5%, and thus birth rates are 44.5% per
year. Cattle give birth during the spring and we parameterise this to occur in
March (month number 3). According to National Farmers Union (2010), 24% of
cattle in a herd are culled each year. We thus set as model parameter space of
maximum healthy cattle life expectancy of 4 years. Infected cattle seldom live
longer than one year (Krebs et al. 1997) and we thus used as maximum infected
cattle life expectancy of 1 year. As the population of cattle is essentially
controlled by humans (farmers) we have set mean annual birth rates equal to
mean annual death rates assuming a constant population all else been equal;
However, if for any reason the number of cattle in the herd was reduced, farmers
would account for this and adjust cattle population in farm to previous levels by
importing cattle or not slaughtering older cattle during that year.
Cattle testing
Rationale & Parameter space
According to EU Directives 64/432/EEC and 97/12/EC the minimum testing
frequency for cattle depends on the percentage of infected cattle herds.

According to the directive annual testing is required unless the percentage of
infected herds in a state or region of the state is 1% or less. When the percentage
of infected herds are 0.2% or less than 0.1% testing may be conducted every
three or 4 years respectively. In practise, most places in the UK test every 4
years. Increasing test frequency would increase the annual cost of testing and
could have trade implications (Krebs et al 1997). We have explored testing
intervals of 4, 3, 2, and 1 years. In an effort to explore whether more frequent
testing could potentially eradicate TB in cattle we have further explored testing
intervals of 6 and 8 months. All cattle moving from one farm to another are
tested prior to movement and the ones detected infected are removed and
slaughtered (Animal Health and Veterinary Laboratory Agencies 2013). The skin
test on cattle is imperfect i.e. it's accuracy is lower than 100% and thus the test
will not always detect an infected cattle. According to Defra (2009) 'studies
evaluating the sensitivity of the test suggest that its sensitivity lies between 52%
and 100% with median values of 80% and 93.5% for standard and severe
interpretation, respectively'. Further the presence of a common parasite Fasciola
hepatica is reported to under-ascertain the rate of the skin test to about onethird (Claridge et al. 2012). We have thus explored parameter space of skin
testing accuracy of 80%, 70%, 60%, and 50% each time the test is applied. We
have not included a live test for badgers as 'live test treatment was not
significantly different from that in the no live test operations' (Table 5.2 in Krebs
et al. 1997).
Infections
Badger to cattle
Rationale & Parameter space
The main route of TB infection from badgers to cattle is through inhaling or
ingesting bacteria excreted by badgers directly into pasture (Benham and Broom
1991; Krebs et al. 1997). In a study using data from Woodchester park, where
infections are at the upper end recorded in the UK, it was reported that badger to
cattle infection rate had to be 3.4% to 6% per year in order to sustain current TB
levels (Smith et al. 2001). However mean TB badger infection levels in the Smith
et al. (2001) study were 16% a high value in comparison to the mean % of
infected badgers in the UK which is 4.05% (Krebs et al. 1997). We have thus
explored infection rates of 3.4%, 6%, and the median value 4.7% badger to cattle
per infected badger individual per year. In the above, infection rates were
derived by dividing the number of herd breakdowns attributed to badgers by the
number of years (Smith et al. 2001) but it is not specified whether 'herd
breakdowns attributed to badgers' accounted for cattle to cattle infection rate cattle are known to infect other cattle even in the absence of badgers (Goodchild
and Clifton-Hadley 2001). In other words it is not known whether in the above
calculations the number of cattle infected by other cattle, if any, was removed
from the analysis or whether all infections were attributed to badgers. We have
therefore decided additionally to explore in simulations a badger to cattle
infection rate that is a level of magnitude lower which was arbitrarily set to 0.1%
per infected badger per year.
Badger to badger

Model description
Badgers infect other badgers that do not belong to the same group with a
between groups badger to badger infection rate (Smith et al., 2001). The
implementation is stochastic: For every infected badger on the current cell let
the infection rate be a number Ib2b and rnd a uniform random number drawn in
[0, 1]. If rnd  Ib2b the infected badger will infect another badger on current cell. If
a badger on the current cell encounters badgers from the same set it infects them
with the within group badger to badger infection rate, while if not then it is
infecting them with the between groups badger to badger infection rate. The
process is repeated during every time step for every cell for every infected
badger. The time of infection is recorded for every badger. The mean life
expectancy of newly infected badgers is adjusted from mean healthy life
expectancy to mean infected badger life expectancy.
Rationale & Parameter space
Badgers are known to be infecting each other through respiratory tract, through
bites and wounds, sharing setts, as well as from mothers to cubs (Krebs et al.
1997; Jenkins et al. 2012; Smith et al. 2012). Despite the fact that there are
several studies reporting the fact that badgers are infecting other badgers, there
are relatively scarce data on the mechanisms of transmission (Krebs et al. 1997).
In addition unless a clear mechanistic experiment is conducted where other
agents of infection are isolated, it is hard to quantify the rate of infection
between badgers. In a mathematical analysis of data from Woodchester Park, an
area with one of the highest badger population densities as well as infection
rates in the UK (Table 3.3 & 3.4 in Krebs et al. 1997) it was reported that, in the
absence of other infective agents, badger to badger infection rates varied from
0.1% to 5% per year, while an infection rate of lower than 0.1% per year
resulted in a failure of the disease to establish due to boundary conditions (Smith
and Cheeseman 2002). In a study using sensitivity analysis of data from the same
area it was concluded that within the group infection rate was 5%, but 20%
between groups (Shirley et al. 2003). Given that badgers spend more than 95%
of their time inside their own group territories (Roper and Lüps 1993), and that
even four years after birth ≈80% of badgers were still in the groups that they are
born (Woodroffe et al. 1995), and that badgers sleep together in the same
chamber (Roper and Christian 1992) transmission seems most likely to occur
within the sett (Krebs et al. 1997). Thus, it is unlikely that between groups
infection rates will be as high as 20% but essentially this parameter is not well
known. We have thus explored parameter space of within group badger to
badger transmission of 0.1%, 5%, and the median value of 2.55% for every
infected badger individual per year. We have further explored a level of
magnitude lower than the lowest value, 0.01% to test whether such parameter
space would lead to TB eradication in the absence of other infecting agents
(Smith and Cheeseman 2002). We have used the same values of between group
badger to badger infection rate of 0.01%, 0.1%, 2.55%, 5% (no distinction
between within group and between group infections) as well as the between
group values increased by 0.5% per value.
Cattle to badger
Model description

For every infected cow on current cell let the infection rate be a number Ic2b and
rnd a uniform random number drawn in [0, 1]. If rnd  Ic2b the infected cow will
infect a badger on current cell. The process is repeated during every time step
for every cell for every infected cattle. The time of infection is recorded for every
badger. The mean life expectancy of newly infected badgers is adjusted from
mean healthy life expectancy to mean infected badger life expectancy.
Rationale & Parameter space
While there is a strong inference that cattle are infecting badgers both in terms
of spatial association of Mycabacterium bovis in cattle and badgers (Woodroffe et
al. 2005; Woodroffe et al. 2006) as well as in terms of genome sequencing (Biek
et al. 2012), to our knowledge there are no quantified data on the infection rates
between cattle to badgers perhaps due to the fact that the main animal of
interest are cattle. However, in order to account for the full cycle of infections
between and within badgers and cattle, it is important to include the four-way
pattern of infections (badger to badger, badger to cattle, cattle to badger, and
cattle to cattle - see also Annex 3 in King et al. 2007). This is due to the fact that
badgers could be infecting cattle at a lower rate than they have been infected by
cattle or vice versa and management actions should incorporate such
information. We have explored a parameter space of cattle to badger infection
rates of 0.1%, 3.4%, 4.7%, and 6% per infected cattle per year. In the absence of
available data we used values equal to the infection rates of badger to cattle.
Infection rates are essentially depended upon the total number of animals in a
herd or population density within a unit of space (Goodchild and Clifton-Hadley
2001). As the number of cattle within a km2 are at least 10-fold larger than the
number of badgers within a km2, we have used equal infection rates of cattle to
badger as badger to cattle but this assumption should be rather viewed as a
lower limit of the cattle to badger infection rates (i.e. cattle to badger infection
rates are likely to be higher in reality assuming that the badger to cattle infection
rates are the ones given).
Cattle to cattle
Model description
For every infected cow on the current cell let the infection rate be a number Ic2c
and rnd a uniform random number drawn in [0, 1]. If rnd  Ic2c the infected cow
will infect another cow on current cell. The process is repeated during every time
step for every cell for every infected cow. The time of infection is recorded for
every cow. The mean life expectancy of newly infected cattle is adjusted form
mean healthy life expectancy to mean infected cattle life expectancy.
Rationale & Parameter space
While it is often acknowledged that TB infects both domestic and wild animals,
and that wildlife can have an important role in the spreading of Mycobacterium
bovis into cattle (Walter et al. 2012), 'some of the initial infection, and eventually
most of the spread within an infected herd, may be due to cattle to cattle
transmission' (Goodchild and Clifton-Hadley 2001). In the absence of infected
wildlife, and badgers in particular, TB can enter the herd mainly via purchase of
infected cattle (Goodchild and Clifton-Hadley 2001; Gilbert et al. 2005). Studies
of TB spread within cattle in the absence of wildlife infecting agents concluded
that herd size is the key factor (Denny and Wilesmith 1983; Goodchild and
Clifton-Hadley 2001). This is due to the fact that the degree that cattle are

infectious depends on the number of organisms excreted and the length and
closeness of contact - essentially both factors depend on the number of cattle per
unit of space (Costello et al. 1998). We have used cattle to cattle infection rate of
0.0073 per infected cattle per day (Barlow et al. 1997; Table 8 in Goodchild and
Clifton-Hadley 2001). This value corresponds to an annual infection rate of
0.0073 x 365 = 2.6645  2.7 % per infected cattle per year similar to the one
given by (Conlan et al., 2012).
Initialisation
Rationale & Parameter space
Farm and herd sizes have been reported to be increasing in the UK over time
(Goodchild and Clifton-Hadley 2001). According to the Royal Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA), the average herd sizes have arisen
from 71 cattle in 1994 to 92 animals in 2004
(http://www.rspca.org.uk/allaboutanimals/farm/cattle/dairy/farming). We
have used a value of mean herd size of 91 animals as reported by Eurostat
(2009). According to Eurostat (2009) farms in the UK vary from < 10 ha to > 200
ha per farm. We sought to quantify the effect of farm and herd size on the
dynamics of TB between and within cattle by performing simulation scenarios
that included mean farm size of 1, 2, 3, and 4 cells corresponding to 0.7, 1.4, 2.1,
and 2.8 km2 per farm respectively. Note that the initial density of cattle per km2
was in all cases constant and equal to 84.7 cattle cell-1. The percentage of infected
badgers varies greatly depending on the study area and up to a point more
studies of badgers infections may be conducted at areas with high TB prevalence
in the badger population or post-mortem testing for TB prevalence can be biased
towards higher TB incidents as infected badgers are more likely to be killed
during culling or other occasions such as road accidents than healthy badgers
(see Table 2.2 together with Table 3.4 in Krebs et al. 1997). We have
parameterised the model to include initial % of infected badgers of 4.05%
following the 1971-1994 UK average (N=21,731 badgers); (Table 2.2 in Krebs et
al. 1997), as well as 14% simulating areas with high TB prevalence between
badgers (Delahay et al. 2000). If the UK average is 4.05% then the incidence of
infected badgers in some areas must be lower than 4.05%. We have thus also
included simulation scenarios with initial badger infections of 2%. A study, using
capture–mark–recapture over 17 years (1982–1996), of the spatial prevalence of
TB in badgers (N=1270 badgers) reported that TB prevalence within the
population was highly localised but also highly variable (Delahay et al. 2000).
Prevalence of TB within groups (at least one infected badger within the group)
varied from 33.3% to 80% (Table 3.4 in Krebs et al. 1997). As our modelling
surface area covers 11,468.8 km2, an area close to the surface area of a county,
the prevalence of TB in badger groups (at least one infected individual within
each group) cannot coincide with an overall disease prevalence of 4.05% within
the badger population at that scale. We have thus explored parameter space of
between groups TB prevalence (percentage of cells that contain at least one
infected badger) of 35%, 40%, 45%, 50%, and 55%. We have distributed initially
infected badgers in an aggregated way while cattle on a random way because
badgers are social animals and so infected animals are likely to be non-randomly
distributed due to other infected badgers. All simulation scenarios were
replicated also in the absence of badgers (initial badger population = 0) and thus

following only cattle, as well as in the absence of cattle (initial cattle population =
0) and thus following only badgers in order to quantify dynamics of TB in the
absence of other infecting agents.
Additional statistical analysis (not in main text)
Linear mixed effects models were used to determine possible
relationships between the number of infected cattle (dependent variable), and
various independent variables: winter housing and the use of badger culling (as
factors); and mean farm size, number of culling blocks, cattle testing interval,
cattle testing accuracy, infection rate badger to badger within group, infection
rate badger to badger between groups, infection rate cattle to cattle, infection
rate badger to cattle, infection rate cattle to badger, initial percentage of infected
cattle, mean annual cattle distance movement, mean percentage of cattle moving
every year, culling intensity per cell in culling areas, percentage of cells that
initially contain at least one infected badger, life span of infected badgers, badger
birth rate, and initial percentage of infected badgers. The total number of cattle
was used as a random effect in the model in order to account for potential larger
numbers of infected cattle in large sized herds that could bias the analysis
towards larger herd sizes.. Regarding mixed effects models analyses of
simulation results we chose to analyse number of infected cattle as a dependent
variable with total cattle as a random effect and not percentage of infected cattle
within the simulated population as percentages are bounded by 0 and 100 and
are sensitive to the total number of cattle individuals. We used the AIC
information criterion to assess the most parsimonious model and simplify
models by progressively removing the least significant covariates until no
further removal was justified (Burnham and Anderson, 2002). Inspection of
residual plots for constancy of variance and heteroscedasticity indicated that the
models were well behaved in all cases. Analyses were conducted using the ‘lme’
function in R 2.14.0 using the nlme library (R Development Core Team, 2013).
We implemented hierarchical variance partitioning statistical modelling of the
covariates of the most parsimonious model to account for the contribution of
each explanatory variable to the total variance of infected cattle (Mac Nally,
2002). Variance partitioning was conducted using the ‘all.regs’ and ‘hier.part’
functions in hier.part package in R 2.14.0 (R Development Core Team, 2013).
Mixed effects models of number of infected cattle in simulation scenarios
with zero badger population (cattle only), included number of infected cattle as
dependent variable, and the effects of winter housing (as factor), mean farm size,
cattle testing interval, cattle testing accuracy, infection rate cattle to cattle, initial
percentage of infected cattle, mean annual cattle distance movement, mean
percentage of cattle moving every year. The random effect model structure
included the total number of cattle.
Mixed effects models of number of infected badgers in simulation
scenarios with zero cattle population (badgers only), included number of
infected badgers as dependent variable, and the effects of culling (as factor),
badger birth rate, badger life span when infected, culling efficiency %, number of
culling blocks, and infection rate badger to badger. The random effect model
structure included the initial % of infected badgers per cell nested in the initial %
of infected badgers nested in the initial total number of badgers
(random=~1|badgerstot/iniinfbadger/badgermaxinfpercell). The random
effects structure included the three-way nesting as in the absence of cattle, the

initial % of infected badgers and the initial % of infected badgers per cell were
highly correlated with the total number of badgers in each time step.
Confronting model outputs with data
We have identified three potential patterns to perform pattern oriented
modelling: (i) Effects of culling over time in the number of infected badgers
within culling areas: According to DEFRA (2010) § 3, 8, 11, 36 culling was
applied for five years in an area of 100 km2 with culling efficacy 70% and
resulted in 28.3% decrease in TB cattle incidence at the end of that period. In the
same document § 5 it was stated that at least 40-50% of cattle herd breakdowns
were due to badgers in high incidence areas. We run a simulation scenario with
culling applied into a block of 12 x 12 cells (12 x 12 = 144 cells x 0.7 km2 per cell
= 100.8 km2), with badger-to-cattle equal to cattle-to-cattle infection rates
(=2.7% as recorded by Conlan et al. 2012 for cattle-to-cattle infection rates).
These infection rates were set as equal in order to reproduce the fact that at least
50% of cattle herd breakdowns were due to badgers in high incidence areas. We
compared the model output with the numbers regarding infected cattle after five
y provided in Donnelly et al. (2011) –a more recent update of the same data as
the one in DEFRA (2010). (ii) Changes in the population of badgers over time. We
compared the model output in terms of initial population of badgers (65536 in
all cases) vs. the final population of badgers across all scenarios - population
change was calculated as [(final-initial)/initial]. We have compared the % in
population change in the model against data at four published locations:
Woodchester, Wytham, Bristol (Table 3.3 in Krebs et al 1997 and references
therein), and the mean of several areas across the UK (Wilson et al. 1997). (iii) A
scenario where cattle testing and movement was interrupted during the footand-mouth epidemic (FMD). Initially the model is run with parameter space as in
line 9 in Supp. 2. After 20 y (month 240) of model run the model’s output in
terms of total and infected cattle and badgers was used as input to a simulation
scenario in which all else remain the same as in the previous input but cattle
testing and movement was interrupted as occurred during the 2002 FMD for 11
months. After 11 months, the model’s output in terms of total and infected cattle
and badgers was used as input to a simulation scenario in which all else been
equal as initially started (line 9 in Supp. 2). Model’s output was compared with
data from DEFRA regarding TB incidents in cattle in the UK (Incidence of TB in
cattle in Great Britain – GB dataset, available at:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/incidence-of-tuberculosis-tb-incattle-in-great-britain.
Results
The most parsimonious model included: culling as a covariate with the
effect of culling to reduce the number of infected cattle (coefficient +12.25);
cattle testing interval with less frequent testing associated with higher numbers
of cattle infections (coefficient +193.049); mean annual cattle distance
movement, with longer distances associated with higher infections (coefficient
+22.564); mean percentage of cattle moving every year with higher numbers of
cattle moving resulting in higher infections (coefficient +769.484); percentage of
initially infected badgers with higher initial TB prevalence in badgers resulting in
higher cattle infections (coefficient +456.271); badger to cattle infection rate
with higher infection rates associated with more cattle infections (coefficient

+773.311); and cattle to badger infection rate with higher infection rates
associated with more cattle infections (coefficient +335.547). Cattle testing
accuracy was also marginally significant but its removal was not justified and
thus is included as a covariate in the final model; Higher test accuracy was
associated with lower cattle infections (coefficient -56.162). These results are
summarised in Table 1. All the other covariates included in the initial maximal
model were removed as non-significant. Results regarding variance partitioning
are listed in the main text.

The most parsimonious model of simulation scenarios with cattle only (no
badgers) included: the effects of winter housing and application of winter housing
increased infections (coefficient +2336.302); mean farm size with larger farms
associated with more infections (coefficient +788.967); cattle testing interval with less
frequent testing resulting in more infections (coefficient +100.845); mean annual cattle
distance movement, with longer distances associated with higher infections (coefficient
+27.544); and mean percentage of cattle moving every year with higher numbers of
cattle moving resulting in higher infections (coefficient +462.764). As winter housing
was implemented in the model (all cattle summoned in one cell during winter months)
this was potentially likely to interact with mean farm size, an interaction effect between
mean farm size and winter housing was included in the initial maximal model but
dropped as non significant. These results are summarised in Table 2.
The most parsimonious model of simulation scenarios with badgers only (no
cattle) included: the effects of culling efficiency and more efficient culling decreased
infections (coefficient -2.364), badger life span when infected with badgers surviving
longer when infected associated with more infections (coefficient +2481.055), infection
rate badger to badger within group with higher within-group infection rates associated
with more infections (coefficient +1452.892) and infection rate badger to badger
between groups with higher between groups infections associated with more infections
(coefficient +1872.663). These results are summarised in Table 3.

References

Animal Health and Veterinary Laboratory Agencies (2013) Pre-Movement and
Post-Movement testing of cattle in Great Britain. Publication number AGTBYHE-04. http://www.defra.gov.uk/ahvla-en/files/pub-advice-tbmove.pdf
Miller, T.J. (2007) Contribution of individual-based coupled physical-biological
models to understanding recruitment in marine fish populations. Marine
Ecology Progress Series, 347, 127-138.
Daewel, U.T.E., Peck, M.A., KÜHn, W., St. John, M.A., Alekseeva, I. & Schrum, C.
(2008) Coupling ecosystem and individual-based models to simulate the
influence of environmental variability on potential growth and survival of
larval sprat (Sprattus sprattus L.) in the North Sea. Fisheries
Oceanography, 17, 333-351.
Evans, M.R., Bithell, M., Cornell, S.J., Dall, S.R.X., Díaz, S., Emmott, S., Ernande, B.,
Grimm, V., Hodgson, D.J., Lewis, S.L., Mace, G.M., Morecroft, M., Moustakas,
A., Murphy, E., Newbold, T., Norris, K.J., Petchey, O., Smith, M., Travis, J.M.J.
& Benton, T.G. (2013a) Predictive systems ecology. Proceedings of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 280.

Bithell, M. & Brasington, J. (2009) Coupling agent-based models of subsistence
farming with individual-based forest models and dynamic models of
water distribution. Environmental Modelling and Software, 24, 173-190.
Barlow, N.D., Kean, J.M., Hickling, G., Livingstone, P.G. and Robson, A.B. (1997). A
simulation model for the spread of bovine tuberculosis within New Zealand
cattle herds. Preventive Veterinary Medicine. 32: 57-75
Brennan, M.L., Christley, R.M., 2012. Biosecurity on Cattle Farms: A Study in
North-West England. PloS One 7, e28139.
Burnham, K.P., Anderson, D.R., 2002. Model Selection and Multimodel Inference.
New York: Springer Verlag.
Carter, S.P., Delahay, R.J., Smith, G.C., Macdonald, D.W., Riordan, P., Etherington,
T.R., Pimley, E.R., Walker, N.J., Cheeseman, C.L., 2007. Culling-induced social
perturbation in Eurasian badgers Meles meles and the management of TB
in cattle: an analysis of a critical problem in applied ecology. Proceedings of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 274, 2769-2777.
Conlan, A.J.K., McKinley, T.J., Karolemeas, K., Pollock, E.B., Goodchild, A.V.,
Mitchell, A.P., Birch, C.P.D., Clifton-Hadley, R.S., Wood, J.L.N., 2012.
Estimating the Hidden Burden of Bovine Tuberculosis in Great Britain.
PLoS Comput Biol 8, e1002730.
Mac Nally, R., 2002. Multiple regression and inference in ecology and
conservation biology: further comments on identifying important predictor
variables. Biodiversity and Conservation 11, 1397-1401.
R Development Core Team, 2013. R; A language and environment for statistical
computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.
Riordan, P., Delahay, R.J., Cheeseman, C., Johnson, P.J., Macdonald, D.W., 2011.
Culling-Induced Changes in Badger (<italic>Meles meles</italic>)
Behaviour, Social Organisation and the Epidemiology of Bovine
Tuberculosis. PloS One 6, e28904.
Smith, G.C., Cheeseman, C.L., Wilkinson, D., Clifton-Hadley, R.S., 2001. A model of
bovine tuberculosis in the badger Meles meles: the inclusion of cattle and
the use of a live test. Journal Of Applied Ecology 38, 520-535.
Woodroffe, R., Macdonald, D.W., da Silva, J., 1995. Dispersal and philopatry in the
European badger, Meles meles. Journal of Zoology 237, 227-239.
Benham, P. F.J. and Broom, D.M. (1991) Responses of dairy cows to badger urine
and faeces on pasture with reference to bovine tuberculosis transmission.
British Veterinary Journal, 147: 517-531 .
Biek R, O'Hare A, Wright D, Mallon T, McCormick C, et al. (2012) Whole Genome
Sequencing Reveals Local Transmission Patterns of Mycobacterium bovis in
Sympatric Cattle and Badger Populations. PLoS Pathogens 8(11): e1003008.
Bourne, F. J., Donnelly, C., Cox, D., Gettinby, G., McInerney, J., Morrison, I. &
Woodroffe, R. (2007) Bovine TB: the scientific evidence, a science base for a
sustainable policy to control TB in cattle, an epidemiological investigation
into bovine tuberculosis. Final report of the Independent Scientific Group on
Cattle TB. Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, London, UK.
Carter SP, Delahay RJ, Smith GC, Macdonald DW, Riordan P, et al. (2007) Cullinginduced social perturbation in Eurasian badgers Meles meles and the
management of TB in cattle: an analysis of a critical problem in applied

ecology. Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 274: 2769–
2777.
Cheeseman, C.L., Cresswel l , W.J., Harris, S. and Mallinson, P. J. (1988a)
Comparison of d ispersal and other movements in two badger (Meles
meles) populations. Mammal Review, 18 : 51 -59.
Cheeseman, C.L., Wilesmith, J .W., Ryan, J. and Mallinson, P.J. (1987). Badger
population dynamics in a high-density area. Symposia of the Zoological
Society of London 58: 279-294.
Cheeseman, C.L., Wilesmith, J.W., Stuart, F.A. and Mallinson, P.J . (1988b)
Dynamics of tuberculosis in a naturally infected badger population.
Mammal Review 18 : 61 -72.
Conlan, A.J.K., McKinley, T.J., Karolemeas, K., Pollock, E.B., Goodchild, A.V.,
Mitchell, A.P., Birch, C.P.D., Clifton-Hadley, R.S. & Wood, J.L.N. (2012)
Estimating the Hidden Burden of Bovine Tuberculosis in Great Britain.
PLoS Comput Biol, 8, e1002730.
Claridge, J., Diggle, P., McCann, C.M., Mulcahy, G., Flynn, R., McNair, J., Strain, S.,
Welsh, M., Baylis, M. and Williams, D.J.L. (2012) Fasciola hepatica is
associated with the failure to detect bovine tuberculosis in dairy cattle
Nature Communications. 3: 853
Clifton-Hadley, R.S. (1993) The use of a geographical information system (GIS) in
the control and epidemiology of bovine tuberculosis in south-west England
(Thrusfield, M.V. (ed.)). In : Proceedings of the Society of Veterinary
Epidemiology and Preventative Medicine. Meeting at University of Exeter,
31 March to 2 April 1993: 166-179.
Costello, E., Doherty, M.L., Monaghan, M.L., Quigley, F.C. and O'Reilly P.F. (1998) A
study of cattle-to-cattle transmission of Mycobacterium bovis infection. The
Veterinary Journal. 155: 245-250
Cresswell, W.J., Harris, S., Cheeseman, C.L. and Mallinson, P.J. (1992) To breed or
not to breed: an analysis of the social and density-dependent constraints on
the fecundity of female badgers (Meles meles). Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London, B, 338 : 393-407.
da Silva, J., Macdonald, D.W. and Evans, P.G .H . (1994) Net costs of group living in
a solitary forager, the Eurasian badger (Meles meles). Behavioural Ecology,
5: 151 - 158
DEFRA (2009) Bovine tuberculosis in England: Towards eradication. Final Report
of the Bovine TB Advisory Group. Presented to Defra on 8 April 2009.
http://archive.defra.gov.uk/foodfarm/farmanimal/diseases/atoz/tb/docu
ments/tbag-finalreport.pdf
DEFRA (2010) Bovine Tuberculosis: The Government’s approach to tackling the
disease and consultation on a badger control policy. Annex B - Scientific
evidence on culling
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20120616115816/http://archi
ve.defra.gov.uk/corporate/consult/tb-control-measures/100915-tbcontrol-measures-annexb.pdf
Delahay, R.J., Langton, S., Smith, G.C., Clifton-Hadley, R.S. and Cheeseman, C.L.
(2000) The spatio-temporal distribution of Mycobacterium bovis (bovine
tuberculosis) infection in a high-density badger population. Journal of
Animal Ecology. 69: 428–441.

Denny, G.O. and Wilesmith, J.W. (1999) Bovine tuberculosis in Northern Ireland:
a case-control study of risk factors. Veterinary Records. 144: 305-310
Eurostat (2009) Farm Structure Survey in the United Kingdom - 2007. Statistics in
Focus 81/2009. Available at:
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/cache/ITY_OFFPUB/KS-SF-09081/EN/KS-SF-09-081-EN.PDF
Food Standards Agency (2007) Clean Beef Cattle for slaughter A guide for
producers. Food Standards Agency Publications FSA/0951/1007. Available
at: www.food.gov.uk/multimedia/pdfs/publication/cleanbeefsaf1007.pdf
Gilbert M, Mitchell A, Bourn D, Mawdsley J, Clifton-Hadley R, et al. (2005) Cattle
movements and bovine tuberculosis in Great Britain. Nature 435: 491–496.
Goodchild, A.V. and Clifton-Hadley, R.S. (2001) Cattle-to-cattle transmission of
Mycobacterium bovis. Tuberculosis 81: 23-41
Harris, S. and Cresswell, W.J. (1987) Dynamics of a suburban badger (Meles
meles) population. Symposia of the Zoological Society of London, 58: 295311.
Jenkins HE, Cox DR, Delahay RJ (2012) Direction of Association between Bite
Wounds and Mycobacterium bovis Infection in Badgers: Implications for
Transmission. PLoS ONE 7(9): e45584.
Jenkins HE, Woodroffe R, Donnelly CA (2010) The Duration of the Effects of
Repeated Widespread Badger Culling on Cattle Tuberculosis Following the
Cessation of Culling. PLoS ONE 5(2): e9090.
King, D., Roper, T.J., Young, D., Woolhouse, M.E.J., Collins, D.A., & Wood, P. (2007)
Tuberculosis in cattle and badgers: a report by the Chief Scientific Adviser, Sir
David King. London.
Krebs, J. R., Anderson, R., Clutton-Brock, T., Morrison, I., Young, D. and Donnelly
C. (1997) Bovine tuberculosis in cattle and badgers. London, UK: Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF) Publications.
Kruuk H. & Parish T. (1982) Factors affecting population density, group size and
territory of the European badger, Meles meles. Journal of Zoology 196: 31–
39.
Little, T.W.A., Naylor, P.F. and Wilesrnith, J.W. (1982). Laboratory study of
Mycobacterium bovis infection in badgers and calves. Veterinary Record,
111 : 550-557.
National Farmers Union (2010) Dairy Cow Welfare Strategy. August 2010
Riordan P, Delahay RJ, Cheeseman C, Johnson PJ, Macdonald DW (2011) CullingInduced Changes in Badger (Meles meles) Behaviour, Social Organisation
and the Epidemiology of Bovine Tuberculosis. PLoS ONE 6(12): e28904.
Roper, T.J. and Christian, S.F. (1992) Sett use in badgers (Metes meles) (Priede, I .
G . and Swift, S . H . (eds.)). Radio telemetry: remote monitoring and
tracking of animals. Chichester, El lis Harwood : 661 -669.
Shirley MDF, Rushton SP, Smith G, South AB, Lurz PWW. (2003) Investigating the
spatial dynamics of bovine tuberculosis in badger populations: Evaluating
an individual-based simulation model. Ecological Modelling 167: 139-157
Sleeman, D.P. (1992). Long distance movements in an Irish badger population
(Priede, I . G . and Swift, S.H. (eds.)). In: Wildlife telemetry. Proceedings of
the 4th European Conference on Wildlife telemetry. London. Ellis Harwood:
670- 676.

Smal, C. (1995) The badger and habitat survey of Ireland. Dublin: National Parks
and Wildlife Service and Department of Agriculture, Food and Forestry
(DAFF, Republic of Ireland). 22 pp.
Smith GC, McDonald RA, Wilkinson D (2012) Comparing Badger (Meles meles)
Management Strategies for Reducing Tuberculosis Incidence in Cattle. PLoS
ONE 7(6): e39250.
Smith, G.C. and Cheeseman C.L. (2002) A mathematical model for the control of
diseases in wildlife populations: culling, vaccination and fertility control.
Ecological Modelling 150: 45-53
Smith, G.C., Cheeseman, C.L., Wilkinson, D. and Clifton-Hadley R.S. (2001) A
model of bovine tuberculosis in the badger Meles meles: the inclusion of
cattle and the use of a live test. Journal of Applied Ecology 38: 520-535
Thibier, M. and Wagner, H.-G. (2002) World statistics for artificial insemination
in cattle. Livestock Production Science. 74: 203–212
Walter, W.D., Anderson, C.W., Smith, R., Vanderklok, M., Averill, J.J. and
VerCauteren, K.C. (2012) On-farm mitigation of transmission of
Tuberculosis from white-tailed deer to cattle: Literature review and
recommendations. Veterinary Medicine International, 2012: 616318
Wilkinson, D., Bennett, R., McFarlane, I., Rushton, S., Shirley, M. and Smith, G.C.
(2009) Cost-benefit analysis model of badger (Meles meles) culling to
reduce cattle herd tuberculosis breakdowns in Britain, with particular
reference to badger perturbation. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 45: 10621088
Wilson, G., Harris, S. and Mclaren, G. (1997) Changes in the British badger
population, 1988- 1997. London : People's Trust For Endangered Species.
142pp.
Woodroffe, R., Donnelly, C. A., Johnston, W. T., Bourne, F. J., Cheeseman, C. L.,
Clifton-Hadley, R. S., Cox, D. R., Gettinby, G., Hewinson, R. G., Le Fevre, A. M.,
McInerney, J. P. and Morrison, W. I. (2005), Spatial association
of Mycobacterium bovis infection in cattle and badgers Meles meles. Journal
of Applied Ecology, 42: 852–862.
Woodroffe, R., Donnelly, C.A., Jenkins, H.E., Johnston, W.T., Cox, D.R., Bourne, F.J.,
Cheeseman, C.L., Delahay, R.J., Clifton-Hadley, R.S., Gettinby, G., Gilks, P.,
Hewinson, R.G., McInerney, J.P. and Morrison, W.I. (2006) Culling and cattle
controls influence tuberculosis risk for badgers. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103, 14713-14717
Donnelly, C.A., Jenkins, H.E. & Woodroffe, R.W. (2011). Analysis of further data (to
28 August 2011) on the impacts on cattle TB incidence of repeated badger
culling. PloS ONE comment on Jenkins et al. (2010) PloS ONE e9090.
Available at:
http://www.plosone.org/annotation/listThread.action;jsessionid=D67E9
0E7815990D1EC6F0F88D5922EF3?root=3161

Table S1. ANOVA results of the most parsimonious model of the number of infected
cattle (dependent variable). The total number of cattle was included as a random effect

(Intercept)
culling
cowtestinterv
cowtestaccur
Infrateb2cow
Infratecow2b
cowdispmean
cowdistmean
Iniinfbadger

numDF denDF F-value p-value
1
156 467.1834 <.0001
2
156
8.9141
0.0033
4
156
59.7986 <.0001
3
156
3.8087 0.0528*
3
156
8.5877
0.0039
3
156
4.4599
0.0363
4
156
54.6294 <.0001
4
156
7.7384
0.0061
2
156
16.0794 0.0001

Table S2. ANOVA results of the most parsimonious model of the number of
infected cattle (dependent variable) in simulation scenarios that included cattle
only (no badgers). The total number of cattle was included as a random effect.
pnumDF denDF
F-value
value
(Intercept)
1
153
242.8247 <.0001
housing
1
153
36.26084 <.0001
meanfarmsize
2
153
5.46896 0.0206
cowtestinterv
4
153
36.72815 <.0001
cowdispmean
4
153
82.72493 <.0001
cowdistmean
4
153
26.14834 <.0001
Table S3. ANOVA results of the most parsimonious model of the number of
infected badgers (dependent variable) in simulation scenarios that included
badgers only (no cattle). The random effect model structure included the initial
% of infected badgers per cell nested in the initial % of infected badgers nested
in the initial total number of badgers.
pnumDF denDF
F-value
value
(Intercept)
1
153
1302.3312 0.0022
badgerlifespaninf
2
153
195.8472 <.0001
badgermaxcullingpercell
4
153
5.46896
0.017
infrateb2b
3
153
316.2157 <.0001

