arXiv:1503.02846v1 [q-bio.QM] 10 Mar 2015

Generalized modeling of empirical
social-ecological systems
Steven J. Lade, Susa Niiranen, Maja Schlüter
March 11, 2015

Abstract
Modeling social-ecological systems is difficult due to the complexity of ecosystems and of individual and collective human behavior. Key components of the
social-ecological system are often over-simplified or omitted. Generalized modeling is a dynamical systems approach that can overcome some of these challenges. It can analyze qualitative system dynamics such as regime shifts despite
incomplete knowledge of the model’s constituent processes, but has been used
primarily in theoretical contexts. Here, we review generalized modeling and use
a recent study on the Baltic cod fishery’s boom and collapse to demonstrate
its application to modeling the dynamics of empirical social-ecological systems.
These empirical applications demand new methods of analysis suited to larger,
more complicated generalized models than is common in theoretical contexts.
Generalized modeling is a promising tool, in both participatory and research
settings, for rapidly developing mathematically rigorous, process-based understanding of a social-ecological system’s dynamics despite limited knowledge of
the system.

1

Introduction

Humanity relies on the earth’s biophysical processes for a range of ‘services’
ranging from the fulfillment of basic physiological needs such as food and water to facilitating the cultural and spiritual interactions that help bind societies
[Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005]. At the same time, these biophysical processes are being affected by humans on a dramatic scale [Steffen et al.,
2015b,a]. To understand and manage biophysical systems such as natural resources, or to understand today’s human welfare problems, therefore often requires acknowledging that these systems are part of interlinked social-ecological
systems [Berkes and Folke, 1998].
The dynamics and dynamical stability of social-ecological systems are particularly critical to understand [Folke et al., 2010]. For example, a sustainable social-ecological system may be associated with the stability over time
1

of a desirable basin of attraction [Derissen et al., 2011], while regime shifts,
such as the collapse of a fishery, are often associated with loss of stability
[Scheffer et al., 2001, Scheffer and Carpenter, 2003]. Dynamical stability has already been an object of research in theoretical ecology for decades [Holling, 1973,
May, 1972, Scheffer et al., 2001] and is receiving increasing attention in studies of human decision-making [Kelso, 1997, Scherbaum et al., 2008]. Recently,
change in stability, via statistics of time series such as variance and autocorrelation of time series [Kuehn, 2011], has been used as an early warning signal for
sudden changes in dynamical patterns [Dakos et al., 2012, Scheffer et al., 2009,
Scheffer and Carpenter, 2003].
Dynamical modeling of social-ecological systems can however be a difficult
undertaking [Schlüter et al., 2012]. Both individual and collective human behavior and ecological and biophysical dynamics are extremely complex and contextdependent where our knowledge of interactions is highly partial and uncertain.
Integrating human behavior with ecological dynamics is additionally complicated because the two domains often involve dramatically different theories and
conceptual backgrounds as well as different types and amounts of available data.
Modeling approaches often deal with this complexity by over-simplifying the system, or by omitting one domain altogether [Schlüter et al., 2012]. The resulting
models often are of only theoretical interest without clear validation from or
significance for case studies, lack a complete understanding of processes driving
the social-ecological system’s dynamics, or stop at a qualitative level such as
causal loop diagrams and do not proceed to a quantitative model at all.
Here, we show how the generalized modeling approach [Gross and Feudel,
2006, Kuehn et al., 2013] can overcome many of the challenges involved in modeling empirical social-ecological systems. Already extensively used in ecology
[Gross et al., 2009b, Stiefs et al., 2010, Yeakel et al., 2011, 2014], generalized
modeling is a type of dynamical systems approach that is well suited to research questions involving the roles of processes and feedbacks in dynamical
patterns such as attractors, regime shifts, and oscillatory dynamics. Because
a generalized model does not require full specification of the functional forms
of these processes, social and ecological components can be modeled and empirically grounded at comparable levels of complexity despite differing levels of
knowledge of and data availability. Generalized modeling can be used to investigate qualitative system behavior in relatively data-poor systems, or as a
first modeling exercise preceding a more complicated model. As we will show,
development of a generalized model is also well suited to a collaborative or
participatory process involving participants with different areas of knowledge.
We illustrate the application of the generalized modeling approach using
recent work we undertook on modeling the collapse of the cod fishery in the
Baltic Sea [Lade et al., 2015]. In the early 1980s, the biomass of cod in the
Baltic Sea reached previously unseen levels. The cod stock persisted at this
high level for several years before suddenly and dramatically collapsing in the
late 1980s to levels from which there has been little recovery even to the present
day [Eero et al., 2008, Möllmann et al., 2009, SOU, 1993]. During the boom and
collapse, regulation of the fishery was ineffective or non-existent, but government
2

subsidies encouraged expansion of the fishing fleet [SOU, 1993]. In the study,
we sought to understand the role of social dynamics in the boom and collapse
of the social-ecological system constituted by the cod fishery, in contrast to the
usually exclusively ecological studies of the system.
We first review the mathematical foundations and basic procedure of generalized modeling. We then describe how generalized modeling can be applied
to empirical social-ecological systems. The modeling process begins with model
construction, through model conceptualization, formalization into a generalized
model, and parameterization. Using the Baltic cod fishery case as an example, we describe the particular advantages and challenges involved in applying
generalized modeling to empirical social-ecological systems. We then introduce
several analyses that can be applied to a generalized model, the application of
some of which are described here for the first time in detail. Finally, we reflect broadly on our experience using generalized modeling for the Baltic cod
fishery case study and the potential of generalized modeling for empirical socialecological systems more broadly.

2

Generalized modeling overview

A conventional dynamical systems approach to analysing stability involves: selecting functional forms and parameters for the dynamical model; solving the
resulting model for a fixed point; and then calculating the stability at the fixed
point using the Jacobian matrix (matrix of derivatives) at the fixed point. Generalized modeling instead directly parameterizes the Jacobian matrix, as will be
explained in more detail in the next section. In this manner, stability can be estimated both more quickly and with fewer model assumptions (in particular, no
functional forms are required) than in a conventional model. On the other hand,
a generalized model is insufficiently specified to produce the time series output
that is commonly associated with dynamical system models. Generalized modeling also avoids the reliance on long, high-quality time series of early warning
approaches [Dakos et al., 2014] and allows for the incorporation of other types
of information by using a model-based approach [Boettiger and Hastings, 2013]
to estimate stability.
Although generalized modeling is (usually) used to estimate stability of a
fixed point, the social-ecological system need not reside precisely at the fixed
point. The social-ecological system may fluctuate within a basin of attraction
about the fixed point; the stability of the fixed point is used as a measure of the
stability of the basin of attraction [Scheffer and Carpenter, 2003]. The value
of the fixed point may also slowly change in time due to the effects of what
are called slow variables and drivers in the resilience literature [Walker et al.,
2012], which has a formal mathematical counterpart in the fast-slow time scale
decomposition [Kuehn, 2011].

3


  

* "

+
$	 	

 	

	


β

β % &'( ± &')






 




elasticity

 	



! "
#	$

, -	


 	+


Figure 1: Summary of the generalized modeling procedure.

3

Model construction

In this section, we review the steps involved in the construction and parameterization of a generalized model of an empirical social-ecological system (Fig 1).
We illustrate the model construction process using a recent study [Lade et al.,
2015] in which generalized modeling was used to investigate the roles of social
and ecological processes and feedbacks in maintaining the boom and triggering
the collapse of cod stocks in the Baltic Sea. Generalized modeling is well suited
to such a research question, because of its focus on processes and feedbacks and
because persistence and collapse can be readily interpreted in terms of stability.
Our review is mostly qualitative. The formal mathematical foundation of
generalized modeling has been described many times elsewhere [Gross and Feudel,
2006, Kuehn et al., 2013, Lade et al., 2013].

3.1

Conceptual model

The structure of the generalized model needs first to be identified: the important
state variables in the system, the processes which affect those state variables,
and with which state variables these processes interact. In previous literature on
generalized modeling this step has generally been overlooked. Modeling socialecological systems, however, requires a large variety of disciplinary knowledge,
and modeling an empirical case requires careful decisions about research questions, system boundaries, and the level of detail of the description.
In the Baltic study, a group with expertise on the ecological, political, economic, and sociological aspects of the Baltic Sea was assembled. The group
developed a collective causal loop diagram [Sterman, 2000] outlining the impor4

Fisher decisions
West coast

Fishing

Baltic

External
Fleet

Total
Effort

Local
Fleet

Herring Fishing

Ecology

Herring

Time Spent
Fishing

Cod

Zooplankton

Subsidies

Perceived
Profitability

Context
Price
of fisher
decision-making

Salinity

Regulation

Larval
cod

Sunk Cost
Effects
Perceived
CPUE
Cod
Catch
Foreign Cod Catch

Sprat
Temperature

Sprat Fishing

Figure 2: Simplified version of the collaboratively developed causal loop diagram
for the Baltic cod fishery social-ecological model. Arrows indicate the direction
of influence of one quantity on another. Boxes indicate state variables treated
as stocks; ovals denote intermediate variables; smaller text indicates drivers.
Dotted lines indicate interactions included in hypothetical model ‘experiments’.
CPUE denotes Catch Per Unit Effort. Reproduced from Lade et al. [2015].
tant entities and interactions affecting the dynamics of the Baltic cod fishery
during the 1980s [Lade et al., 2015] (simplified version shown in Fig. 2). Causal
loop diagrams conceptualize social-ecological systems in terms of stocks or variables and relationships between those variables, which can be readily converted
into a generalized model. Furthermore, causal loop diagrams are often used to
assess feedbacks within social-ecological systems and many researchers are already familiar with them. This success demonstrated that generalized modeling
can be successfully used in collaborative or participatory settings.
To illustrate this model construction process, let us focus on the processes
driving a small part of the generalized model: the state variable LocalFleet (Fig
2) representing the size of the local fishing fleet. In the study, we focused on
the Swedish fishing fleet as this was the fleet for which we had the most knowledge and data. We decided to distinguish this fishing fleet from the external
(Swedish west coast) fleet, which fished mostly in the North Sea but opportunistically moved into the Baltic, for example in response to changes in licensing
conditions in the North Sea. We assumed a primarily economic motivation for
fisher decisions on fleet size, such that fisher investment in fleet and gear depended on the fishers’ perception of profitability in the fishery. Government
subsidies for these investments, which were substantial at the time [Lade et al.,
2015], were also assumed to affect changes in fleet size. Decreases in fleet size due
to degradation and decommissioning were not included due to these processes

5

operating on a longer time scale than the cod fishery’s boom and collapse.

3.2

Generalized model

The state variables and processes graphically represented in the conceptual
model need to be mathematically represented in a generalized model. In this
context, a generalized model is a system of differential equations in which functional forms are not specified, but rather represented by ‘placeholder’ functions.
In the Baltic cod fishery study, the equation for the dynamics of the LocalFleet
state variable described above had the following form (the complete generalized
model is in Lade et al. [2015]):
dLocalFleet
= FisherInvestment(PerceivedProfitability)+ InvestmentSubsidies.
dt
(1)

3.3

Jacobian matrix

The generalized modeling approach then assumes the existence of a fixed point
[Kuehn et al., 2013]. and the Jacobian matrix of the generalized model is symbolically calculated at the fixed point. As described in Sec. 2, however, this
assumption does not require that the empirical social-ecological system resides
precisely at the fixed point.
Additionally, all state variables are formally rescaled in terms of their values
at the fixed point [Kuehn et al., 2013]. (If X has values X ∗ at the fixed point,
the change of variables X → X/X ∗ is performed.) This step does not affect the
values of the generalized parameters introduced below, nor as was recently recognized [Lade et al., 2013] is it needed in order to calculate eigenvalues. Rescaling
is advantageous because the values of state variables at the fixed points are
become unnecessary to calculated eigenvectors and other generalized modeling
outputs described below. Elements of the Jacobian’s eigenvectors, after rescaling, become expressed in fractional (fraction of the value of the state variable
at its steady state) rather than absolute units.
To calculate the Jacobian matrix, we need the derivatives of the right-handside with respect to the other state variables. In the case of Eq. (1), we begin
by taking the differential of the right-hand-side. Since InvestmentSubsidies is a
driver, it is assumed to be constant in the stability analysis, and we obtain
dRHS ≡ d (FisherInvestment + InvestmentSubsidies)
dFisherInvestment
dPerceivedProfitability.
=
dPerceivedProfitability

(2)

PerceivedProfitability is, however, only an intermediate variable, itself depending on other state variables. If deriving the Jacobian by hand, this process
would need to be repeated until only differentials of state variables appeared on
the right-hand side, from which the derivatives needed for the Jacobian could
be read off. In the Baltic Sea model, this process was partially automated.
6

3.4

Generalized parameters

The entries in the Jacobian are next re-written in terms of the more easily
interpreted ‘generalized parameters’. Here, we use three types of generalized
parameters:
• α parameters, which represent the characteristic time scale for changes in
a state variable.
• β parameters, which compare the strengths of multiple processes that are
acting on a state variable. Usually, all the processes with positive sign are
compared against each other and all the processes with negative sign are
compared.
• Elasticity parameters, which characterize the non-linearity of the process.
They take the general form
HX =

X ∂H
H ∂X

for the function H(X) with respect to state variable X. For example,
a function H(X) = aX n has elasticity n everywhere, while the Holling
type II function H(X) = aX/(b + X) has elasticity in the range [0, 1) for
b, X > 0.
The generalized parameters are parameters like in a conventional simulation
model, except that they parameterize the Jacobian matrix directly, rather than
parameterizing functional forms like ‘conventional’ parameters do. Consequently,
the generalized parameters can parameterize the entire class of models that give
rise to that Jacobian matrix, rather than just a single model formulation as is
usually the case in conventional models [Kuehn, 2011].
For Eq. (2), a suitable choice of generalized parameters is
FisherInvestment + InvestmentSubsidies
LocalFleet
FisherInvestment + InvestmentSubsidies
β[LocalFleet] =
FisherInvestment
dFisherInvestment PerceivedProfitability
,
FIPP =
dPerceivedProfitability FisherInvestment

α[LocalFleet] =

where the last parameter denotes the elasticity of FisherInvestment with respect
to PerceivedProfitability, the differential can be rewritten
dRHS = α[LocalFleet] × β[LocalFleet] × FIPP × dPerceivedProfitability.

3.5

Parameterization

Values or ranges are then estimated for the generalized parameters. In the
Baltic cod fishery study, a range of social (such as fleet composition, subsidy
7

and income data) and ecological (such as catch and diet data) data were used
to estimate generalized parameters [Lade et al., 2015]. Generalized parameters
were estimated for two periods: during the cod boom, and at the start of the cod
collapse. We were careful not to apply the generalized model to other periods of
the cod collapse, as the fishery clearly was not at or near a stable state during
this time.
The available data for the generalized parameters fell into four broad categories. In each case, a value was assigned to the generalized parameter together
with a range specifying a uniform distribution that was later used for uncertainty
analysis.
• Parameters for which annual data was available, mostly ecological parameters based on catch and stock assessment data. Estimates of the
generalized parameter were calculated from each year. The generalized
parameter was assigned the mean of the estimates with a range given by
the extremes of the estimates.
• Parameters for which only qualitative information or a single quantitative
estimate, such as fleet composition from a single year, was available. Parameter values and distributions were assigned on a case by case basis. For
example, sometimes although quantitative data available it was known to
be an underestimate.
• Some parameters were given by the definition of variables in the model.
For example, total effort is defined by number of vessels multiplied by
time spent fishing. The elasticities of total effort with respect to number
of vessels and time spent fishing were both set to 1, with range of zero
width about 1.
• For the small number of parameters for which no empirical or theoretical
data was available, a uniform distribution was assigned: for beta parameters, nominal value 0.5 and range 0 to 1; for elasticities, nominal value 1
with range 0.5 to 2.

4

Model validation and analysis for large generalized models

We now describe methods of analysis suitable for a large, empirically based generalized model such as the Baltic Sea cod fishery case (step 6 of Fig. 1). The
methods include both long-standing approaches and methods first used on a
generalized model in the Baltic Sea study [Lade et al., 2015]. In addition to estimating stability via eigenvalues (Sec. 4.1), we introduce analyses that explore
the contributions to social-ecological system stability of subsystems (Sec. 4.2),
feedbacks (Sec. 4.4), and individual links or parameters (Sec. 4.6). Eigenvector analysis allows a shift on focus to the roles of individual state variables

8

(Sec. 4.3); uncertainty analysis quantifies the degree of confidence in model outputs (Sec. 4.5); and model experiments can be used to explore the consequences
hypothetical modeling assumptions (Sec. 4.7).
Results from these analyses can also be used to validate the generalized
model, by comparing the model’s predicted patterns against the observed dynamics. Because a generalized model does not produce time series output like a
conventional simulation model, validation of the model must proceed differently.
The output of a generalized model instead consists of predictions of dynamical
patterns: stable fixed points, loss of stability, oscillatory dynamics, and so on.
(In this sense, generalized modeling is somewhat similar to the pattern-oriented
modeling of agent-based models [Grimm et al., 1996, 2005].) Stability, as measured via eigenvalues, will be used to validate the Baltic cod fishery model, as
described in the next section.

4.1
4.1.1

Eigenvalues
Theory

A key output of a generalized modeling analysis is the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix. Eigenvalues are commonly used, both in conventional dynamical
models and generalized models, to indicate stability of fixed points [Kuznetsov,
2010]. For a continuous time formulation as was used in the Baltic cod fishery
model, if the real parts of all eigenvalues are negative then the fixed point is
stable. A purely real eigenvalue crossing the imaginary axis (that is, acquiring
positive real part) corresponds to a fold bifurcation in the attractor landscape
of the system, which is in turn often associated with regime shifts such as fishery collapses1 [Biggs et al., 2012, Scheffer and Carpenter, 2003]. The eigenvalue
with largest real part is therefore an indicator of stability (more precisely, instability, since a positive real part corresponds to an unstable fixed point).
Previous analyses of large generalized models [Gross et al., 2009b, Zumsande and Gross,
2010, Yeakel et al., 2014] used a dichotomous measure of stability: those combinations of parameters which led to an eigenvalue with positive real part were
labeled ‘unstable’, otherwise the parameter combination was ‘stable’. The tendency of systems to be stable across a range of generalized parameters was
studied. In cases where the modeling aim is instead to estimate stability in a
specific empirical case, however, such a dichotomous stability measure may be
unable to identify changes in the stability of the system with sufficient detail.
Consider estimating the eigenvalues of a system at several time points before
a fold bifurcation. With a dichotomous measure, the decline in stability could
not be measured; only the final collapse would be reported. Indeed even the
eigenvalues estimated from simulations of a theoretical system undergoing a
fold bifurcation may never actually display positive real part [Lade and Gross,
1 A pair of complex conjugate eigenvalues crossing the imaginary axis corresponds to a Hopf
bifurcation [Kuznetsov, 2010], which is often associated with the emergence of oscillations such
as in a predator-prey system [Fussmann et al., 2000]. It is a fold bifurcation, however, that
we found in the Baltic cod fishery case.

9

2012]. For empirical application to specific social-ecological systems, such as in
the Baltic cod fishery case, we recommend using the real part of the dominant
eigenvalue as an indicator of stability.
A continuous stability measure is, however, susceptible to localized modes
of the social-ecological system, which a dichotomous measure is not. Localized
modes are dynamics involving a small part of the full social-ecological system
that are often a result of symmetries in the model’s construction [Aufderheide et al.,
2012]. They are often not representative of the dynamics of the full socialecological system, but nevertheless can lead to an eigenvalue at or near zero that
can register as the dominant eigenvalue. Systematically detecting and assessing
localized modes, and selecting appropriate eigenvalues as stability indicators, is
ongoing work [Aufderheide et al., 2012] that is important the for future development of the generalized modeling approach. Alternatively, localized modes
with zero eigenvalues may indicate that inappropriate modeling assumptions
are being made [Gross et al., 2009a].
Finally, we motivated the use of eigenvalues by noting that regime shifts are
often associated with fold bifurcations. There are according to the resilience
literature two recognized mechanisms, however, by which a system can ‘tip’
or undergo a ‘regime shift’ into a new state [Biggs et al., 2012]. In one mode,
drivers change the stability landscape of the system through a bifurcation so that
the previously stable state disappears and the system must transition into a new
state. In a second mode, not necessarily associated with a bifurcation, drivers
cause a rapid shock directly to state variables of a system that push it out of a
stable state into a new state. Following Ashwin et al. [2012], we refer to these
two modes as B-tipping (for bifurcation) and N-tipping (for noise) respectively2 .
N- and B-tipping are of course not entirely independent. A system approaching
a B-tip is also at increased risk of an N-tip, and is likely to tip due to noise
before the bifurcation point is actually reached. However these two theoretical
modes of tipping focus attention on different criteria and methods for validation
and analysis of the model, as described here and also in the eigenvector tests
below.
4.1.2

Validation of the Baltic cod fishery model

Instability, as measured by eigenvalues, was used as a validation test for the
model of the Baltic cod fishery [Lade et al., 2015]. The fishery model was expected to have been stable during the cod boom, since the boom persisted over
the longest time scale in the model, the reproductive cycle of cod. This was
predicted by the model (Fig 3a, SES column). Another validation test was the
change in stability of the fishery at the start of the collapse, at which point the
instability should have increased. The fishery model indeed showed increased
instability, in fact passing the threshold from stable to unstable, at the beginning of the collapse (Fig 3b, SES column). This was strong support for the
2 A third mode of tipping, where drivers cause a rapid shift in the position of the basin of
attraction [Scheffer et al., 2001], can also be associated with increased eigenvalue [Kéfi et al.,
2013] and therefore we expect it to be detected by the methods for B-tipping.

10

0.1
0.0
-0.1
ecological

SES

social

-1.0

0.2

SES

-0.5

0.3

social

Change in instability

0.0

ecological

Instability (1/year)

0.5

Figure 3: Eigenvalues and system decomposition for the generalized
model of the Baltic Sea cod fishery. (a) Dominant eigenvalues (instabilities)
at the cod boom and (b) changes in dominant eigenvalues at the start of the
collapse compared to the cod boom in the ecological, social and coupled socialecological systems. Reproduced from Lade et al. [2015].
validity of the model, and for a regime shift via B-tipping in particular.
As anticipated above, the Baltic cod fishery model indeed displayed a localized mode, due to symmetry between two state variables, as well as a second
mode that became localized during model experiments (Fig 4). In the Baltic cod
fishery model the task of selecting the appropriate eigenvalue to use for reporting stability was however straightforward. After eliminating the zero eigenvalue
of the localized mode, the next dominant eigenvalue was a purely real eigenvalue
that, continuation of that eigenvalue showed, became unstable at the start of
the collapse [Lade et al., 2015].

4.2

System decomposition

Social-ecological systems, as a framework for analysis, are believed to be important because of the feedbacks and the dynamics that emerge due to the coupling
between the social and ecological systems [Levin et al., 2012, Berkes and Folke,
1998]. Generalized modeling allows the importance of the social-ecological coupling to be simply tested by decomposing the system into decoupled social and
ecological systems and analyzing the behavior of these decoupled systems.
Formally, submatrices (subsets of the full matrix’s rows and columns) corresponding to the social and ecological subsystems are extracted from the full
social-ecological system’s Jacobian matrix. The submatrices obtained correspond to the Jacobian matrices of subsystems with fixed input from the rest of
the system. Exploring an alternative fixed point, such as complete disconnection
with zero input from the other subsystem, would likely involve Jacobian matrices with different values3 . The submatrices obtained can then be subjected to
any of the analyses described in this section.
In the Baltic cod fishery, the submatrices’ eigenvalues were calculated to
assess the contributions of the decoupled systems to the social-ecological sys11

0.00

456789:;<7

0/./3
0/./2
0.0

CPUEPerception

1.0
0.5
0.0

TimeSpentFishing

1.0
0.5
0.0

LocalFleet

1.0
0.5
0.0

ExternalFleet

1.0
0.5
0.0

CodBiomass

1.0
0.5
0.0

CodNumber

1.0
0.5
0.0

JuvenileCodBiomass

1.0
0.5
0.0

0.5

1./

1.0
JuvenileCodNumber 0.5
0.0

SpratBiomass

1.0
0.5
0.0

HerringBiomass

1.0
0.5
0.0

ZooplanktonBiomass

1.0
0.5
0.0
0.0

0.5

1.0

beta[PerceivedProfitability]

Figure 4: Localized eigenvectors. (top row) Two eigenvalues of the Baltic Sea
cod fishery generalized model [Lade et al., 2015] and (other rows) the absolute
12
values of the components of their eigenvectors,
as a function of the generalized
parameter beta[PerceivedProfitability]. One of the eigenvectors (blue line) is
a localized eigenvector (localized to the state variables TimeSpentFishing and
ExternalFleet) for all values of the parameter. For intermediate values of the
parameter, the other eigenvector (black line) is delocalized across both the ecological and social parts of the system. At high or low values of the parameter,
however, the eigenvector becomes localized to two state variables in the ecological or social parts of the system, respectively.

tem’s overall stability. The decoupled ecological (respectively, social) systems
correspond to that subsystem with constant fishing effort from the social system (respectively, constant cod availability from the ecological system). Results
demonstrated that during the boom the decoupled ecological system may in fact
have been unstable, only yielding a stable coupled social-ecological system due
to the stabilizing effect of the social system (Fig 3a). Results also showed that
the instability in the coupled social-ecological system may, remarkably, have increased more than either of its component sub-systems (Fig 3a). These results
are discussed at length in Lade et al. [2015].

4.3

Eigenvectors

The eigenvalues λk of the Jacobian matrix represent dynamical modes of a
social-ecological system. They are a system-level property and do not distinguish the contribution of individual state variables to the social-ecological
system’s dynamics. Each eigenvalue, however, has associated with it a pair of
eigenvectors, a right eigenvector v(k) and a left eigenvector w(k) [Wong, 1997]
that do resolve state variables.
The elements of a left eigenvector indicate the pattern of perturbations that
must be applied to the state variables to excite exactly that mode. The elements
of a right eigenvector indicate the extent to which the state variables are affected by that mode [Kampmann and Oliva, 2009, Aufderheide et al., 2013]. In
a social-ecological system undergoing a B-tipping regime shift, the right eigenvector corresponding to the dominant eigenvalue can be used to predict the
direction in which the system’s state variables are expected to change at the
time of the collapse (the ”collapse direction”).4
Mathematically, the right eigenvectors of any unstable eigenvalues span the
unstable eigenspace of the fixed point [Solari et al., 1996]. The eigenspace, however, includes both positive and negative (parallel and antiparallel) multiples of
the eigenvector; the dominant right eigenvector therefore can only indicate how
state variables will move relative to each other. Resolving absolute directions
would require analyzing the model to higher orders than the linear analysis
usually provided by generalized modeling [Zumsande, 2011].
An additional caveat is that eigenvectors are a linear analysis, only predicting
3 Formally,

h

for a system comprised of two subsystems x and y such that d
i
f (x,y)
,
the
Jacobian
matrix is at the fixed point (x∗ , y∗ ) is
g(x,y)
" ∂f

∂x
∂g
∂x

∂f
∂y
∂g
∂y

#





x
y

/dt =

x=x∗ ,y=y∗

The upper left submatrix is the same as the Jacobian of the subsystem with constant input
from the rest of the system at the full system’s fixed point, dx/dt = f (x, y∗ ) at x = x∗ . It
is generically different to that for the subsystem with zero input from the rest of the system,
dx/dt = f (x, 0) at x = x∗ .
4 In the case of an N-tipping regime shift, if the shocks on the system are known, the
response of the system to the shocks could be predicted using a press perturbation approach
[Aufderheide et al., 2013].

13

the initial direction of the collapse as the social-ecological system leaves its
previous attractor. The right eigenvector is therefore unlikely to be a reliable
estimator for the magnitude of the change in state variables, and should only be
used to predict direction. Even the direction of change, however, could easily
switch due to non-linear effects.
Aufderheide et al. [2013] also proposed indicators based on a weighted combination of the eigenvectors from different modes. They
 Pdefine the sensitivity
(k)
of state variable i to the rest of the system as log − k |vi |/λk and the

 P
(k)
influence of state variable i on the rest of the system as log − k |wi |/λk .
In a model of a social-ecological system, sensitivity could possibly be used as a
measure of how strongly the state variables would respond to an intervention,
and influence for how strongly an intervention on that state variable would affect
the rest of the system.
In the case of the Baltic cod fishery it is known that the biomass of sprat
increased dramatically at the same time as the collapse of the cod stock. The
known trajectories of sprat and other state variables in the cod fishery were
compared against the predicted collapse direction as a validation test for the
cod fishery model [Lade et al., 2015].

4.4

Feedback loops

Graphical representations of social-ecological or other dynamical systems are
often analyzed in terms of feedback loops. Feedback loops are pathways within
a dynamical system in which changes in the value of any state variable in the
loop affect the value of the same state variable, via the chain of variables indicated by the loop [Sterman, 2000]. Feedback loops are an intuitive method for
understanding the origin of a system’s dynamics. They are an appealing concept for understanding how system-level dynamics emerge from the interactions
of specific processes in the system.
‘Reinforcing’, ‘positive’ or ‘unstable’ loops magnify the initial disturbance,
while ‘balancing’, ‘negative’ or ‘stable’ loops reverse the effect of the disturbance
and tend to return the system to equilibrium. Feedback loops of a ‘non-reduced’
system include all intermediate variables in the loop description, while in ‘reduced’ systems only the state variables are indicated [Kampmann, 2012].
Feedback loops, however, are notoriously hard to systematically analyze
[Kampmann and Oliva, 2009]. One of the most rigorous methods so far developed for analyzing feedback loops is Loop Eigenvalue Elasticity5 Analysis
(LEEA) [Kampmann and Oliva, 2009, Kampmann, 2012]. The first step in
applying LEEA to the Jacobian matrix produced by a generalized modeling
analysis is identifying a complete set of feedback loops for the system. An immediate difficulty is that there is no unique ‘complete’ set of feedback loops. The
Shortest Independent Loop Set (SILS) algorithm of Oliva [Oliva, 2004] produces
5 The elasticities in LEEA and the elasticity type of generalized parameter share a common mathematical origin but their roles in model analysis and parameterization, respectively,
should not be confused.

14

the smallest set of loops that are ‘independent’ of each other. An additional
difficulty is that even within a particular loop set, the loops may not be very
meaningful. For example, a pair of ‘phantom loops’ may have large elasticities
but always cancel each other out [Kampmann and Oliva, 2009].
The second step in LEEA is estimating the sensitivity of a chosen eigenvalue
(the dominant eigenvalue is often the choice made) to the strength of each loop.
The elasticity of the eigenvalue to individual links is first estimated using an
analytical approximation [Magnus, 1985, Kampmann, 2012]. The membership
of links in the different loops is also known. The elasticity of the eigenvalue to
loop strength can then be inferred [Kampmann, 2012].
In the Baltic Sea cod fishery case study, LEEA with SILS was applied to the
(non-reduced) ecological and social subsystems as well as the social-ecological
system [Lade et al., 2015]. Loop influence6 , rather than elasticity, was calculated as this avoids singular results near zero eigenvalue [Kampmann and Oliva,
2009]. Meaningful results were obtained in the ecological and social-ecological
analysis, but the results for the social system were harder to interpret due to the
model’s structure: the feedback loops in the model’s social system all overlap,
with alternative pathways only in two, separate, sections. Focusing instead on
the alternative pathways, and calculating sensitivity of the eigenvalue to individual links within those pathways, gave better insight into the dynamics of the
social system than analyzing the entire feedback loop.

4.5

Uncertainty analysis

A strength of generalized modeling as a tool for social-ecological system analysis
is its ability to deal with uncertainty in the functional forms of processes in the
social-ecological system. Analysis of the social-ecological system can proceed
without detailed knowledge of the functional forms, requiring only estimates
of these generalized parameters. Rigorous model analysis, however, quantifies
uncertainties in knowledge of the system (specifically, in the values of the generalized parameters) and assesses their effects on the model outputs.
In the Baltic cod fishery model, uncertainties in the generalized parameters
were estimated as described in Sec. 3.5 above. The propagation of these parameter uncertainties, which were additionally assumed to be uncorrelated, were
propagated through to the model outputs (such as eigenvalues) using Monte
Carlo sampling. This uncertainty analysis, being possibly the first treatment
of uncertainties in a generalized model, was deliberately chosen to be simplistic
and transparent, and is likely to overestimate uncertainties. More sophisticated
methods may yield more accurate uncertainty estimates. In particular, Bayesian
approaches may be well suited to treat the mix of quantitative and qualitative
information that is often available in a generalized modeling analysis.
6 Not to be confused with the influence based on the eigenvector analysis of
Aufderheide et al. [2013] described above.

15

4.6

Sensitivity analysis

Sensitivity analyses examine how model outputs depend on individual model
components, complementing analyses of the dependence of model output on
larger model structures such as feedback loop analysis and system decomposition. Sensitivity analyses also complement uncertainty analysis in that they can
apportion output uncertainty to different inputs [Saltelli et al., 2008].
Sensitivity analyses of complex models are often local due to computational
cost, but local sensitivity analyses can be uninformative when the model output
(here, stability) is a highly nonlinear function of its inputs (here, the generalized
parameters). Global sensitivity analysis, where the entire parameter space is
sampled, is generally preferable [Saltelli et al., 2008]. The calculation of the Jacobian matrix in a generalized model, where it is immediately obtained from the
generalized parameters, is much faster than in conventional simulation models,
where the location of the fixed point must be re-evaluated for each combination
of input parameters, and allows for a global sensitivity analysis even with large
numbers of parameters.
In the Baltic Sea case study, variance-based sensitivity analysis [Saltelli et al.,
2008], which is a type of global sensitivity analysis, was applied to the socialecological system during the cod boom. Variance-based sensitivity analysis decomposes the variance in the model output into contributions from each input
parameter. Two sensitivity measures are usually reported for each parameter:
the ‘main effect index’, the effect of varying that parameter alone, averaged
over the other parameters; and the ‘total effect index’, the effect of that parameter together with the effects of all its interactions with other parameters
[Saltelli et al., 2008]. The analysis was computationally fast, even though the
model had over 100 parameters. The variance-based sensitivity analysis was
complemented with a conventional local derivative sensitivity analysis to obtain
information on the direction in which a parameter affects the stability.

4.7

Model experiments

The final type of generalized model analysis we introduce is model ‘experiments’, in which the structure of the social-ecological model itself is modified,
or where generalized parameters are adjusted to values outside their empirically
determined range. The purposes of such experiments could include testing the
structural assumptions that constitute the social-ecological model, or exploring
model behavior in plausible but hypothetical alternative model structures.
Although generalized modeling allows additional interactions and feedback
loops to be added very easily, care must be taken regarding assumptions on
the fixed point of the social-ecological model during experiments. If a model
experiment were to involve changes in the fixed point of the system, the values of
generalized parameters in the model will generically also change, as they depend
strongly on the location of the fixed point. In theoretical studies where a large
range of generalized parameter values are considered, this is not a problem, as
the theoretical range is likely to also apply to the new fixed point. In empirical

16

studies, however, where generalized parameters are estimated at a specific fixed
point (such as the cod boom), the previous estimate of the generalized parameter
may not be accurate at the new fixed point.
We therefore recommend, in empirical studies, interpreting the model experiments as exploring a situation where the system remains at the same fixed
point but the processes in the model are configured differently. Unlike typical
simulation models, the generalized model is not used to extrapolate system dynamics to hypothetical regions of state space for which there is no empirical data
available, but rather to explore the effects of different process configurations at
the same location in state space.
For example, in the Baltic cod fishery case study where model experiments
were used to explore the effects of fishery regulations [Lade et al., 2015], to
ensure that the generalized parameters remain valid the experiments were interpreted as follows. The experiments explored an alternative Baltic Sea fishery,
where all state variables (fish stocks, fisher effort levels, and fleet sizes) were the
same as during the actual boom, but where regulation was an additional, strong
factor influencing fisher decision making, implying compensatory changes in the
strengths of other processes. A hypothetical situation where regulation had
succeeded in reducing fishing effort and catch could not be investigated without
requiring new estimates or unjustified extrapolations of generalized parameters.

5
5.1

Discussion
Generalized modeling of empirical social-ecological systems

Studies of social-ecological systems are frequently either in-depth case studies
that can represent the complexity of a specific case [Berkes and Folke, 1998], or
theoretical studies that aim to represent general mechanisms and make general
statements concerning social-ecological systems [Biggs et al., 2009, Carpenter et al.,
1999, Lade et al., 2013]. The results of case-studies, however, can be difficult
to generalize to other situations, and the theoretical studies can lack the complexity needed to be relevant to real-world policy-making situations. Modeling
approaches at an intermediate level of complexity are required, which can take
the complexity of contextual factors into account while also being able to provide
system-level, generalizable explanations for the phenomena under study. Generalized modeling promises to be a method that provides such an approach. As the
Baltic cod fishery example demonstrates, it can efficiently handle case-specific
social and ecological complexity while also rigorously and rapidly analyzing the
model at a system level.
The generalized modeling approach can function in the presence of limited
data and a variety of quantitative and quantitative knowledge. Long time series
are not necessary (although may help yield a more accurate model) to calibrate
model functions as only point properties of the model’s processes are required.
These parameters, the so-called generalized parameters that parameterize the

17

system’s Jacobian matrix, are easily interpreted and can often be extracted from
qualitative knowledge about the social-ecological system. At the same time,
the lack of functional forms means that generalized models cannot simulate
time series, an output that is usually expected of dynamical models. Instead
generalized models should be applied to research questions involving qualitative
dynamical patterns—such as the boom and collapse in the Baltic cod fishery,
as demonstrated above. The qualitative dynamical patterns could be the final
research question, as in the Baltic Sea case study, or they could a first modeling
exercise preceding development of a more complicated model.
Integrating knowledge from traditionally isolated disciplines (such as the
natural and social sciences) is another important challenge for social-ecological
modeling. Causal loop diagrams are widely used, especially in collaborative
or participatory contexts, to assess feedbacks within a social-ecological system
[Sendzimir et al., 2008, Downing et al., 2014], but the ‘modeling’ process often terminates there, due to the difficulty of developing a quantitative socialecological model. As shown in the Baltic case study, generalized modeling is a
promising tool for developing a causal loop diagram into a quantitative model
in collaborative or participatory settings.
A generalized model also can be efficiently subjected to several different
forms of analysis, as shown here. A key output of a generalized modeling analysis is system stability (eigenvalues). Generalized modeling can also analyze the
effects on stability of the social and ecological subsystems (system decomposition), individual feedback loops (feedback loop analysis) and individual processes or parameters (sensitivity analysis), giving insight into the underlying
mechanisms leading to the qualitative dynamics. The effects of these dynamics
on particular state variables can also be studied (eigenvector analysis). Several
of these methods had not been applied to a generalized model before the Baltic
case study. We specifically highlight feedback loop analysis as a promising tool,
although there remain significant methodological challenges, for developing understanding of how social-ecological system dynamics emergence from specific
processes.

5.2

Lessons learned from Baltic model

Here, we reflect on our experiences in using generalized modeling for the Baltic
cod fishery social-ecological model [Lade et al., 2015].
The construction of the conceptual model was a collaborative process involving researchers from several disciplines. During this phase we sought to
concentrate almost exclusively on the social side of the system, as it had been
less thoroughly studied than the ecological system. In contrast, when converting
the causal loop diagram into a generalized model and estimating the generalized
parameters, most difficulties were encountered in the ecological system, in particular the modeling of cod. Ultimately, appropriately modeling cod population
dynamics required four state variables (adult and juvenile number and biomass)
rather than one and the introduction of a model parameter that was the secondstrongest contributor to uncertainty in the output [Lade et al., 2015]. Unlike
18

the first phase of the model development process, where the lesser studied components (the social subsystem) attracted more attention, in this phase of the
modeling process the better studied components (the ecological subsystem) attracted more attention. We speculate this is because constructing the model to
be consistent with existing knowledge of the system and existing modeling work
requires more effort for more well-known components.
‘Model experiments’ on a generalized model were also introduced. We argued
that model experiments are most easily performed such that the experiment does
not change the location of the model’s fixed point, but rather explores the effects
of alternative configurations of processes that lead to the same fixed point. This
can, however, restrict the usefulness of these ‘experiments’. In the Baltic fishery
model it would have been useful to consider experiments where regulations had
reduced fishing effort, and to test whether the boom would have been sustainable
under reduced effort, for example. This is not possible in generalized modeling
without re-estimating generalized parameters for the entire system at its new
fixed point. On the other hand, it is advantageous that generalized modeling
forces clarity on what model predictions are extrapolations and what are based
on existing operating points. Extrapolations to new operating points could be
made within a generalized modeling framework, given sufficient information to
justify those extrapolations.

5.3

Future developments of generalized modeling

Finally, we speculate on important areas in which generalized modeling’s development would facilitate its application to empirical social-ecological systems.
An important step of a generalized modeling analysis procedure is to assume
the existence of a fixed point, so that the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix can
be used as indicators of the stability of the fixed point. The Jacobian matrix, and
objects computed from it such as local Lyapunov exponents [Abarbanel et al.,
1991] and finite-time Jacobian matrices [Cvitanović et al., 2012], can however
yield information about the qualitative dynamics of the system even when it
is not near equilibrium. These quantities are generally used to estimate the
rate of divergence of initially nearby trajectories. The quintessential situation
is chaos where the rate of divergence is positive. We therefore speculate that a
generalized modeling approach could be used to characterize the dynamics of a
system even in the absence of a fixed point.
Generalized modeling analyses are fast to perform as only the eigenvalues of
a matrix need to be computed, compared to solving a set of differential equations
in a traditional simulation-based approach. Coding the generalized model was
however also relatively time consuming, as the Jacobian needed to be derived
manually (with some limited automation, as described above) and all analysis techniques coded manually. In order for generalized modeling to be widely
used, a computer program with graphical interface similar to system dynamics’
Vensim [Ventana Systems, 2014] would be highly beneficial. The generalized
modeling procedure in a theoretical context—construction of the generalized
model, parameterization, and calculation of stability or bifurcations—is suffi19

ciently mature to warrant such an effort. The present article shows, however,
that methods important for applying generalized modeling to large-scale empirical systems, such as uncertainty analysis, sensitivity analysis and feedback
loop analysis, still need to be refined.

6

Conclusions

Understanding the world’s natural resource use and human wellbeing challenges
requires a specific type of systems thinking: social-ecological systems, in which
natural and human systems are recognized as an interconnected and interdependent whole [Berkes and Folke, 1998, Schlüter et al., 2012]. We have elaborated
the potential for generalized modeling, a type of dynamical systems modeling,
to be used for empirical studies of social-ecological systems. A key advantage
of generalized modeling is that the functional forms of the often poorly known
social and ecological processes are not required. Even in the presence of this uncertainty generalized modeling provides formal mathematical tools with which
to analyze the social-ecological model. Like other systems approaches, generalized modeling is also suitable for use in a collaborative or participatory mode.
Although more development is required, generalized modeling is a promising
tool for both researchers and stakeholders to rapidly gain an understanding of
the qualitative dynamics of a social-ecological system.

References
H.D.I. Abarbanel, R. Brown, and M.B. Kennel. Variation of lyapunov
exponents on a strange attractor. Journal of Nonlinear Science, 1(2):
175–199, 1991.
ISSN 0938-8974.
doi: 10.1007/BF01209065.
URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01209065.
J. M. Anderies, S. R. Carpenter, W. Steffen, and J. Rockström. The topology of non-linear global carbon dynamics: From tipping points to planetary
boundaries. Geophysical Research Letters.
Peter Ashwin, Sebastian Wieczorek, Renato Vitolo, and Peter Cox. Tipping
points in open systems: bifurcation, noise-induced and rate-dependent
examples in the climate system. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A, 370(1962):1166–1184, 2012. doi: 10.1098/rsta.2011.0306. URL
http://rsta.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/370/1962/1166.abstract.
Helge Aufderheide, Lars Rudolf, and Thilo Gross. Mesoscale symmetries explain
dynamical equivalence of food webs. New Journal of Physics, 14(10):105014,
2012. URL http://stacks.iop.org/1367-2630/14/i=10/a=105014.
Helge Aufderheide, Lars Rudolf, Thilo Gross, and Kevin D. Lafferty. How
to predict community responses to perturbations in the face of imperfect

20

knowledge and network complexity. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 280
(1773), 2013.
F. Berkes and C. Folke, editors. Linking Social and Ecological Systems: Management Practices and Social Mechanisms for Building Resilience. Cambridge
University Press, 1998.
Reinette Biggs, Stephen R. Carpenter, and William A. Brock.
Turning back from the brink: Detecting an impending regime shift in
time to avert it.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(3):826–831, 2009.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0811729106.
URL
http://www.pnas.org/content/106/3/826.abstract.
Reinette Biggs, Thorsten Blenckner, Carl Folke, Line Gordon, Albert Norström,
Magnus Nyström, and Garry Peterson. Regime shifts. In A. Hastings and L. J.
Gross, editors, Encyclopedia of Theoretical Ecology, pages 609–617. University
of California Press, 2012.
Carl Boettiger and Alan Hastings. Tipping points: From patterns to predictions.
Nature, 493(7431):157–158, 2013.
S. Carpenter, W. Brock, and P. Hanson. Ecological and social dynamics in
simple models of ecosystem management. Conservation Ecology, 3:4, 1999.
P. Cvitanović, R. Artuso, R. Mainieri, G. Tanner, and G. Vattay. Chaos: Classical and Quantum. Niels Bohr Institute, Copenhagen, 14 edition, 2012. Available at http://ChaosBook.org/version14.
Vasilis Dakos, Stephen R. Carpenter, William A. Brock, Aaron M. Ellison,
Vishwesha Guttal, Anthony R. Ives, Sonia Kéfi, Valerie Livina, David A.
Seekell, Egbert H. van Nes, and Marten Scheffer. Methods for detecting
early warnings of critical transitions in time series illustrated using simulated
ecological data. PLoS ONE, 7(7):e41010, 07 2012.
Vasilis Dakos, Stephen R. Carpenter, Egbert H. van Nes, and Marten Scheffer.
Resilience indicators: prospects and limitations for early warnings of regime
shifts. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, 370
(1659), 2014. ISSN 0962-8436.
Sandra Derissen, Martin F Quaas, and Stefan Baumgärtner. The relationship
between resilience and sustainability of ecological-economic systems. Ecological Economics, 70(6):1121–1128, 2011.
Andrea S Downing, Egbert H van Nes, John S Balirwa, Joost Beuving,
P Bwathondi, Lauren J Chapman, Ilse JM Cornelissen, Iain G Cowx,
K Goudswaard, Robert E Hecky, et al. Coupled human and natural system dynamics as key to the sustainability of lake victorias ecosystem services.
Ecology and Society, 19(4):31, 2014.

21

Margit Eero, Friedrich W Köster, and Brian R MacKenzie. Reconstructing
historical stock development of atlantic cod (gadus morhua) in the eastern
baltic sea before the beginning of intensive exploitation. Canadian Journal
of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 65(12):2728–2741, 2008.
Carl Folke, Stephen R. Carpenter, Brian Walker, Marten Scheffer, Terry Chapin,
and Johan Rockström. Resilience thinking: Integrating resilience, adaptability and transformability. Ecology and Society, 15:20, 2010.
Gregor F Fussmann, Stephen P Ellner, Kyle W Shertzer, and Nelson G
Hairston Jr. Crossing the hopf bifurcation in a live predator-prey system.
Science, 290(5495):1358–1360, 2000.
Volker Grimm, Karin Frank, Florian Jeltsch, Roland Brandl, Janusz
Uchmański, and Christian Wissel. Pattern-oriented modelling in population ecology. Science of The Total Environment, 183(12):151 – 166, 1996.
ISSN 0048-9697. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0048-9697(95)04966-5. URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0048969795049665.
Modelling in Environmental Studies.
Volker Grimm, Eloy Revilla, Uta Berger, Florian Jeltsch, Wolf M.
Mooij, Steven F. Railsback, Hans-Hermann Thulke, Jacob Weiner,
Thorsten Wiegand, and Donald L. DeAngelis. Pattern-oriented modeling of agent-based complex systems: Lessons from ecology.
Science, 310(5750):987–991, 2005.
doi: 10.1126/science.1116681.
URL
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/310/5750/987.abstract.
Thilo Gross and Ulrike Feudel. Generalized models as a universal approach to the analysis of nonlinear dynamical systems.
Phys. Rev.
E, 73:016205, Jan 2006.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.73.016205.
URL
http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.73.016205.
Thilo Gross, Andrew M. Edwards, and Ulrike Feudel.
The invisible
niche:
Weakly density-dependent mortality and the coexistence of
species. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 258(1):148–155, 2009a. ISSN
0022-5193.
doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2009.01.018.
URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022519309000320.
Thilo Gross, Lars Rudolf, Simon A. Levin, and Ulf Dieckmann.
Generalized models reveal stabilizing factors in food webs.
Science, 325:747–750, 2009b.
doi:
10.1126/science.1173536.
URL
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/325/5941/747.abstract.
C. S. Holling. Resilience and stability of ecological systems. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 4:pp. 1–23, 1973. ISSN 00664162. URL
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2096802.
Christian Erik Kampmann. Feedback loop gains and system behavior (1996).
System Dynamics Review, 28(4):370–395, 2012. ISSN 1099-1727. doi: 10.
1002/sdr.1483. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sdr.1483.
22

Christian Erik Kampmann and Rogelio Oliva. System dynamics, analytical
methods for structural dominance analysis in. In Robert A. Meyers, editor,
Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science, pages 8948–8967. Springer
New York, 2009. ISBN 978-0-387-75888-6.
Sonia Kéfi, Vasilis Dakos, Marten Scheffer, Egbert H. Van Nes, and Max Rietkerk. Early warning signals also precede non-catastrophic transitions. Oikos,
122(5):641–648, 2013. ISSN 1600-0706. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0706.2012.20838.
x. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0706.2012.20838.x.
JA Scott Kelso. Dynamic patterns: The self-organization of brain and behavior.
MIT press, 1997.
Christian Kuehn.
A mathematical framework for critical transitions:
Bifurcations, fastslow systems and stochastic dynamics.
Physica
D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 240(12):1020–1035, 2011.
ISSN 01672789.
doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physd.2011.02.012.
URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167278911000443.
Christian Kuehn, Stefan Siegmund, and Thilo Gross. Dynamical analysis
of evolution equations in generalized models. IMA Journal of Applied
Mathematics, 78(5):1051–1077, 2013. doi: 10.1093/imamat/hxs008. URL
http://imamat.oxfordjournals.org/content/78/5/1051.abstract.
Yuri Kuznetsov. Elements of Applied Bifurcation Theory. Springer, 2010.
S. J. Lade, S. Niiranen, J. Hentati-Sundberg, T. Blenckner, Wiebren J. Boonstra, K. Orach, M. Quaas, H. Österblom, and M. Schlüter. Do social dynamics
matter for ecosystem regime shifts? an empirical test of social-ecological coupling in the baltic sea. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2015. submitted.
Steven J. Lade and Thilo Gross. Early warning signals for critical transitions: A
generalized modeling approach. PLoS Comput Biol, 8(2):e1002360, 02 2012.
Steven J. Lade, Alessandro Tavoni, Simon A. Levin, and M Schlüter. Regime
shifts in a social-ecological system. Theoretical Ecology, 6(3):359–372, 2013.
ISSN 1874-1738.
Simon Levin, Tasos Xepapadeas, Anne-Sophie Crépin, Jon Norberg, Aart
de Zeeuw, Carl Folke, Terry Hughes, Kenneth Arrow, Scott Barrett, Gretchen
Daily, Paul Ehrlich, Nils Kautsky, Karl-Gran Mäler, Steve Polasky, Max
Troell, Jeffrey R. Vincent, and Brian Walker. Social-ecological systems as
complex adaptive systems: modeling and policy implications. Environment
and Development Economics, FirstView:1–22, 11 2012. ISSN 1469-4395.
J. R. Magnus. On differentiating eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Econometric
Theory, 1:179–191, 1985.
Robert M May. Will a large complex system be stable? Nature, 238:413–414,
1972.
23

Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: Synthesis. Island Press, Washington DC, 2005.
Christian Möllmann, Rabea Diekmann, Bärbel Müller-Karulis, Georgs Kornilovs, Maris Plikshs, and Philip Axe. Reorganization of a large marine
ecosystem due to atmospheric and anthropogenic pressure: a discontinuous
regime shift in the central baltic sea. Global Change Biology, 15(6):1377–
1393, 2009. ISSN 1365-2486. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2486.2008.01814.x. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2008.01814.x.
Rogelio Oliva. Model structure analysis through graph theory: partition heuristics and feedback structure decomposition. System Dynamics Review, 20(4):
313–336, 2004.
A. Saltelli, M. Ratto, T. Andres, F. Campolongo, J. Cariboni, D. Gatelli,
M. Saisana, and S. Tarantola. Global Sensitivity Analysis: The Primer. John
Wiley & Sons, 2008.
Marten Scheffer and Stephen R. Carpenter.
Catastrophic regime
shifts in ecosystems:
linking theory to observation.
Trends
in Ecology & Evolution, 18(12):648 – 656, 2003.
ISSN 01695347.
doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2003.09.002.
URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169534703002787.
Marten Scheffer, Steve Carpenter, Jonathan A. Foley, Carl Folke, and Brian
Walker. Catastrophic shifts in ecosystems. Nature, 413:591–596, 2001.
Marten Scheffer, Jordi Bascompte, William A. Brock, Victor Brovkin,
Stephen R. Carpenter, Vasilis Dakos, Hermann Held, Egbert H. van Nes, Max
Rietkerk, and George Sugihara. Early-warning signals for critical transitions.
Nature, 461:53–59, 2009.
Stefan Scherbaum, M Dshemuchadse, and A Kalis. Making decisions with a
continuous mind. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 8(4):454–
474, 2008.
M. Schlüter, R. R. J. McAllister, R. Arlinghaus, N. Bunnefeld, K. Eisenack,
F. Hölker, E.J. Milner-Gulland, B. Müller, E. Nicholson, M. Quaas, and
M. Stöven. New horizons for managing the environment: a review of coupled
social-ecological systems modeling. Natural Resource Modeling, 25:219–272,
2012. ISSN 1939-7445.
Jan Sendzimir, Piotr Magnuszewski, Zsuzsanna Flachner, Peter Balogh, Geza
Molnar, Attila Sarvari, and Zsuzsanna Nagy. Assessing the resilience of a
river management regime: informal learning in a shadow network in the tisza
river basin. Ecology and Society, 13(1):11, 2008.
H.G Solari, M.A Natiello, and G.B Mindlin. Nonlinear Dynamics: A Two-Way
Trip from Physics to Math. CRC Press, 1996.
24

SOU. Svenskt fiske: slutbetnkande av Utredningen om fiskerinringens utvecklingsmjligheter, volume 103. Statens Offentliga Utredningar, 1993.
Will Steffen, Wendy Broadgate, Lisa Deutsch, Owen Gaffney, and Cornelia
Ludwig. The trajectory of the anthropocene: The great acceleration.
The Anthropocene Review, 2015a. doi: 10.1177/2053019614564785. URL
http://anr.sagepub.com/content/early/2015/01/08/2053019614564785.abstract.
Will Steffen, Katherine Richardson, Johan Rockström, Sarah E. Cornell, Ingo
Fetzer, Elena M. Bennett, R. Biggs, Stephen R. Carpenter, Wim de Vries,
Cynthia A. de Wit, Carl Folke, Dieter Gerten, Jens Heinke, Georgina M.
Mace, Linn M. Persson, Veerabhadran Ramanathan, B. Reyers, and Sverker
Sörlin. Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing
planet. Science, 347:1259855, 2015b. doi: 10.1126/science.1259855. URL
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/early/2015/01/14/science.1259855.abstract.
John D. Sterman. Business Dynamics: Systems Thinking and Modeling for a
Complex World. Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2000.
Dirk Stiefs, George AK Van Voorn, Bob W Kooi, Ulrike Feudel, and Thilo
Gross. Food quality in producer-grazer models: A generalized analysis. The
American Naturalist, 176(3):367–380, 2010.
Ventana Systems. Vensim, 2014. http://www.vensim.com.
Brian H. Walker, Stephen R. Carpenter, Johan Rockström, Anne-Sophie Crépin,
and Garry D. Peterson. Drivers, ”slow” variables, ”fast” variables, shocks,
and resilience. Ecology and Society, 17(3):30, 2012.
S. S. M. Wong. Computational Methods in Physics and Engineering. World
Scientific, 1997.
J. D. Yeakel, D. Stiefs, M. Novak, and T. Gross. Generalized modeling of
ecological population dynamics. Theor. Ecol., 4(2):179–194, 2011.
Justin D Yeakel, Mathias M Pires, Lars Rudolf, Nathaniel J Dominy, Paul L
Koch, Paulo R Guimarães, and Thilo Gross. Collapse of an ecological network
in ancient egypt. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(40):
14472–14477, 2014.
M. Zumsande. Extension of Generalized Modeling and Application to Problems
from Cell Biology. PhD thesis, Technische Universität Dresden, 2011.
Martin Zumsande and Thilo Gross.
Bifurcations and chaos in the
MAPK signaling cascade. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 265(3):481–
491, 2010.
ISSN 0022-5193.
doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2010.04.025. URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002251931000216X.

25

