Optimal chemotaxis in animal cell intermittent migration
P. Romanczuk1,2 , G. Salbreux2
1

arXiv:1503.05054v1 [physics.bio-ph] 17 Mar 2015

2

Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University, NJ 80544, USA,
Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems, Nöthnitzerstr. 38, 01187 Dresden, Germany
(Dated: March 18, 2015)
Animal cells can sense chemical gradients without moving, and are faced with the challenge
of migrating towards a target despite noisy information on the target position. Here we discuss
optimal search strategies for a chaser that moves by switching between two phases of motion (run
and tumble), reorienting itself towards the target during tumble phases, and performing a persistent
random walk during run phases. We show that the chaser average run time can be adjusted to
minimize the target catching time or the spatial dispersion of the chasers. We obtain analytical
results for the catching time and for the spatial dispersion in the limits of small and large ratios of
run time to tumble time, and scaling laws for the optimal run times. Our findings have implications
for optimal chemotactic strategies in animal cell migration.

Eukaryotic cells migration does not always occur continuously: bimodal motions with reorientation phases
where cells loose their polarity and phases of polarized,
persistent motion have been reported in unicellular organisms [1], in cell migration occurring during development in the Zebrafish and Xenopus embryo [2–5], or in
mammalian cells [6]. These two phases of motions have
been denominated runs and tumbles [2] in analogy with
E. Coli motion, although the corresponding migration
mechanisms and chemical sensing of animal cells are very
different to the ones employed by bacteria. Possibly, cellular run and tumble behavior reflects the necessity for
the cell to retract motile protrusions before forming new
ones [2]: in that case, the run time is associated to the
protrusion lifetime (cf. Fig 1A).
Primordial germ (PG) cells in the Zebrafish embryo
in particular have been reported to switch between two
behavioural modes denoted “run” and “tumbles” [2]. In
addition, PG cells move collectively in response to the
chemokine SDF-1a towards the gonad during the first 24
hours of development [2]. In contrast to bacteria, after a
tumble phase, PG cells choose a direction biased towards
their target : animal cells are indeed capable of migration towards a source through sensing of chemical gradients [7, 8], allowing them to bias their motion towards a
chemical source [9, 10] without the need to sample the
chemoattractant at different spatial positions.
PG cells therefore display intermittent, directed migration towards a target. We investigate here the chemotactic efficiency of this class of motion with a minimal model.
We ask in particular (i) how does the time necessary to
find the target depend on the properties of the cell motion, and (ii), how does the spatial dispersion of a group
of cells evolve in time. Both questions are relevant for
biological processes, where cells have to move to specific
locations and maintain their cohesion [11].
In random search processes, a chaser without information on the target location performs a random walk
until hitting the target by chance [12, 13]. In this context, the persistence length of a particle performing a

random search can be optimised to minimise the search
time [14]. In this work, we consider instead the optimal
moving strategy for another class of motion, directed random search, where the chaser has noisy information on
the location of the target, and needs to slow down to
reorient. More specifically, we consider an intermittent
moving chaser which stops for a finite time to reorient
towards its target (e.g. due to chemotaxis), with some
detection error. This simple model accounts for the general situation where the reorientation of the chasing agent
takes time, either due to physical constraints or to a finite
detection time.
The main question is: how often should such a particle
stop and reorient to efficiently move towards the target?
Intuitively, short runs have the advantage of frequent reorientation towards the target, but at the cost of frequent
stopping, while long runs may significantly deviate the
particle from the location of the target, due to initial orientation errors and possible motion of the target. We
show here that this results in an optimal run time which
depends on the size and distance of the target and on
the orientation errors that the chaser makes. Similarly,
the effective diffusion of a collection of chasers can also
be optimized, which might be essential for collective cell
migration towards a common target.
We consider point-like agents (chasers) moving in two
dimensions towards a disc-shaped target with radius S
located at position xT (Fig. 1). The chaser position is
denoted xC and its direction of motion is given by the
heading angle ϕ. The chasing agent switches between a
run and a tumbling state. The tumbling phase lasts for
a time tt during which the chaser does not move, after
which the agent picks a direction uC towards the target,
with an additional angular “detection” error η (Fig. 1).
The initial polar angle of the chaser at the start of the
run phase then reads
ϕi = arg(xT − xC ) + η.

(1)

For simplicity, η is drawn from a normal distribution with
standard deviation . In general, the detection error 

2

y

A

t =0
vC

B

Chaser

C

t = tr,1 + tt,1

D

t = Tc

η1
η2

d

θ

Target
100

y

50

S

x

800

E

Tc =744.6

0
50

100

F

400

tmax =365.0
450

τr =8
300

x

150

τr =1
τr =2

σ2 (t)

600

τr =8
τr =15

200
0

0

0

400

time t

800

1200

FIG. 1. (A) Run and tumble migration of animal cells: Runs
correspond to directed migration, of polarized cells with actinrich protrusions (lamellipodia) at the leading edge (green).
Tumbles correspond to reorientation events associated with
repolarization events. (B-D) Model schematic: A chasing particle aims at a target by switching between persistent motion
towards the target (runs) and reorientation events (tumbles).
After reorientation, the chaser orients itself towards the target
with an error η. (E) Simulation snapshot of 20 chaser trajectories for τr = 8 and t < Tc = 744.6; the red circles indicates
chaser positions at maximal dispersion (tmax = 388.0). (F)
Dispersion σ 2 (t) versus time for different run times. The vertical lines indicate the average catching time Tc . Parameters
(d,e): θ0 = π, d0 = 500,  = 0.3, S = 0.1, N = 40000.

might depend on the distance to the target d, for instance
due to the spatial variation of the chemoattractant. In
this letter, we focus mainly on the simplest case of a
constant , and relax this assumption at the end of the
letter. During the run phase lasting for a time tr , the
particle is not able to further bias its motion towards the
target, and moves with a constant speed vC and heading
angle dynamics ϕ̇ = ηC (t), with ηC (t) a Gaussian white
noise with variance Dϕ . For Dϕ = 0 the chaser moves
on a straight line in the direction initially chosen ϕ = ϕi ,
whereas for Dϕ > 0 it performs a persistent random walk.
We assume here random switching between the run
and reorientation phases to be given by a dichotomous
Markov process. The durations of the different phases,
tr and tt , are exponentially distributed with an average
run time τr and an average stopping time τt .
To gain insight in the dynamics of the chasing motion,
we performed simulations of the motion of a collection
of chasers (Fig. 1). At time t = 0 the chaser particles
are placed at an angle θ0 and distance d0 from the target
placed at the origin, xT = 0. Each chaser starts with a
run with initial heading given by Eq. 1. Timescales are
set by the tumbling time τt , velocities are normalized by
the chaser velocity vC and distances by vC τt .
To characterize the motion of chasers, we numerically
evaluate the average catching time Tc and the spatial dis-

FIG. 2. Catching time Tc (a,c,e) and maximum dispersion
2
σmax
(b,d,f) versus τr /τt for different orientation errors 
(a,b), target radius S (c,d) and angular noise Dϕ (e,f); in2
sets show the effective diffusion coefficient Deff = σmax
/tmax .
Default parameters: N = 104 , θ0 = π,  = 0.2, d0 = 1000,
τt = 1, vC = 1, S = 1, Dϕ = 0.

persion in chaser positions, σ 2 (t) = h(xC (t))2 i−hxC (t)i2 .
The dispersion exhibits different regimes over time (Fig.
1, [15]): an initial diffusive spread, where σ 2 (t) increases
roughly linearly, is followed by a transition to a stationary state, where σ 2 (t) assumes a constant value.
We then evaluated the average catching time Tc , the
2
maximum dispersion during the catching process σmax
,
2
and the initial effective diffusion Deff = σmax /tmax with
tmax being the time of maximum dispersion. When varying the ratio of run to tumble time τr /τt , we observe that
2
Tc is minimal for an optimal value of τr /τt (Fig. 2). σmax
also exhibits a minimum for zero or a finite value of the
run time τr . This behavior can be understood intuitively
as follows: for short run times τr , the chaser reorients frequently, allowing it to follow accurately the target; the
frequent reorientations however slow the chaser down.
For long run times on the other end, the chaser has a
high probability to miss the target due to orientation
errors, leading to large displacements away from the target. When varying the rotational diffusion of the chaser
Dϕ , we find that for τr > 1/Dϕ the chaser “forgets” its
initial direction during each run and the catching time
sharply increases, while for short run times the catching time and chaser dispersion are unchanged (Fig. 2).
Because rotational diffusion then essentially introduces a
maximum value of τr above which the catching process
becomes undirected, we focus on the limit Dϕ → 0 in the
following.

3
a

b

the gradient operator acting on the x dependency of
pr (x, ϕ), and the time dependency of pr and pt is implicitly implied. By deriving moment equations from Eqs.
2-3 (Supp. Mat), we find that the average chaser velocity towards the target relaxes in a time τr τt /(τr + τt ) to
the stationary value

y

y

x

x

2

vC τr e− 2
,
hvi =
τr + τt
FIG. 3. Limit cases of the chaser motion. (a) For small
enough runs and away from the target, the chaser undergoes
a nearly one-dimensional motion. (b) For large runs and close
to the target, the chaser moves around the target and has a
fixed probability of hitting the target at each run.

(4)

while the chaser dispersion σ 2 (t) = Deff t is predicted
to increase linearly in time with the effective diffusion
coefficient


2 2
τt2
2vC
τr
−2
)e
.
(5)
1 − (1 −
Deff =
τr + τt
(τr + τt )2
2v 2 τ 2 τ 2

To understand the origin of the optimal behavior, we
note that two regimes emerge from the analysis of numerical simulations depending on the ratio between the
average run length and the distance to the target (Fig.
3). For vc τr  |xC | (large distances and short runs),
the chasing motion is dominated by a slow effective drift
towards the target. For vc τr & |xC | (small distances and
large runs), the chasers approach the vicinity of the target and the catching process is primarily dominated by
the probability of hitting the target within a single run.
The total catching time is then the sum of the time to
approach the target (first regime), and the time to catch
it (second regime). A visualization of the catching process for different average run times is provided in the
Supplementary Material [15].
Based on these observations, we start by considering
the limit of short runs with chasers positioned far from
the target with the initial distance d0  S. We assume
here, without loss of generality due to rotational symmetry, that the chaser initial position is along the x axis,
xc (t = 0) = −d0 ex . The chaser then follows a nearly
one-dimensional motion along the x-direction, such that
the desired chaser heading angle is small (ϕ ≈ 0). The
system can be described in terms of the spatial probability density functions (PDFs) for chaser particles in the
run and tumble phase pr (x, ϕ) and pt (x) [16], where the
probability distribution is conditioned to the initial position and angle (x0 , ϕ0 ). The general evolution equations
for the PDFs in the frame of the target read
∂t pr (x, ϕ) = − ur .∇pr (x, ϕ) −

1
1
∂t pt (x) = − pt (x) +
τt
τr

Z

1
1
pr (x, ϕ) + T (ϕ)pt (x)
τr
τt
(2)
2π

For  = 0, Deff = (τrC+τrt )t3 : in that limit, the diffusion is
only due to the stochasticity in run and tumble times, and
for large run time the diffusion constant decreases with
τr , since each additional run introduces dispersion by
generating different run lengths between different chasers
(a zero run time also minimizes the diffusion, but the
catching time then diverges). For  6= 0, there is an optimal run time minimizing the diffusion coefficient, given
for  → 0 by τr /τt = 1/: large runs indeed increase dispersion, because they tend to amplify initial errors in the
heading angle.
The average approach time to the target is given in
that drift-dominated limit by
Tc(1) =

d0 − S
2

r
e− 2
vC τrτ+τ
t

,

(6)

which agrees with numerical simulations (Fig. S1).
Therefore, in the limit of small runs, increasing the run
time is always favorable.
We now discuss the opposite limit when the target is
sufficiently close to the chaser to be reached within a single run (Fig. 3B). We assume that the probability distribution of the chaser position at tumble, pt , has relaxed
to a steady state. The steady-state distribution is then
isotropic. At lowest order in the orientation error , the
chaser-target distance R = |xc | is distributed according
R
to an exponential distribution, pt (R) = τr1vc e− τr vc , with
the corresponding standard deviation of chaser position
σstat = τr vc . To evaluate the catching time, we note that
the probability of hitting the target in one run, after each
tumble, is given by
Z ∞
phit =
dRpt (R)pdir (R)preach (R)
(7)
R=0

dϕpr (x, ϕ)

(3)

0

where ur = vC uC (ϕ) is
 the2 drift velocity in the run
ϕ
1
phase, T (ϕ) = √2π
exp − 2
is the probability of re2
orientation in the ϕ direction after a tumble, ∇ denotes

where pdir (R) is the probability of choosing a direction
towards the target, and preach (R) is the probability of
performing a sufficiently long run to actually reach the
target. We start by evaluating pdir . The chaser is heading
towards the target provided that the detection error is

4
2500

Tc

2000

2
σmax

105
(1)

(2)

Tc +Tc

Def f Tc
2
σstat

104
1500
103
1000

a

500

10

b

102
0

10

1

10

2

100

101

τr
c

d

simulation
∼ −1/3

τ∗

102

1/3

10−1

10−1

100

ang. error 

τ∗

e

100

avg. tumble time τt

f

102

simulation
∼ S 1/3

101

simulation
1/3

∼ d0

1

10−2

2
FIG. 5.
Catching time Tc and maximum dispersion σmax
4
versus 1 . Simulation parameters: N = 10 , τt = 1, vC = 1,
0 = 0.1, S = 1, d0 = 300 and θ0 = π.

101
10−2

10

simulation
∼ τt

101

102

102

τr

101
10−1

100

101

102

103

initial distance d0

target size S

104

FIG. 4. Comparison of simulation results and theory: (a)
(1)
2
with
Tc and analytical prediction Tc = Tc + Tc2 ; (b) σmax
2
Deff Tc for the “quasi-1D” approach and σstat = (τr vc )2 for
the “single run” encounter (right). Parameters: N = 104 ,
 = 0.1, S = 1, d0 = 500. Scaling of the optimal run time τr∗
minimizing Tc , (c) with the angular error , (d) the average
tumble time τt , (e) the target size S and (f) the initial distance
d. The solid lines indicate the predicted dependence from
theory. Simulation parameters: N = 104 , vT = 0.1, and
unless parameters are varied, τt = 1, vC = 1,  = 0.2, S = 1,
d0 = 500 and θ0 = π.

S
sufficiently small, |η| < R
. As a result, the probability of
choosing the right direction by a favorable choice of error
η is given by

Z
pdir (R) = 2

R

S
√

2

2

0

e−x
dx √
π

(8)

To obtain preach (R), we note that (1) at lowest order in
S
R , the run time has to to be larger than tcatch = R/vC
to reach the target, and (2) run times are taken out of an
−R/τr vC
exponential distribution; therefore, preach = e√
.
2S
1
Overall, we then obtain phit ' 2 M ( τr vC  ) with
R∞
M (x) = 0 dy e−y Erf(x/y) [17], and the average catching time from the vicinity of the target reads
Tc(2) '

2(τr + τt )
√

M ( τr v2S
)
C

.

(9)

Therefore, in the limit of large runs, decreasing the run
time is favorable, an opposite behavior to the short run
time limit discussed before.
The total time to reach the target, Tc , is the sum of
the time required to approach the target (Eq. 6) and the
(1)
(2)
time to catch it in its vicinity (Eq. 9), Tc = Tc + Tc .

The resulting analytic prediction accounts very well for
the catching time obtained by simulations (Fig. 4a). To
estimate the optimal run time, we look for the minimum
of the total catching time Tc . We find that for intermediate orientation error √dvS τ    1, the optimal run
c t
time τr∗ scales as [15]

1/3
dS
∗
τr ∼
τt
(10)
vc2 
The condition can be rewritten as an optimal run length
1
τr∗ vC ∼ (dSτt vc /) 3 , scaling with the geometric mean of
the three lengths of the problem. The predicted scaling
is verified by numerical simulations (Fig. 4c-f). The
intermittent directed chaser has an optimal run length
strikingly different from the optimal persistence length of
a random searcher, which was found to be of the order of
the system size [14]. It further implies that performing
short length runs is better for small target sizes, when
the distance to the target is close, and for short tumbles.
The optimal run length is also crucially dependent on
the orientation error: quite naturally, smaller orientation
errors allow to perform larger runs.
In the minimal model discussed so far, we have assumed that the reorientation error  is independent of
the distance to the target d(t) = |xc (t)|. For directional
sensing however, the detection accuracy of the target direction is likely to decrease with d(t). To account for this,
we numerically investigated an extension of our model
by assuming that an arbitrary error function (d) can
be approximated by a linear function (d) ≈ 0 + 1 d
with 1 > 0. Simulations results for a finite 1 show the
same qualitative behavior as the minimal model (Fig.
5): an optimal run time minimizing the catching time
still exists. When increasing 1 , the optimal run time
minimizing the dispersion moves towards zero, similar to
increasing the overall constant error  (Fig. 2b).
We have also considered the situation where the target
moves balistically with a finite, but small, speed vT < vC ,
and found that the same qualitative findings hold [15].
A crucial difference for a finite target speed vT is the
existence of a regime where the catching time Tc diverges,

5
occurring above a threshold detection error  or for short
run time τr [15].
The robustness of our qualitative results to these modifications suggests that the minimal model introduced
here exhibits physical properties which will be preserved
for more realistic description of cells moving with intermittent motion. Developmental processes require cell migration occurring at the scale of the organism [18]: it
would be interesting to experimentally test whether migrating cells operate near the optimum value predicted
by Eq. 10 in this context. Recently, Minina et al. [3]
have analyzed in detail guided migration of progenitor
cell in vivo. Based on their experimental results they suggest that progenitor cells might adaptively decrease their
run length by downregulating receptor signaling close to
the source of the relevant chemokine. A disruption of
this control mechanism for run length was shown to hinder precise arrival of cells at the target. These empirical
findings are confirmed by our theoretical work, in particular by the predicted decrease in optimal run length with
decreasing distance to the target (Fig. 4f). This indeed
suggests that PG cells have evolved complex chemotactic
strategies for precise spatial and temporal arrival at target sites, to ensure successful development of the embryo.
We expect that further research combining new quantitative experiments and more elaborate theoretical models
will provide important insights into the mechanism and
function of directed cell migration in living systems.
From a more general point of view with respect to theory of search processes, our simple but generic model can
be viewed as an investigation of optimal directed search,
which is fundamentally different from the random search
processes predominantly studied up to date.
Acknowledgements We thank Ewa Paluch for bringing
cellular run and tumble motion to our attention and for
stimulating discussions, and Vasily Zaburdaev for helpful comments on the manuscript. PR gratefully acknowledges the hospitality of the Kavli Institute for Theoretical
Physics (UCSB). This research was supported in part by
the National Science Foundation under Grant No. NSF
PHY11-25915.

[1] M. Polin, I. Tuval, K. Drescher, J. P. Gollub, and R. E.
Goldstein, Science 325, 487 (2009), PMID: 19628868.
[2] M. Reichman-Fried, S. Minina, and E. Raz, Developmental Cell 6, 589 (2004).
[3] S. Minina, M. Reichman-Fried, and E. Raz, Current Biology 17, 1164 (2007).
[4] H. Blaser, M. Reichman-Fried, I. Castanon, K. Dumstrei, F. L. Marlow, K. Kawakami, L. Solnica-Krezel, C.P. Heisenberg, and E. Raz, Developmental Cell 11, 613
(2006).
[5] E. Theveneau, L. Marchant, S. Kuriyama, M. Gull,
B. Moepps, M. Parsons, and R. Mayor, Developmental
Cell 19, 39 (2010), PMID: 20643349.
[6] A. A. Potdar, J. Lu, J. Jeon, A. M. Weaver, and P. T.
Cummings, Annals of biomedical engineering 37, 230
(2009), PMID: 18982450 PMCID: PMC3586332.
[7] K. F. Swaney, C.-H. Huang, and P. N. Devreotes, Annual
Review of Biophysics 39, 265 (2010), PMID: 20192768.
[8] H. Levine and W.-J. Rappel, Physics Today 66, 24
(2013).
[9] R. G. Endres and N. S. Wingreen, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 105, 15749 (2008).
[10] M. Ueda and T. Shibata, Biophysical Journal 93, 11
(2007).
[11] M. Doitsidou, M. Reichman-Fried, J. Stebler, M. Kprunner, J. Drries, D. Meyer, C. V. Esguerra, T. Leung, and
E. Raz, Cell 111, 647 (2002).
[12] V. Méndez, D. Campos, and F. Bartumeus, in Stochastic
Foundations in Movement Ecology (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014), Springer Series in Synergetics, pp. 177–
205.
[13] O. Benichou, M. Coppey, M. Moreau, P.-H. Suet, and
R. Voituriez, Physical Review Letters 94, 198101 (2005),
copyright (C) 2009 The American Physical Society;
Please report any problems to prola@aps.org.
[14] V. Tejedor, R. Voituriez, and O. Benichou, Physical Review Letters 108, 088103 (2012).
[15] URL will be provided by the publisher.
[16] H. G. Othmer, S. Dunbar, and W. Alt, Journal of Mathematical Biology 26, 263 (1988).
[17] M (x) is a monotonously increasing function of its argument and has well defined limits: M (x) ' √2π x log x1 for
x → 0, and M (x) ' 1 for x → ∞.
[18] B. E. Richardson and R. Lehmann, Nature reviews.
Molecular cell biology 11, 37 (2010), PMID: 20027186.

