arXiv:1503.00908v2 [physics.bio-ph] 20 Mar 2015

A model for calcium-mediated coupling between the
membrane activity and the clock gene expression in the
neurons of the suprachiasmatic nucleus
J. M. Casado and M. Morillo
Area de Fı́sica Teórica. Universidad de Sevilla
Apartado Correos 1085, 41080 Sevilla (Spain)

Abstract
Rhythms in electrical activity in the membrane of cells in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN) are crucial for the function of the circadian timing system,
which is characterized by the expression of the so-called clock genes. Intracellular Ca2+ ions seem to connect, at least in part, the electrical activity of
SCN neurons with the expression of clock genes. In this paper, we introduce
a simple mathematical model describing the linking of membrane activity to
the transcription of one gene by means of a feedback mechanism based on
the dynamics of intracellular calcium ions.
Keywords: Circadian rhythms, Hindmarsh-Rose model, Goodwin model,
intracellular calcium dynamics
1. Introduction
Circadian rhythms arise from the cooperative action of a number of endogenous biological oscillators generating daily patterns of many physiological and behavioral processes that persist even in the absence of the forcing
provided by the external light-dark cycle. The master circadian clock in
mammalians is located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), a neuronal
structure located in the anterior hypothalamus. The cells of the SCN behave as a set of cooperative autonomous oscillators with slightly distributed
frequencies yielding a global circadian (∼24-hour period) rhythm. Thus the
basic oscillatory mechanism leading to the emergence of circadian rhythms
has an intracellular origin that relies on the negative self-regulation of gene
expression through transcriptional/translational feedback loops. In the last
Preprint submitted to Elsevier

March 23, 2015

few years, a number of genes involved in such a regulatory mechanism has
been identified [1].
On the other hand, the neurons in the SCN show a characteristic firing
pattern that changes dramatically with the circadian cycle. They are thought
to encode the time of the day by adjusting their firing frequency to high rates
during the day and lower ones at night. Different studies carried out in recent
times both in Drosophila and in mammals suggest that the electrical activity
of SCN cells provides the driving of the molecular clockwork. Also, keeping
the SCN cells within an appropriate voltage range may be required for the
generation of circadian rhythmicity of clock gene expression at the single
cell level [1]. Thus, a fundamental question in circadian biology is how the
electrical activity may regulate clock gene expression and, conversely, how
this latter process may alter the electrical activity in SCN neurons.
The evidence accumulated in recent years suggests that the effect of the
electrical activity on clock gene expression by SCN cells is probably mediated,
at least in part, by Ca2+ ions. In fact, a close relationship between electrical
activity and Ca2+ levels has been observed. Resting levels of Ca2+ in SCN
neurons exhibit a circadian rhythm that has been detected by using a calcium
sensitive dye. During the peak in firing at midday, SCN neurons show resting
Ca2+ levels of around 150 mM, but these levels drop to about 75 mM during
times of inactivity. The action potential itself is an important source of Ca2+
in the SCN, regulating Ca2+ influx into the soma through the opening of
voltage-sensitive calcium channels [1]. This feature has been shown most
clearly by a recent work in which a Ca2+ levels and the firing of the SCN
neurons were measured simultaneously [2]. Data from this study show that
driving the frequency of action potentials in the SCN neurons to 5-10 Hz
(daytime levels) induces a rise in somatic Ca2+ levels. This effect can be
attenuated by the application of a L-type Ca2+ channel blocker [2].
In addition to the relative contribution of Ca2+ influx to intracellular calcium levels, SCN neurons also have a rhythmically regulated reservoir of calcium that is not driven by membrane events. Both processes, inflow/outflow
of calcium across the cell membrane and fixation/release of Ca2+ from the
calcium store, cooperate to generate intracellular Ca2+ oscillations that seem
to be crucial in driving a robust rhythm in gene expression. Indeed, rhythms
in Ca2+ levels, with its peak occurring during the day, seem to be a general
feature of circadian systems [1].
It turns out that the oscillatory behavior of the intracellular concentration
of Ca2+ , and those of the variables of the genetic network as well, have a
2

much slower time scale than that of the variables involved in the generation
of action potentials by the cell membrane. Thus, from a theoretical point
of view, the problem is to understand how fast variables can control the
dynamics of slower ones and vice versa.
A conductance based model of spiking in cells of SCN has recently been
presented in [3, 4]. In those works, the huge variety of ionic currents that
contribute to the membrane excitability was modeled in terms of the sodium,
potassium and leakage currents characteristic of the Hodgkin-Huxley formalism plus a specific calcium current. They describe the periodic alternation
between silent and excited states of the neuronal membrane in terms of direct
and inverse Hopf bifurcations induced by the externally imposed time dependence of the ionic conductances. Nonetheless, in those works, no attempt is
made to link this driving to changes in the intracellular level of either Ca2+
or of any other substance.
The aim of this paper is to suggest a plausible mechanism linking the
electrical activity in the cell membrane to the circadian rhythms of the genes
expressions, taking into account the two very different time scales associated
to the membrane voltage (fast) and the genetic (slow) processes. The basic
ingredient is to admit that the intracellular level of Ca2+ controls both the
firing frequency and the transcription of a clock gene. The control of the
firing frequency is achieved by the free Ca2+ concentration that, in turn, is
controlled by the Ca2+ in the cell cytoplasm coming from reservoirs. The
reservoir Ca2+ concentration varies in a much longer time scale than the intracellular Ca2+ one. At the same time, the intracellular Ca2+ concentration
evolves slowly compared to the other variables characterizing the membrane
electrical activity. On the other hand, the control on the circadian variables
is established by assuming that the activation of the clock gene expression is
proportional to the free Ca2+ concentration.
2. Ca2+ controlled electrical activity
We take the electrical activity taking place in the neuron membrane to
be described by the two-dimensional system
ẋ = y − ax3 + bx2 + q − sz,
ẏ = c − dx2 − y.

(1)
(2)

The variable x represents the (dimensionless) voltage across the cell membrane and y is a recovering variable that describes the currents restoring the
3

polarity of the membrane after the emission of an action potential, q is a control parameter. In the first of these equations, z stands for the free calcium
concentration inside the cell, whose dynamics is supposed to be governed by
the reactions
k(x)
k2
k3
Z −→
ø,
ø −→ Z
ZR −→
Z.
(3)
The first equation describes the outflow of Ca2+ from the cell whereas the
second one expresses the inflow of these same ions while the voltage-sensitive
calcium channels are open during the membrane activation. Thus, the rate
of this process is made dependent of the voltage. The last reaction describes
the release of calcium ions from a intracellular reservoir described by the
variable zR . The changing in Ca2+ levels induced by the reservoir seems to
be a critical part of the output pathway by which intracellular processes drive
rhythms in neural activity [1]. The kinetic of calcium ions are completed by
the reactions
µk4
µk5
Z −→ ZR
ZR −→ ø
(4)
where the first reaction describes the subtraction by the reservoir of free
calcium ions and the second one corresponds to the direct loss of calcium
ions by the reservoir. This set of reactions allows us to write the system of
differential equations for the variables z and zR
ż = (k(x) − k2 z + k3 zR ),
żR = µ(k4 z − k5 zR ).

(5)
(6)

If we admit that the temporal scale for the evolution of the reservoir is
much slower that the corresponding to the free calcium (µ  ), we have
żR = 0,

⇒

zR = Γ,

(7)

Γ being constant on the  time scale. Thus, introducing this constant in Eq.
6 and assuming that k(x) = k1 x, we can write
ẋ = y − ax3 + bx2 + q − sz,
ẏ = c − dx2 − y,
ż = (k1 x − k2 z + g),

(8)
(9)
(10)

with g = k3 Γ. This three-dimensional dynamical system is formally identical
to the Hindmarsh-Rose (HR) neuronal model [10]. Here, however, the slow
4

adaptation variable z introduced by these authors is reinterpreted as the
intracellular free Ca2+ concentration, whose level controls the much faster
spiking variables x and y. The HR model shares essential qualitative features
with several conductance-based models of excitable cells giving rise to squarewave bursting [5, 6, 7]. All those models involve the interplay between a stable
branch of stationary points and a limit cycle through a saddle middle branch
in the equilibrium curve. By inducing the periodical transitions between
these two coexisting attractors by means of a slow control variable, this
dynamical mechanism allows the description of periodical silent and active
phases in the neuron behavior. This same dynamical mechanism has recently
been invoiced to interpret some experimental findings related to crustacean
patterns generators [8].
The HR system with   1 has two very different time scales, one of them
associated with a fast subsystem (x and y variables) and the other associated
with the dynamics of a slow subsystem (z variable). In fact,   1 implies
that in the time scale in which both x and y vary, z can be considered as
a constant. Thus, calling sz = γ we are led to analyze the dynamics of the
two-dimensional system
ẋ = y − ax3 + bx2 + q − γ,
ẏ = c − dx2 − y,

(11)

in terms of the values of the parameter γ. The equilibrium values x∗ of this
two-dimensional system obey a cubic equation resulting from the crossing of
both nullclines associated with Eq.(11),
ax3 + (d − b)x2 − q − c + γ = 0.

(12)

Several regimes can be found as the parameter γ is varied. As seen in Fig.1
for small negative values of γ the only attractor is an equilibrium point (a
stable focus) with non-zero x∗ -values. As γ increases, the system undergoes a
Hopf bifurcation rendering unstable the branch of equilibrium points giving
rise to a stable limit cycle corresponding to voltage spikes (point B in Fig.1).
For still larger γ values, the cubic equation has two unstable values coexisting with a stable one. Furthermore, the limit cycle disappears through a
homoclinic bifurcation when it collides with the unstable branch of x∗ (point
A in the same figure). Notice the rather small interval of γ values for which
the stable limit cycle coexists with the stable equilibrium point appearing
5

through a saddle-node bifurcation. For still larger values of γ, just a stable
stationary branch remains.
Following a technique pioneered by J. Rinzel some decades ago [12] a
rather useful picture of the HR model dynamics as given by Eq. (10) can
be obtained by projecting its orbits onto the xz-plane, and superimposing it
with the bifurcation diagram for the fast subsystem described by Eq. (11).
In Fig.2, an enlarged version of the coexistence region is presented including
the nullcline of the slow subsystem in (10) x = (k2 z − g)/k1 (the red dotdashed line). The solid black thin line in this figure corresponds to the
bursting oscillations depicted in red in Fig. 1. This curve has been obtained
from the x(t) and z(t) obtained by numerically integrating the full system
of differential equations (10). It corresponds to the projection on the x − z
plane of the global three dimensional attractor.
4

x∗ = x ∗ (γ ), x

3
2

B

1
0
A

−1
−2
−3
−15

−10

−5

γ, z

0

Figure 1: Z−shaped steady state curve x∗ = x∗ (γ) for the fast subsystem (Eq.11).

The stable branch is depicted by a continuous line whereas the dashed lines represent unstable branches of equilibria. The limit cycle appearing at γ = −11.293 and
ending at the homoclinic bifurcation at A appears in gray. The projection of the
global attractor of the full three-variable system (in red) has been superimposed to
this diagram. Parameter values are a = 1.0, b = 3.0, c = 1.0, d = 5.0, q = 0.3, k1 =
1.0, k2 = 0.1 and g = 1.33.

As one can observe in Fig. 2, when z slowly moves to the left (notice
that ż < 0 under the z−nullcline), the x variable evolves along the branch
of stable equilibria (C → D) until it comes to an end at a saddle-node
bifurcation (point D). At this point it is forced to jump to the limit cycle
6

2

x∗ = x ∗ (γ ), x

1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5

A

−1

D

−1.5
−2
−0.5

C
0

γ, z

0.5

1

Figure 2: Enlarged version of coexistence region depicted in Fig. 1. The homo-

clinic bifurcation occurs at A and the fold bifurcation at D. The red dot-dashed
line corresponds to the z−nullcline. The solid black thin line corresponds to the
bursting oscillations depicted in red in Fig. 1.

by crossing the z−nullcline and afterwards it is forced to move to the right
(now ż > 0) while performing fast oscillations. This oscillatory behavior ends
when the limit cycle disappears through the homoclinic bifurcation at A. At
this point, the x variable must jump to the stable branch of equilibria and
the whole process repeats itself.
The temporal evolution of x(t) and z(t) has been depicted in Fig.3. As
we can see, the free running x(t) variable alternates periodic episodes of fast
spiking with silent epochs of much slower evolution. On the other hand,
z(t) evolves in the slower time scale. In this case, the temporal scale of the
transitions between the silent and the spiking states of the neuron coincides
with that of the z variable. Each period of the z oscillations corresponds to
a cycle characterized by a rise of the calcium level associated with the burst
of spikes and followed by a silent phase in which the concentration of Ca2+
slowly decays.
Note that our model describes the membrane activity without explicitly
incorporating the ionic currents. Nonetheless, our equations show a bifurcation structure close to that of more complicated conductance models [4].

7

3. Coupling electrical and molecular activities
On the genetic side of the model, we have considered the transcription
of only one clock gene. Thus the variables of interest are the intracellular
concentration of clock gene mRNA, the corresponding level of a clock protein
and that of a transcriptional inhibitor whose action closes the self-regulatory
feedback loop. All these variables obey the differential equations of the wellknown Goodwin model [9].
To link the membrane electrical activity to the clock gene expression, we
assume that the level of free calcium acts as an activator of the transcription
of the mRNA. Then, our complete model is embodied in the six-variable
system of differential equations
ẋ = y − ax3 + bx2 − sz + q + pY,
ẏ = c − dx2 − y,
ż = (k1 x − k2 z + g),

 αz
− kX ,
Ẋ = 
1 + Zh
Ẏ = (kf X − kY ),
Ż = (kf Y − kZ)

(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)

where X, Y and Z describe the clock mRNA, the clock protein and the
inhibitor of the transcription, respectively. Throughout this work we will
take a = 1, b = 3, c = 1, d = 5, s = 1, h = 10, k = 2, kf = 2 and, α = 8.
Note that the above equations contemplate a direct feedback mechanism by
which the molecular clock is able to drive the electrical activity of the cell
membrane through the term pY appearing in the voltage equation. At the
same time, the variable z representing the free Ca2+ concentration inside the
cell, influences the clock gene concentration X through a Hill-like term. For
more elaborated circadian models involving several clock genes [13, 14] the
coupling between the membrane and genetic activities could be formulated
along the lines of our methodology by including terms describing the Ca2+
activation of the different gene expressions.
We first study the case with no feedback from the genetic variables on
the membrane ones (p = 0). In Fig. 3 we have depicted the temporal
behavior of the voltage variable and that of the intracellular concentration
of free calcium as well as the evolution of all the variables of the genetic
subsystem. The parameter  sets the spiking frequency of the system so that
8

2

x

1
0
−1

z, X, Y, Z

−2
4

5

6

5

6

7

8

9

10

7

8

9

10

1
0.5
0
4

!t

Figure 3: Square-wave bursting of the model with p = 0 as a function of (dimen-

sionless) time t (upper panel).The evolution of X(t) (black), Y (t) (blue) and Z(t)
(red) as well as the temporal behavior of z(t) (red thick line) have been depicted in
the lower panel. Parameter values are  = 0.001, p = 0, q = 0.3, k1 = 1.0, k2 = 0.8
and g = 1.23.

the smaller it is, the higher the frequency of spiking achieved during the
bursting phase. The value of q is critical to the character and persistence of
these bursts. In order to save computation time we have set the values of
 small but with no intention to fit quantitatively the experimental values
for the neurons of the SCN. One could interpret the behavior observed in
Fig. 3 by noting that the start of a burst of spikes activates the inflow of
Ca2+ , thus increasing its intracellular level until it forces the membrane back
to its resting electrical state. On the other hand, the slow oscillation in the
intracellular calcium concentration forces a slightly delayed oscillation in the
level of mRNA (black line in the lower panel), leading to an additional delay
in the evolution of the protein level (blue line) as well as in the inhibitor (red
line). Note that there is no modulation of the bursts amplitude due to the
fact that we have chosen p = 0.
Now we turn to the case with p 6= 0. As we can see in Fig.4, the existence
of the pY feedback term in the first equation of the model generates a relatively complex temporal modulation of the voltage variable along the day.
Again, the genetic variables oscillate at the slower time scale of the voltage
variable and with a certain dephasing among them. As we can see in Fig.4,
the level of the clock gene mRNA peaks at the start of the silent phase of
9

X, Y, Z

x, z

the neuron that takes place during the daylight hours (see Fig.5) while it
decreases during the night.

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

ϵt
Figure 4: Autonomous behavior of x(t) and z(t) for the model with p 6= 0 (upper

panel). The evolution of X(t) (black), Y (t) (blue) and Z(t) (red) have been
depicted in the lower panel. Parameter values are k1 = 4, k2 = 0.6, q = 0.5 and
p = 12.5.

In Fig.5 we present the autonomous behavior of the voltage variable in
terms of the Zeitgeber Time (ZT) during a whole day. The time origin for
the data plotted in this figure has been shifted to coincide with that of the
data reported by Belle and coworkers for the forcing of per1-containing SNC
neurons with a sequence of equal periods of light and darkness [4]. The results
presented here are qualitatively close to those experimental findings although
some differences in timing remains. From ZT0 to ZT2 approximately, the
neuron is firing, whereas from ZT4 to ZT10, it has been deeply depolarized
and has become silent. The value chosen for p in the equations of the model
affects the period of depolarization. For p = 13.5, the spiking behavior starts
again at ZT10 and lasts until ZT18, when the neuron becomes hyperpolarized
and its activity ceases. This silent period increases as the parameter k2
decreases. Finally, at Z22 the neuron starts firing again. The intracellular
concentration of calcium ions, on the other hand, rises during the day, peaks
in the evening and early night and decreases to a minimum along the late
night hours. Note that the spiking frequency changes with the ZT value.

10

x
2

4

6

8

10

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

z

0

ZT
Figure 5: Autonomous behavior of the voltage variable (upper panel) and that of

the concentration of intracellular calcium (lower panel) during a whole day. The
silent phase characterized by a strongly depolarized membrane appears through
an inverse Hopf bifurcation and ends at a direct bifurcation of the same kind.
Parameter’s values are k1 = 4, k2 = 0.6, q = 0.5, and p = 13.5. The time origin
has been shifted to coincide with that used in [4].

4. Concluding remarks
Experimental evidence indicates that the link between electrical activity
and clock gene expression in SCN cells is provided, at least in part, by the intracellular dynamics of Ca2+ ions associated with the existence of a reservoir
of these ions inside the cell. The nature and localization of this intracellular
reservoir is unknown at present although it seems that this role is played by
the endoplasmic and sarcoplasmic reticulae [15].
In this work we have presented a mathematical model aiming to explore
a simple dynamical mechanism for the driving of clock genes by the firing
activity of neurons. Some work carried out in the last few years suggests the
existence of a control of the firing frequency by clock gene expression, but
very little is known about the mechanisms by which genetic oscillations are
able to drive rhythms in neural activity [1]. So, in this work we have explored
this issue by assuming that the protein produced by the transcription of the
clock gene modulates the neuronal firing. Similar results would have been
obtained by using the mRNA variable or the inhibitor to control the neuronal
firing. The role played by a calcium reservoir has been taken into account by
11

considering the kinetics of calcium fixation and its release by the reservoir.
It seems possible to extend the main ideas that we have elaborated here to
link the genetic and membrane variables of the SNC using a conductance
based model for the membrane activity as well as a dynamics of more than
one clock gene. Work along these lines is in progress.
References
[1] C. S. Colwell, Nature Neuroscience 12 (2011) 553.
[2] R. Irwin, C. Allen, J. Neurosci. 27 (2007) 11748.
[3] C. K. Shin, D. B. Forger, J. Biol. Rhythms 22 445 (2007).
[4] M. D. C. Belle, C. O. Diekman, D. B. Forger, H. D. Piggins, Science
326 (2009) 281.
[5] T. R. Chay, J. Keizer, Biophys. J. 42 (1983) 181.
[6] R. J. Butera, J. Rinzel, J. C. Smith, J. Neurophysiol. 82 (1999) 382.
[7] D. Golomb, C. Yue, Y. Yaari, J. Neurophysiol. 96 (2006) 1912.
[8] B. Marin, R. D. Pinto, R. C. Elson, E. Colli, Phys. Rev. E 90 (2014)
042718.
[9] A. Woller, D. Gonze, T. Erneux, Phys. Rev. E 87 (2013) 032722.
[10] J. L. Hindmarsh, R. M. Rose, Nature 296 (1982) 162; Proc. R. Soc.
London B 221 (1984) 87.
[11] S. Bernard, D. Gonze, B. Cajavek, H. Herzel, A. Kramer, PLOS Comp.
Biol. 3 (2007) 0667.
[12] J. Rinzel, in Ordinary and Partial Differential Equations, eds. B. D.
Sleemon and R. J. Jarvis, Springer, New York, 1985.
[13] S. Becker-Weinmann, J. Wolf, H. Herzel, and A. Kramer, Biophys. J. 87
(2004) 3023.
[14] J.-C. Leloup and A. Goldbeter, PNAS 100 (2003) 7051.
[15] D. Noble and Y. Rudy, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 359 (2001) 1127.
12

