Hox	  genes	  underlie	  metazoan	  development,	  but	  what	  controls	  them?
Raffaele	  Di	  Giacomo1°,	  Bruno	  Maresca2°	  and	  Jeffrey	  H.	  Schwartz3*	  
1Department

of Mechanical and Process engineering 5	  (D-MAVT), Swiss Federal Institute of

Technology (ETH), Zurich, CH, Switzerland
2

Dept. of Pharmacy, Division of BioMedicine, University of Salerno, Italy.

3

Departments of Anthropology and History and Philosophy of Science, University of Pittsburgh,

USA. 	  
°

These authors contributed equally to this work. *Corresponding author: Email: jhs@pitt.edu 	  

Abstract 	  Although metazoan development is conceived as resulting from gene regulatory networks	  (GRNs) controlled by Hox genes, a better analogy is computer architecture: i.e., a task	  accomplished in sequential steps linked to an external referent that “counts” each step. A	  developmental “step” equals the expression of genes in specific cells at specific times and telomeres represent external “counters” wherein “counting” is a function of telomere	  shortening at each cell
division that permits the sequential expression of Hox genes and,	  ultimately, complex form.
Metazoan development thus best resembles a Turing machine,	  which could be used to model the
development of any metazoan.
Key Words: telomerase, telomere shortening, Hox gene expression, metazoan development,	  Turing machine	  
Introduction In metazoan development complexity emerges regardless of taxic differences in
cell	  number and growth rates of different tissues and organs. To explain this, Wolpert (Wolpert
1969) suggested that specific cells secrete a graded concentration of morphogens such that, de-

pending on the distance of target genes from a morphogen source, their differential	  expression
above and below certain thresholds generates a particular spatial patterning of cell	  differentiation. Support of this model was sought in Bicoid, which is a homeodomain-containing	  
transcription factor (TF) that in Drosophila embryos determines the anteroposterior axis	  
(Wartlick, et al. 2009), and controls activation of the segmentation gene hunchback anteriorly
(Okabe-Oho, et al. 2009; Schultz and Tautz 1995). By transmitting information across cells,
morphogens were seen as orchestrating the patterning of organismal structure by forming long	  
range gradients in which cells “learn” their relative spatial positions. Recently, Wolpert	  (Wolpert
2011) rejected this model. Since morphogen diffusion depends on a tissue’s three-dimensional
structure, including	  density and nature of cell-cell contacts, the binding of diffusible molecules to
receptors makes	  problematic determining effective morphogen concentrations. Moreover, since
the properties of morphogen gradients are affected by other molecules and change over time
(Yan and Lin 43 2009), pattern formation is affected pleiotropically (Wolpert 2007). Consequently, Wolpert (Wolpert 2011) (p. 364) concluded that “extracellular diffusion is not reliable
enough to specify positional information, and other mechanisms must be involved.” Instead, he
(Wolpert 2010) proposed that 1) stem cells may possess a mechanism that counts successive cell
divisions and 2) telomeres may be involved. We (Di Giacomo, et al. 2013) hypothesized that the
emergence of complex, metazoan structure was the result of first increasing telomere	  length, and
then shifting to a telomerase-negative cellular state in which telomeres shorten with	  each cell division, thereby creating a linearly changing reference point (i.e. an irreversible	  counting mechanism) that differentially exposes previously silenced Hox genes. The basic	  metazoan “Bauplan”
is, therefore, the consequence of a sequential, stepwise, time-and spacedependent, expression of
Hox genes inextricably linked to telomere shortening.	  Here we argue, since the metazoan

Bauplan is the consequence of a series of sequential steps performing a specific task with reference to an external point “counting” each step, that	  1) metazoan development is similar to computer architecture, and 2) the existence of an	  external counter implies that it can be conceived as
either a universal or a series of special Turing machines that can be used to model the development of any metazoan.
Telomeres	  In contrast to the linear chromosomes of eukaryote cells, the single, circular chromosome	  of prokaryote cells permits complete replication of its DNA with every cell division. For
some	  number of early post-zygotic mitotic divisions in lower and higher eukaryotic cells, initial
chromosome length is maintained because cells express the enzyme telomerase, which adds six	  
base-pair repeat sequences to the chromosomal ends. In higher eukaryotic cells, chromosomes	  
then begin to shorten because they down-regulate telomerase, becoming telomerase negative	  
(O'Hare and Delany 2005; Taylor and Delany 2000). In turn, the intrinsic mechanism of DNA
polymerase prevents complete replication of the lagging strand, resulting in shortening of its 3’
end. Consequently, with each cell division, one daughter cell retains a complete copy of the parental cell’s chromosome while the other receives a telomerically shortened chromosome, such
that the chromosomes of descendants of one cell lineage remain long, while those of	  descendants
of the other cell lineage continually shorten. Cell division thus generates a branching	  pattern	  
that	  re/lects	  the	  distribution	  of	  telomeres	  of	  varying	  length	  in	  different	  cells	  (fig. 1 above).
Further, as observed in four normal human diploid cells (Huffman, et al. 2000), the rate of telomere shortening is proportional to the 3’ overhangs, which are of differing	  lengths in different
adult tissues.
Hox	  gene	  expression	  Metazoan	  development	  requires	  expression	  of	  a	  /inely	  tuned	  genetic	  
program.	  Hox	  genes	  code	  for	  TFs	  that	  govern	  pattern	  formation	  along	  anteroposterior	  and	  

bilateral	  embryonic	  axes	  (Mallo,	  et	  al.	  2010)	  occur	  in	  clusters	  toward	  one	  of	  the	  chromo-­‐
somal	  telomeric	  regions,	  and	  their	  relative	  positions	  determine	  their	  differential	  expres-­‐
sion	  (Duboule	  1994).	  In	  embryos	  of	  genetically	  modi/ied	  mice,	  when	  Hox	  genes	  normally	  
expressed	  later	  in	  development	  are	  relocated	  nearer	  the	  telomeric	  extremity,	  they	  are	  ex-­‐
pressed	  earlier	  than	  those	  closer	  to	  the	  centromere	  (Tschopp	  and	  Duboule	  2011).	  In	  hu-­‐
mans,	  alteration	  of	  (partially	  identi/ied)	  repetitive	  sequences	  in	  subterlomeric	  regions	  re-­‐
sults	  in	  various	  teratological	  conditions	  (Heutink,	  et	  al.	  1994).	  Further,	  changes	  in	  the	  con-­‐
/iguration	  of	  a	  Hox	  gene	  cluster	  affect	  the	  transcriptional	  regulation	  of	  neighboring	  genes,	  
e.g.	  a	  mutation	  in	  the	  human	  HoxD13	  results	  in	  digital	  malformation	  (synpolydactyly)	  
(Quinonez	  and	  Innis	  2014).	  Consequently,	  the	  fundamentals	  of	  development	  common	  to	  all	  
metazoans	  –	  Gene	  Regulatory	  Networks	  (GRNs)	  (Davidson	  and	  Erwin	  2006)	  –	  are	  the	  
consequence	  of	  a	  time-­‐dependent	  expression	  of	  Hox	  genes,	  which	  must	  be	  properly	  or-­‐
dered	  and	  in	  the	  correct	  physical	  location.	  Saccharomyces	  cerevisiae	  (yeast)	  telomeres	  play	  
a	  major	  role	  in	  determining	  reversible	  mating	  type	  (Lebrun,	  et	  al.	  2001):	  i.e.	  MATa	  and	  
MATα	  are	  TFs	  that	  induce	  speci/ic	  mating	  type	  genes.	  In	  the	  diploid	  state,	  yeast	  telomerase	  
is	  expressed	  and	  Sir1-­‐Sir4	  proteins	  fold	  telomeres	  and	  silence	  transcription	  at	  the	  mating-­‐
type	  locus	  [telomeric	  position	  effect	  (TPE)].	  In	  the	  haploid	  state,	  yeast	  telomerase	  is	  not	  ex-­‐
pressed	  and	  the	  absence	  of	  Sir2	  prevents	  telomere	  folding,	  thereby	  enabling	  gene	  conver-­‐
sion	  (=	  mating-­‐type	  switching)	  from	  the	  silent	  locus	  near	  the	  telomeric	  end	  to	  an	  alternate	  
gene	  type	  in	  a	  transcriptionally	  active	  locus	  closer	  to	  the	  centromere.	  In	  humans,	  SIRT6	  –	  
the	  equivalent	  of	  yeast	  Sir2	  (Imai,	  et	  al.	  2000)	  –	  is	  a	  histone	  deacetylase	  that	  regulates	  
chromatin	  structure	  and	  telomere	  functionality	  through	  deacetylation	  of	  a	  speci/ic	  histone	  
tail	  residue	  (H3K9)	  that	  promotes	  formation	  of	  specialized	  telomeric	  chromatin	  

(Michishita,	  et	  al.	  2009).	  	  As	  demonstrated	  in	  S.	  cerevisiae,	  master-­‐and	  proto-­‐silencers	  in	  
the	  subtelomeric	  region	  reinforce	  TPE	  (Lebrun,	  et	  al.	  2001)	  until	  telomere	  shortening	  dur-­‐
ing	  mating-­‐type	  switching	  inactivates	  them	  (/ig.	  1	  below).	  This	  permits	  conversion	  of	  the	  
MATa	  gene,	  which	  is	  situated	  closer	  to	  the	  centromere,	  to	  the	  MATα	  gene	  in	  the	  subtelo-­‐
meric	  region	  (Klar	  2007).	  Although	  mice	  cells	  embody	  a	  master-­‐and	  proto-­‐silencer	  mecha-­‐
nism,	  silencers	  are	  interspersed	  throughout	  the	  HoxD	  cluster	  and	  involved	  in	  the	  timing	  of	  
HoxD	  gene	  expression	  (Fourel,	  et	  al.	  2002).	  Signi/icantly,	  not	  only	  do	  the	  yeast	  MATa	  and	  
mouse	  HoxD	  occupy	  similar	  chromosomal	  positions	  relative	  to	  the	  centromere,	  but	  the	  
homeodomains	  of	  encoded	  proteins	  are	  identical	  in	  three-­‐dimensional	  structure	  (Gehring	  
1998).	  Thus,	  MATa	  and	  MATα	  may	  represent	  “proto”-­‐Hox	  orthologues.	  From	  the	  foregoing	  
we	  predict	  1)	  that	  continued	  analysis	  of	  metazoan	  subtelomeric	  regions	  will	  demonstrate	  
that	  they	  mirror	  S.	  cerevisiae	  in	  having	  master-­‐and	  proto-­‐silencers	  whose	  unmasking	  via	  
telomere	  shortening	  allows	  them	  to	  act	  on	  their	  counterparts	  in	  associated	  Hox	  clusters	  
and	  2),	  since	  the	  signi/icantly	  longer	  telomeres	  of	  higher	  eukaryotes	  shorten	  in	  “steps,”	  the	  
subtelomeric	  master-­‐and	  proto-­‐silencers	  will	  be	  unmasked	  in	  a	  sequential,	  stepwise	  fash-­‐
ion,	  resulting	  in	  an	  ordered	  expression	  of	  Hox	  genes	  (/ig.	  1	  below).	  Further,	  given	  that	  ARS	  
consensus	  sequence-­‐containing	  proto-­‐silencers	  convert	  to	  anti	  silencers	  in	  replication-­‐
factor	  S.	  cerevisiae	  mutants	  (Rehman,	  et	  al.	  2009),	  developmental	  anomalies	  reported	  for	  
humans	  can	  be	  understood	  in	  terms	  of	  nucleotide	  alteration	  of	  subtelomeric	  master-­‐and/or	  
proto-­‐silencers	  leading	  to	  abnormal	  Hox	  gene	  expression.	  
Telomeres	  and	  metazoan	  form	  Our	  hypothesis	  –	  asymmetrical	  shortening	  of	  telomeres	  
due	  to	  the	  down	  regulation	  of	  telomerase	  represents	  an	  external	  counting	  mechanism	  that	  
enables	  cellular	  differentiation	  and	  thus	  complex	  form	  –	  gains	  support	  from	  the	  following:	  

When	  the	  system	  reactivates	  telomerase,	  telomere	  shortening	  and	  the	  process	  of	  
chromosomal-­‐length	  asymmetry	  cease,	  and	  cells	  become	  cancerous,	  wherein	  descendent	  
lineages	  do	  not	  maintain	  a	  differentiated	  state	  (Artandi	  and	  DePinho	  2010).	  Since,	  like	  pro-­‐
karyotic	  and	  normally	  telomerase-­‐positive	  lower	  eukaryotic	  cell	  lineages,	  metazoan	  
telomerase-­‐positive,	  cancer-­‐cell	  lineages	  are	  essentially	  “immortal,”	  it	  is	  obvious	  that	  cells	  
of	  a	  lineage	  cannot	  simultaneously	  be	  telomerase	  positive	  and	  negative	  (allowing	  differen-­‐
tiation)	  (Di	  Giacomo,	  et	  al.	  2013).	  Further,	  although	  coupled	  with	  telomere	  length	  and	  regu-­‐
lated	  by	  shared	  proteins	  (e.g.	  TRF1	  in	  mammals),	  cell-­‐cycle	  control	  is	  independent	  of	  Hox	  
gene	  expression.	  When	  TRF1	  is	  not	  bound	  to	  telomeres,	  as	  in	  late	  G2	  and	  M	  mitosis,	  it	  in-­‐
teracts	  with	  cell-­‐cycle	  proteins	  to	  regulate	  entry	  into	  the	  M	  phase	  (Zhou,	  et	  al.	  2003).	  Addi-­‐
tionally,	  targeted	  deletion	  of	  Trf1	  in	  mice	  leads	  to	  early	  embryonic	  lethality	  (Karlseder,	  et	  
al.	  2003).	  Consequently,	  telomere	  shortening	  can	  be	  conceived	  as	  an	  independent	  and	  irre-­‐
versible	  counting	  mechanism	  that	  is	  external	  not	  only	  to	  Hox	  genes,	  but	  also	  to	  GRN	  sys-­‐
tems.	  In	  turn,	  metazoans	  must	  express	  a	  homogeneous	  and	  highly	  organized	  developmen-­‐
tal	  program	  that	  is	  coupled	  with	  Hox	  gene	  expression	  and	  implemented	  by	  GRNs.	  Studies	  
on	  null	  mice	  lacking	  telomerase	  activity	  in	  the	  TERT	  (Wong	  et	  al.,	  2003)	  or	  TERC	  (Blasco,	  et	  
al.	  1997)	  components	  also	  support	  our	  hypothesis.	  These	  mice	  suffer	  developmental	  de-­‐
fects	  in	  multiple	  tissues.	  In	  successive	  crossbred	  generations,	  normally	  highly	  proliferative	  
tissues	  become	  increasingly	  compromised;	  by	  the	  sixth	  generation,	  offspring	  are	  infertile	  
(Herrera,	  et	  al.	  1999).	  This	  suggests	  that	  while	  the	  counting	  mechanism	  is	  partially	  defec-­‐
tive	  in	  early	  generations,	  it	  can	  still	  enable	  cellular	  differentiation,	  albeit	  with	  consequent	  
developmental	  abnormalities.	  By	  the	  sixth	  generation,	  telomeres	  are	  too	  short	  to	  “count,”	  
and	  development	  is	  derailed.	  As	  summarized	  above,	  we	  propose	  that,	  if	  a	  mutational	  event	  

results	  in	  telomere	  extension	  coincident	  followed	  by	  cells	  becoming	  telomerase	  negative,	  
subsequent	  cell	  divisions	  will	  give	  rise	  to	  one	  cell	  lineage	  through	  which	  an	  unaltered	  copy	  
of	  the	  genome	  will	  be	  retained	  (Di	  Giacomo,	  et	  al.	  2013)	  (/ig.	  1	  above).	  In	  a	  telomerase	  
down-­‐regulated	  "organism,”	  successive	  cell	  division	  cycles	  together	  with	  duplication	  and	  
mutation	  of	  chromosomal	  genes	  coincident	  with	  the	  emergence	  of	  primitive	  Hox	  genes	  
would	  yield	  a	  genome	  capable	  of	  a	  hierarchy	  of	  differential	  expression.	  And	  it	  is	  such	  a	  
novel	  genomic	  con/iguration	  that	  may	  have	  contributed	  to	  the	  origin	  of	  complex,	  metazoan	  
form	  (Di	  Giacomo,	  et	  al.	  2013).	  
Conclusion:	  further	  speculation	  Building	  upon	  McAdams	  and	  Shapiro’s	  (McAdams	  and	  
Shapiro	  1995)	  suggestion	  that,	  during	  development,	  GRNs	  are	  equivalent	  to	  the	  Boolean	  
Logic	  Circuits	  (BLCs)	  on	  which	  computer	  hard-­‐and	  soft-­‐ware	  are	  based,	  Davidson	  (David-­‐
son	  2010)	  argued	  that	  GRNs	  can	  be	  conceived	  as	  consecutive	  BLCs	  that	  emerge	  over	  time	  
via	  transformation	  of	  preceding	  circuits.	  These	  characterizations	  are,	  however,	  inaccurate.	  
A	  BLC	  cannot	  transform	  itself	  into	  a	  new	  circuit	  or	  acquire	  a	  new	  gate	  or	  function	  (Stanko-­‐
vic	  and	  Astola	  2011).	  Moreover,	  even	  if	  GRNs	  were	  controlled	  by	  the	  successive	  activation	  
of	  Hox	  genes,	  and	  GRNs	  and	  Hox	  gene	  expression	  were	  mutually	  interactive,	  the	  shift	  from	  
one	  GRN	  to	  another	  or	  one	  Hox	  gene	  to	  another	  cannot	  be	  internally	  orchestrated.	  It	  must	  
be	  coupled	  and	  synchronized	  with	  an	  external	  counting	  mechanism	  because,	  while	  a	  com-­‐
puter	  program	  may	  be	  a	  nexus	  of	  BLCs,	  something	  external	  to	  that	  program	  must	  jumpstart	  
it	  (=	  bootstrapping).	  Thus,	  if	  one	  invokes	  a	  computer	  analogy,	  one	  cannot	  co-­‐opt	  only	  part	  
of	  it.	  One	  must	  consider	  the	  entire	  architecture	  and	  its	  embedded	  mathematical	  logic.	  Re-­‐
cently,	  Brenner	  (Brenner	  2012)	  suggested	  correspondence	  between	  the	  (universal)	  Turing	  
machine	  model	  and	  a	  cell.	  However,	  since	  a	  single-­‐celled	  organism	  or	  a	  terminally	  differen-­‐

tiated	  cell	  merely	  copies	  itself	  (i.e.	  expresses	  the	  same	  genes),	  rather	  than	  expressing	  re-­‐
cursive	  functions	  or	  referring	  from	  within	  to	  an	  external	  anchor,	  it	  cannot	  represent	  a	  uni-­‐
versal	  Turing	  machine.	  If,	  however,	  the	  process	  of	  metazoan	  development	  embodies	  both	  
an	  external	  reference	  point	  (i.e.	  a	  counting	  mechanism)	  and	  the	  property	  not	  of	  iteration,	  
but	  of	  recursivity	  (i.e.	  cells	  creating	  different	  versions	  of	  themselves	  by	  using	  different	  gene	  
sets	  from	  the	  same	  genome),	  it	  could	  represent	  a	  universal	  Turing	  machine	  suitable	  for	  
modeling	  the	  development	  of	  any	  metazoan.	  If	  recursivity	  is	  not	  a	  property	  of	  metazoan	  
development,	  it	  may	  still	  be	  possible	  to	  demonstrate	  that	  this	  process	  re/lects	  a	  hierarchy	  
of	  special	  Turing	  machines.	  In	  either	  case,	  the	  potential	  of	  our	  hypothesis	  lies	  in	  identifying	  
the	  irreversible,	  sequential	  expression	  of	  sets	  of	  genes	  during	  metazoan	  development	  as	  a	  
reduction	  of	  information	  that	  is	  progressively	  converted	  via	  increasing	  cellular	  differentia-­‐
tion	  into	  complex	  organismal	  form:	  i.e.	  the	  emergence	  of	  metazoan	  complexity	  derives	  from	  
trading	  information	  for	  structure	  (Csuhaj-­‐Varjú,	  et	  al.	  2008).	  Thus,	  in	  contrast	  to	  Brenner’s	  
(Brenner	  2012)	  claim	  that	  biology	  is	  in	  crisis,	  we	  suggest	  that	  integrative	  perspectives	  –	  
perhaps	  as	  presented	  here	  –are	  moving	  the	  /ield	  into	  a	  new	  and	  exciting	  phase	  of	  inquiry.	  

Figure	  legend	  Fig.	  1.	  Above:	  Asymmetrical	  shortening	  of	  a	  telomeric	  end	  through	  three	  
cell	  divisions;	  L:	  average	  length	  (AvL)	  of	  the	  telomere	  considering	  lagging	  and	  leading	  
strands;	  X:	  extent	  of	  telomere	  shortening	  per	  cell	  division	  due	  to	  discontinuous	  synthesis	  of	  
the	  lagging	  strand	  in	  one	  of	  two	  daughter	  cells.	  Colors	  identify	  telomeres	  by	  average	  length.	  
Below:	  Similarity	  between	  S.	  cerevisiae	  mating-­‐type	  switching	  and	  mouse	  HoxD	  de-­‐
silencing.	  A.	  In	  S.	  cerevisiae,	  the	  HMLα	  silent-­‐mating	  cassette	  is	  silenced	  by	  the	  telomere	  
and	  protosilencers	  (TPE).	  With	  telomere	  shortening,	  HMLα	  is	  de-­‐silenced	  and	  gene	  conver-­‐

sion	  takes	  place	  with	  the	  MATa	  gene.	  B.	  In	  mice	  embryos,	  temporal	  de-­‐silencing	  of	  HoxD	  
genes	  is	  a	  function	  of	  telomere	  shortening	  (arrows	  show	  transcription	  of	  HoxD1	  and	  
HoxD3	  genes).	  Since	  more	  than	  one	  cell	  division	  may	  be	  necessary	  to	  de-­‐silence	  a	  single	  
HoxD	  gene,	  we	  present	  a	  simpli/ied	  diagram:	  Subtelomeric	  repetitive	  sequences	  are	  tempo-­‐
rally	  de-­‐silenced	  by	  telomere	  shortening	  and	  act	  on	  master	  and	  protosilencer	  counterparts	  
interspersed	  in	  the	  HoxD	  cluster.	  The	  Hox	  gene	  cluster	  is	  equivalent	  to	  a	  sequential	  access	  
memory	  that	  codes	  for	  the	  main	  instructions	  of	  the	  developmental	  program,	  while	  all	  other	  
chromosomal	  regions	  (not	  represented)	  are	  equivalent	  to	  a	  random	  access	  memory	  that	  
codes	  for	  housekeeping	  genes	  and	  GRNs.	  This	  organization	  resembles	  the	  Harvard	  com-­‐
puter	  architecture.	  

References	  
Artandi	  SE,	  DePinho	  RA	  2010.	  Telomeres	  and	  telomerase	  in	  cancer.	  Carcinogensis	  31:	  9-­‐18.
Blasco	  MA,	  Lee	  HW,	  Hande	  MP,	  Samer	  E,	  Lansdorp	  PM,	  DePinho	  RA,	  Greider	  CW	  1997.	  Te-­‐
lomere	  shortening	  and	  tumor	  formation	  by	  mouse	  cells	  lacking	  telomerase	  RNA.	  Cell	  
91:	  25-­‐34.	  	  
Brenner	  S	  2012.	  Turing	  centenary:	  life's	  code	  script.	  Nature	  482:	  461.	  
Csuhaj-Varjú E, Di Nola A, Păun G, Pérez-Jiménez MJ, Vassal G 2008. Editing configurations of	  
P	  systems.	  Fundamenta	  Informaticae	  82:	  29-­‐46.
Davidson	  EH	  2010.	  Emerging	  properties	  of	  animal	  gene	  regulatory	  networks.	  Nature	  468:	  
911-­‐920.
Davidson	  EH,	  Erwin	  DH	  2006.	  Gene	  regulatory	  networks	  and	  the	  evolution	  of	  animal	  body
plans.	  Science	  311:	  796-­‐800.	  

Di	  Giacomo	  R,	  Schwartz	  JH,	  Maresca	  B	  2013.	  The	  origin	  of	  Metazoa:	  an	  algorithmic	  view	  of
224	  life.	  Biological	  Theory	  8:	  221-­‐231.
Duboule	  D	  1994.	  Temporal	  colinearity	  and	  the	  phylotypic	  progression:	  a	  basis	  for	  the	  sta-­‐
bility of	  a	  vertebrate	  Bauplan	  and	  the	  evolution	  of	  morphologies	  through	  hetero-­‐
chrony.	  Development (Supplement)	  1994:	  135-­‐142.	  
Fourel	  G,	  Lebrun	  E,	  Gilson	  E	  2002.	  Protosilencers	  as	  building	  blocks	  for	  heterochromatin.
229	  BioEssays	  24:	  828-­‐835.
Gehring	  W.	  1998.	  Master	  control	  genes	  in	  development	  and	  evolution:	  the	  homeobox	  story.
231	  Yale	  University	  Press:	  New	  Haven.
Herrera	  E,	  Samper	  E,	  Blasco	  MA	  1999.	  Telomere	  shortening	  in	  mTRK/K	  embryoes	  is	  asso-­‐
ciated	  with	  failure	  to	  close	  the	  neural	  tube.	  EMBO	  18:	  1172-­‐1181.
Heutink	  P,	  et	  al.	  1994.	  The	  gene	  for	  triphalangeal	  thumb	  maps	  to	  the	  subtelomeric	  region	  of
chromosome	  7q.	  Nature	  Genetics	  6:	  287-­‐292.	  
Huffman	  KE,	  Leven	  SD,	  Tesmer	  VM,	  Shay	  JW,	  Wright	  WE	  2000.	  Telomer	  shortening	  is	  pro-­‐
portional	  to	  the	  size	  of	  the	  G-­‐rich	  telomeric	  3'-­‐overhang.	  Journal	  of	  Biological	  Chemis-­‐
try 275:	  19719-­‐19722.
Imai	  S,	  Armstrong	  CM,	  Kaeberlein	  M,	  Guarente	  L	  2000.	  Transcriptional	  silencing	  and lon-­‐
gevity	  protein	  Sir2	  is	  an	  NAD-­‐dependent	  histone	  deacetylase.	  Nature	  403:	  795-­‐800.
Karlseder	  J,	  Kachatrian	  L,	  Takai	  H,	  Mercer	  K,	  Hingorani	  S,	  Jacks	  T,	  de	  Lange	  T	  2003.	  Tar-­‐
geted	  deletion	  reveals	  an	  essential	  function	  for	  the	  telomere	  length	  regulator	  Trf1. Mo-­‐
lecular	  and	  Cell	  Biology	  23:	  6533-­‐6541.
Klar	  AJS	  2007.	  Lessons	  learned	  from	  studies	  of	  /ission	  yeast	  mating-­‐type	  switching	  and	  si-­‐
lencing.	  Annual	  Review	  of	  Genetics	  41:	  213-­‐236.

Lebrun	  E,	  Revardel	  E,	  Boscheron	  C,	  Li	  R,	  Gilson	  E,	  Fourel	  G	  2001.	  Protosilencers	  in 	  Saccharomyces cerevisiae subtelomeric regions. Genetics 158: 167-176.
Mallo	  M,	  Wellik	  DM,	  Deschamps	  J	  2010.	  Hox	  genes	  and	  ergional	  patterning	  of	  the	  vertebrate
body	  plan.	  Developmental	  Biology	  344:	  7-­‐15.
McAdams	  HH,	  Shapiro	  L	  1995.	  Circuit	  simulation	  of	  genetic	  networks.	  Science	  269:	  650-­‐
656.
Michishita	  E,	  McCord	  RA,	  Boxer	  LD,	  Barber	  MF,	  Hong	  T,	  Gozani	  O,	  Chua	  KF	  2009.	  Cell	  cycle-­‐
dependent	  deacetylation	  of	  telomeric	  histone	  H3	  lysine	  K56	  by	  human	  SIRT6.	  Cell 253	  
Cycle	  8:	  2664-­‐2669.
O'Hare	  TH,	  Delany	  ME	  2005.	  Telomerase	  gene	  expression	  in	  the	  chicken:	  telomerase	  RNA
(TR)	  and	  reverse	  trasncriptase	  (TERT)	  transcript	  pro/iles	  are	  tissue-­‐speci/ic	  and	  corre-­‐
late	  with telomerase	  activity.	  Age	  27:	  631-­‐641.
Okabe-­‐Oho	  Y,	  Murakami	  H,	  Oho	  S,	  Sasai	  M.	  2009.	  Stable,	  precise,	  and	  reproducible patterning of bicoid and hunchback molecules in the early Drosophila embryo. PLoS Computa-­‐
tional	  Biology.	  doi:	  e1000486.
Quinonez SC, Innis JW 2014. Human HOX gene disorder. Molecular Genetics and Metabolism
111:	  4-­‐15. 262	  Rehman	  M,	  A,,	  Wang	  D,	  Fourel	  G,	  Gilson	  E,	  Yankulov	  K	  2009.	  Subtelo-­‐
meric	  ACS-­‐containing 263	  Proto-silencers Act as Antisilencers in Replication Factors Mutants in Saccharomyces 264	  cerevisiae. Molecular Biology of the Cell 20: 631-641.
Schultz	  C,	  Tautz	  D	  1995.	  Zygotic	  caudal	  regulation	  by	  hunback	  and	  its	  role	  in	  abdominal
segment formation of the Drosophila embryo. Development 121: 1023-1028.
Stankovic	  RS,	  Astola	  J.	  2011.	  From	  Boolean	  Logic	  to	  Switching	  Circuits	  and	  Automata: to-­‐
wards	  modern	  information	  technology.	  Springer-­‐Verlag:	  Berlin.

Taylor	  HA,	  Delany	  ME	  2000.	  Ontogeny	  of	  telomerase	  in	  chicken:	  impact	  of	  down-­‐regulation
on	  pre-­‐and	  postnatal	  telomer	  length	  in	  vivo.	  Development.	  Growth	  and	  Differentiation	  
42: 271	  613-­‐621.
Tschopp	  P,	  Duboule	  D	  2011.	  A	  genetic	  approach	  to	  the	  transcriptional	  regulation	  of	  Hox	  
gene clusters.	  Annual	  Review	  of	  	  Genetics	  45:	  145-­‐166.
Wartlick	  O,	  Kicheva	  A,	  González-­‐Gaitán	  M	  2009.	  Gradient	  formation.	  Cold	  Spring	  Harbor
Perspectives	  on	  Biology	  1.	  doi:	  a001255
Wolpert	  L	  2010.	  Arms	  and	  the	  man:	  the	  problem	  of	  symmetric	  growth.	  PLoS	  Biology	  8:	  1-­‐3.
Wolpert	  L	  1969.	  Positional	  information	  and	  the	  spatial	  pattern	  of	  cellular	  differentia-­‐
tion. Journal	  of	  Theoretical	  Biology	  25:	  1-­‐45.
Wolpert	  L	  2011.	  Positional	  informaton	  and	  patterning	  revisited.	  Journal	  of	  Theoretical	  Bi-­‐
ology 269:	  359-­‐365.
	  Wolpert	  L	  2007.	  Specifying	  positional	  information	  in	  the	  embryo:	  looking	  beyond morpho-­‐
gens.	  Cell	  130:	  205-­‐209.
Yan	  D,	  Lin	  X	  2009.	  Shaping	  morphogen	  gradients	  by	  proteoglycans.	  Cold	  Spring	  Harbor
Perspectives	  on	  Biology	  1.	  doi:	  (3)a002493
Zhou	  XZ,	  Perrem	  K,	  Ping	  Lu	  K	  2003.	  Role	  of	  Pin2/TRF1	  in	  telomere	  maintenance	  and	  cell
cycle	  control.	  Journal	  of	  Cell	  Biochemstriy	  89:	  19-­‐37. 287	  288	  

Figure	  1	  

