Denoising and Frequency Analysis of Noninvasive
Magnetoencephalography Sensor Signals for
Functional Brain Mapping
Abhisek Ukil, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Magnetoencephalography (MEG) is an important
noninvasive, nonhazardous technology for functional brain
mapping, measuring the magnetic fields due to the intracellular neuronal current flow in the brain. However, most often,
the inherent level of noise in the MEG sensor data collection
process is large enough to obscure the signal(s) of interest. In this
paper, a denoising technique based on the wavelet transform and
the multiresolution signal decomposition technique along with
thresholding is presented, substantiated by application results.
Thereafter, different frequency analysis are performed on the
denoised MEG signals to identify the major frequencies of the
brain oscillations present in the denoised signals. Time-frequency
plots (spectrograms) of the denoised signals are also provided.
Index Terms—Alpha wave, beta wave, brain signal processing,
gamma wave, high beta wave, signal denoising, spectrogram, theta
wave, threshold, time-frequency plot, wavelet transform.

I. INTRODUCTION
AGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY (MEG) is completely noninvasive, nonhazardous technology for
functional brain mapping. Every current generates a magnetic field, and following the same principle in the nervous
system, the longitudinal neuronal current flow generates an
associated magnetic field. MEG detects weak extracranial
magnetic fields in the brain, and allows determination of their
intracranial sources [1], [2], giving a direct information on the
brain activity, spontaneously or to a given stimulus. In comparison, computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) provides structural/anatomical information.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), relying on
blood flow, oxygenation changes, measures neuronal activity
only indirectly [3]. By measuring these magnetic fields, scientists can accurately pinpoint the location of the cells/zones of
the brain that produce each field. These spatio-temporal signals
are used to study human cognition and, in clinical settings, for
preoperative functional brain mapping, epilepsy diagnosis, etc.
One common method of collecting functional data involves
the presentation of a stimulus to a subject. However, most

M

Manuscript received September 29, 2010; accepted November 25, 2010. Date
of publication December 03, 2010; date of current version February 01, 2012.

The author is with ABB Corporate Research, Integrated Sensor Systems
group, Baden-Daettwil, CH-5405, Switzerland (e-mail: abhisek.ukil@ch.abb.
com).

often, the inherent noise level in the data collection process is
large enough to obscure the signal(s) of interest. In order to
reduce the level of noise, the stimulus is repeated for as many
as 100–500 trials. The trials are temporally aligned based on
the timing of the stimulus presentation, and then an average is
computed. This ubiquitously used approach works well, but it
requires numerous trials. This, in turn, causes subject fatigue
and, therefore, limits the number of conditions that can be
tested for a given subject.
This paper presents a denoising algorithm using the wavelet
transform along with thresholding, followed by different frequency analysis. The remainder of the paper is organized as
follows. In Section II, information regarding the practical MEG
technique, the associated noise problem, literature on denoising,
and datasets used in this paper are provided. Section III provides a brief review of the wavelet transform. Section IV discusses in detail about the denoising technique and application
results. Frequency analysis of the denoised signals in terms of
sensor-specific brain oscillation frequency determination and
time-frequency plots are described in Section V, followed by
conclusions in Section VI.
II. MEG, NOISE, AND DENOISING
A. MEG and Noise
The MEG technique measures the extremely weak magnetic
field (of femto Tesla order, 1 fT
T, compared to earth’s
magnetic field of 60 T, about 9 orders of magnitude greater)
generated by the intracellular neuronal current flow in the brain.
This was initiated by the first recordings of the human magnetic
alpha rhythm by Cohen in 1968 [2].
The spontaneous or evoked magnetic fields emanating from
the brain induce a current in some induction coils, which produce a magnetic field in a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) [4]. Superconducting coils have essentially no electrical resistance; thus, the amount of current induced within the coil instantaneously tracks even very small
changes in the magnitude of the impinging magnetic flux. The
SQUID acts as a low-noise, high-gain, current-to-voltage converter that provides the system with sufficient sensitivity to detect neuromagnetic signals of fT order [5]. The MEG sensors
consist of a flux transformer coupled to a SQUID, which amplifies the weak extracranial magnetic field and transforms it into a
voltage. The sensors are immersed in liquid helium and attached
on a concave bottom of a container, where they typically lie at a
distance of 3–4 cm from the cortex [1]. In modern whole-head

Fig. 1. Clinical use of MEG device with visual stimulus [6].

MEG devices [6], the patient wears a helmet containing
sensors (see Fig. 1), in a costly magnetically shielded room. Visual (via screen) or audio stimulus is presented, followed by
signal recording. MEG provides high-resolution measurement
both in space (2–3 mm) and time (1 ms).
B. Denoising Techniques
Among different reported denoising techniques, independent component analysis (ICA)-based approaches are
reported in [7] and [8], while time-shifted principal component
analysis (PCA) is applied in [9]. Both ICA and PCA-based
techniques depend on the time-domain data, not necessarily
implying frequency-based thresholding like the wavelet analysis. The maximum-likelihood technique is used in [10],
while blind source separation has been used in [11]. Both
are promising, but the performance might vary for different
datasets. Signal-space projection on source localization is used
to reduce the artifact in [12], requiring higher-order computation. Adaptive filtering-based approaches like the adjusted least
squares method [13], least mean square techniques [14] are
also used. However, wavelet-based decomposition, especially
the multiresolution analysis, would allow automatic adaptation.
Time-delayed correlation-based techniques were used in [15]
and [16], which are still heavily time-domain dependent. Probabilistic models have been used in [17] for noise suppression
and source localization of MEG data. However, like [10] and
[11], the performances based on probabilities might vary for
different datasets.
C. Experimental Setup and Dataset
The dataset used in this paper was obtained from the competition on denoising of MEG data, organized by Hild in the
2006 IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal Processing (MLSP) [18].
The experimental setup used in this work consisted of 274
sensors detecting the magnetic field (fT) for the pre- and poststimulus period, while the stimulus is presented to the subject
at time
0 ms [18]. The subject was a 26–year-old righthanded female with no known mental deficits. The stimulus was
provided using on/off pneumatic devices (having a compressed
air-driven diaphragm). The total duration of the signal recording

Fig. 2. Average MEG signal over ten trials for 274 sensors.

for each trial is for 361 ms, 120 ms for a pre- and 241 ms for a
post-stimulus period [18]. The sampling frequency was 1.2 kHz
[18]. We are interested in the denoising and analysis of the poststimulus period. Ten trials of the MEG recorded signals using
the aforementioned experimental setup have been used for the
experimentation. Fig. 2 shows the average MEG signal for the
274 sensors over the ten trials.
III. WAVELET TRANSFORM
The wavelet transform (WT) is a mathematical tool, like
Fourier transform for signal analysis. The WT breaks up a
signal into shifted and scaled versions of the original (or
mother) wavelet, allowing for simultaneous time and frequency
analysis. In comparison, the Fourier transform uses sinusoids
as the basis function, allowing only frequency analysis.
The continuous wavelet transform (CWT) [19] is defined as
the sum over all time of the signal multiplied by the scaled and
shifted versions of the wavelet function
CWT

(1)
(2)

is the mother wavelet, the asterisk in (1) denotes a complex conjugate, and
( is a real continuous
number system) are the scaling and shifting parameters, respectively.
is the normalization value of
so that if
has a unit length, then its scaled version
also has a
unit length.
The discrete wavelet transform (DWT) [19] is given by
choosing
in (1) and (2), where
and
( is the set of positive integers)
(3)
The multiresolution signal decomposition (MSD) [20], [21]
technique decomposes a given signal into its detailed and

Fig. 3. Multiresolution signal decomposition.

and the detailed
can be represented as

coefficients. So, the original signal
(6)

With this scheme, if we are interested in reconstructing back
the original signal, we combine
, and so on, to get
back the original signal, i.e., traveling back in Fig. 3 of wavelet
decomposition tree. An example decomposition using the poststimulus signal from sensor 1 is shown in Fig. 5.
Fig. 4. Dyadic scales of sampling frequency associated with multiresolution
decomposition.

smoothed versions. Let
be a discrete-time signal, then
the MSD technique decomposes the signal in the form of
WT coefficients at scale 1 into
and
, the smoothed
(time-domain view) and the detailed (frequency-domain view)
coefficients, respectively
(4)
(5)
(lowpass) and
(highpass) are the associated
where
filter coefficients that decompose
into
and
, respectively. The decomposition process can be iterated, with successive approximations being decomposed in turn, so that the
original signal is broken down into many lower resolution components. This is called the wavelet decomposition tree [20],
[21], shown in Fig. 3. MSD technique can be realized with the
cascaded quadrature mirror filter (QMF) [22] banks.
IV. DENOISING
A. Dyadic Decomposition
For the denoising purpose, the “db4” [19] mother wavelet is
chosen. The sampling frequency of the recorded MEG signals
was 1.2 kHz [18]. Utilization of the MSD technique implies
decomposing the signal in dyadic scales of the sampling frequency, shown in Fig. 4. For this application, the MEG signals
are decomposed up to four scales, which implies band-limitation of the signals up to
75 Hz.
The 274 sensor signals were decomposed individually up to
four dyadic scales, each scale providing the smoothed

B. Thresholding
Thresholding is the simplest method of signal separation or
segmentation. Let denote the threshold. The hard thresholded
signal for any signal is
if
otherwise

(7)

Hard thresholding can be described as the usual process of
setting to zero the elements whose absolute values are lower
than the threshold. Soft thresholding [23] is an extension of
hard thresholding, first setting to zero the elements whose absolute values are lower than the threshold, and then shrinking
the nonzero coefficients towards zero.
After the dyadic decomposition, we apply the thresholding
at each scale on the detailed coefficients, which represent the
frequency profile of the signal in question. The key parameter
in thresholding is obviously the choice of the threshold. For this
application, “universal threshold” [24] is used.
The universal threshold is given by
(8)
where is the median absolute deviation of the wavelet coefficients, [24] and is the number of samples of the wavelet coefficients.
Fig. 6 shows the thresholding applied to the four-scaled decomposed signals (shown in Fig. 5) from sensor 1. The dotted
horizontal lines indicate the thresholds at each scale.
In Fig. 6, adaptive thresholding technique is followed for the
different scale. That is, for example, at scale 1, has frequency
content from 300 to 600 Hz; therefore, a bigger threshold rejecting all these frequencies are selected compared to , which
has frequency content from 75 to 150 Hz. At each scale, part of
the detailed coefficients that are less than the universal threshold

Fig. 5. Four-scale decomposition of sensor 1 signal.

is set to zero, and those that are greater than the threshold are
shrinked towards zero. This soft-thresholding [24] is particularly effective in neuroinformatics application because the neuro
signals are typically of lower frequency compared to high-frequency noise coming from the instrument, the environment, or
other reasons.

the denoised version. In all the plots of Fig. 9, the blue (noisy)
curve shows the original post-stimulus signal, and the black
(central) curve the denoised version.
D. Performance
The performance metric used is the signal-to-noise/interference ratio (SNIR) [18]

C. Results
After thresholding, the denoised detailed coefficients (scale 1
to 4) and the smoothed coefficients (scale 4) are combined as
per (6) to get the denoised signal. The denoised version of the
example signal (post-stimulus period) from sensor 1 is shown in
Fig. 7. In Fig. 7, the blue (noisy) curve shows the original poststimulus signal and the black (central) curve the denoised version. All the analysis was performed using the Matlab wavelet
toolbox [25].
The denoising operation, i.e., wavelet decomposition followed by soft-thresholding using universal threshold, is
performed for all the 274 sensors in this application. Fifteen
examples of such denoising are shown in Fig. 9. These are
chosen to representatively show the different brain oscillations
(explained in Section V), in the original recordings vis-à-vis

SNIR

dB

(9)

where

is the post-stimulus period in milliseconds,
is the number of sensors,
is the average MEG
signal computed over the ten trials (shown in Fig. 2), and
is the denoised MEG signal.
For this application, the SNIRs achieved using different
mother wavelets are summarized in Table I for the pre- and
post-stimulus period.
E. Comparative Analysis of Performance
From Table I, denoising using the db4 mother wavelet produces the best SNIR. It is to be noted that the dataset used here
is the same used in the MLSP denoising competition [18].

Fig. 8. Wavelet functions of the db4, db10, and coif1 mother wavelets.

performs a bit better than db10 for the pre-stimulus period.
However, pre-stimulus period performance is of less interest
than the post-stimulus period, the latter being more informative
in terms of brain functionality.
Best reported SNIR using (9) for the denoised post-stimulus
period in the MLSP 2006 competition was 0.6 dB [26], which
used low-pass filtering with an averaging technique. The result
obtained using the wavelet transform and thresholding in this
paper surpasses that.
F. Discussion of Results

Fig. 6. Thresholding applied to the four-scale decomposition of sensor 1 signal.

Fig. 7. Denoised version of the signal from sensor 1.

From the plots of the different wavelet functions in Fig. 8,
the db10 wavelet function, with longer filter length, has a more
oscillatory nature than the db4. For the low-frequency neuronal
signals, therefore, db4 might yield a better cross-correlation
than the db10, as demonstrated by the results. Nevertheless,
both db4 and db10 being essentially unsymmetrical provides
good performance. db10 has a sharper cutoff frequency.
However, as we are not primarily interested in detecting discontinuities like changes in signal, this property is not of interest.
coif1, with a more symmetrical wavelet function (see Fig. 8),

1) MEG signals are in general spatio-temporal low-frequency neuro signals which are strongly affected by
instrumental and background noise, signals coming from
the background brain activity, etc. Therefore, traditional
denoising techniques (see Section II-B), especially filtering or time-shift-based approaches, fail to encompass
the multitude of the potential sources of disturbances.
On the other hand, the dyadic decomposition (see Fig. 4)
capability of the DWT accounts for different sources of
broadband noises, which makes it particularly suitable for
denoising spatio-temporal MEG transient signals. This
is also confirmed by the improved SNIR achieved by
DWT-based approach in comparison with the low-pass
filtering with averaging technique [26].
2) DWT decomposition combined with soft-thresholding
is a useful approach as also demonstrated by Zhang and
colleagues [27] for denoising Doppler ultrasound signals.
That work considered db3, db4, and db6 mother wavelets.
In the current work, other wavelets like Haar, coiflet, and
symmlet are also compared with the Daubechies family
like db4 and db10 [19] (Table I). Although the signals
come from different sources in the current work and the
work reported in [27], the common fact that db4 performs
well to gain an SNIR of about 4 dB bolsters the potential
of this type of mother wavelet and the overall approach in
general. The work in [27], however, did not discuss about
scales of decomposition, which is covered in details (see
Section IV-A) in this paper. The choice of an appropriate
scale of decomposition is important for optimally thresholding the noise, while preserving the signal of interest.
This will be of particular help for subsequent processing
as would be demonstrated for the MEG signals in the
following sections.
3) The soft-, hard-, or combined thresholding is a useful approach because it is essentially an adaptive technique. This

TABLE I
PERFORMANCE (SNIR) OF DIFFERENT MOTHER WAVELETS FOR DENOISING PRE- AND POST-STIMULUS MEG SIGNALS

means we do not necessarily need to have system knowledge a priori. This is a significant advantage over filtering
and time-shifting-based approaches. Furthermore, this is
not only useful for denoising MEG signals, but this approach is also used in other fields like power systems disturbance analysis [28].
4) The DWT and thresholding approach does not assume any
Gaussian white noise type approximation for the affecting
disturbances. Thereby, it is generally valid.
5) The applicability of the thresholding approach [24] for a
1-dimensional signal is exhaustively maintained by individually treating signals from each sensor. Significant denoising performance is achieved for the individual sensors
(see Fig. 9). This also ensures avoidance of any ambiguity
from the consideration that the signal is a linear combination of different sources or sensors [29]. Individual analysis
of the sensors would also allow monitoring distribution of
certain parameters of interest, e.g., frequency oscillations
in the MEG signals, which is discussed in details in the following sections.
V. FREQUENCY ANALYSIS
A. Frequency-Domain Analysis
In this section, the basic frequency analysis of the denoised
signals from the previous section alongside the original signals is presented. The original and the denoised signals were
transformed into the frequency domain using the fast Fourier
transform (FFT) [30], the sampling frequency being 1.2 kHz
[18]. Then, for each of the 274 sensor signals, from the magnitude spectrum, the three maximum frequency contents are
retrieved.
B. Oscillations in Brain
Allocation of the sensor-wise maximum frequency by the
aforementioned procedure leads us to the detection of the underlying brain waves. Distribution of the dominating frequencies with respect to how many sensors follow that is shown
in Table II. From Table II, we can notice that primarily six
types of waves are present, roughly of 5-, 10-, 15-, 20-, 25-, and
30-Hz frequencies. It is to be noted that the number of sensors
having particular dominant frequency do not necessarily have

TABLE II
DIFFERENT FREQUENCY WAVES

to be physically adjacent. For example, from Fig. 9, spatially
distributed sensor number 5, 44, 100, and 150 follow dominant
5-Hz oscillation; sensor number 2, 9, 232, and 264 follow dominant 10-Hz oscillation, etc.
Of these, the majority (54%) are in the range of 5 Hz.
These are known as the “theta waves” [31], [32]. Theta waves
involve many neurons firing synchronously, probably in the
hippocampus and through the cortex [31]. Theta rhythms are
normally absent in healthy awake adults but are physiological
and natural in awake children under age 13. However, theta
activity can be observed in adults during some sleep states, and
in states of quiet focus, for example, meditation [33]. Besides,
it has been widely acclaimed that theta waves are responsible
for the “online” state of the hippocampus, one of readiness
to process incoming signals [31]. Hasselmo showed that theta
rhythms are very strong in rodent hippocampi and the entorhinal cortex during learning and memory retrieval [34], [35]
and are believed to play a vital role in the cellular mechanism
of learning and memory. This might also be the reason that the
theta waves are dominantly present in this learning task-based
MEG recording of adult subject (a 26-year-old right-handed
female).
The next block is the 10-Hz frequency signals which are about
18%. These are known as the “alpha waves” [36]. Alpha waves
are predominantly found to originate from the occipital lobe

Fig. 9. Original post-stimulus (blue, noisy) and denoised (black, central) signals from different sensors.

during periods of relaxation. These are electromagnetic oscillations in the frequency range of 8–12 Hz arising from syn-

chronous and coherent electrical activity of thalamic pacemaker
cells in the human brain.

Fig. 10. Time-frequency plot (spectrogram) of the denoised sensor 1 signal.

The next block 15 Hz (17%) is the “beta waves” [37]. Beta
states are associated with normal consciousness in awake-state.
Low amplitude beta with multiple and varying frequencies is
often associated with active, busy, or anxious thinking and active
concentration. The absence of beta waves indicates possible cortical damage of the subject. The 20-Hz frequency signals (7%)
are also known as “high beta waves” [38].
The two other small blocks of 25 Hz (1.5%) and 30 Hz (2%)
are towards the “gamma waves” [39]. Gamma oscillations, primarily generated from the dentate gyrus and CA3-CA1 regions,
are believed to be responsible for various cognitive and motor
functions [40].
For the purposes like functional analysis, source localization,
etc., of the denoised MEG signals, distribution of the different
frequency oscillations along with the known spatial positioning
of the sensors could be of particular interest.
C. Time-Frequency Plot: Spectrogram
Time-frequency plots are claimed to be very helpful by the
neuroscientists in analyzing MEG signals. In time-frequency
plot (also known as spectrogram), a sliding window of constant
width is used over the whole length of the data, and the FFT
is computed on the windowed data. This way, the short-time
Fourier transform (STFT) [30] is calculated. The magnitude response of the STFT is plotted in the spectrogram in the way that
the axis represents the sliding time, the axis represents the
frequency, and the color (intensity) represents the magnitude.
In Matlab implementation, by default the input signal is divided into eight segments [25]. If the signal cannot be divided
exactly into eight segments, it is truncated [25]. The sampling
frequency of 1.2 kHz [18] is used for estimating the frequency;
otherwise, a normalized scale could be used [25]. Fig. 10 shows
the time-frequency (spectrogram) plot for the denoised signal
from sensor 1, and Fig. 11 shows the same for the original noisy
signal from sensor 1. A comparison of Figs. 10 and 11 shows

Fig. 11. Time-frequency plot (spectrogram) of the original noisy signal from
sensor 1.

the effect of denoising, as in Fig. 11 we can notice the presence
of lot of high-frequency noise compared to Fig. 10 containing
mostly low-frequency signals of interest.
VI. CONCLUSION
MEG, the noninvasive technique to measure the magnetic
fields resulting from intracellular neuronal current flow, is
quite important for functional brain imaging. However, the
level of noise that is inherent in the data collection process
is large enough that it oftentimes obscures the signal(s) of
interest. Normal averaging over numerous trials of signal
recording most often does not produce an optimum result
and also causes subject fatigue. In this paper, the wavelet
transform-based denoising technique of the MEG signal is
presented. The MEG signals are first decomposed up to the
fourth scale using multiresolution signal decomposition. This
is followed by thresholding utilizing universal threshold. This
method improves the SNIR up to about 4.38 dB compared to
the reported 0.6 dB [26] on the same dataset.
After denoising, different frequency analyses are performed
on the denoised signals. First, the sensor-specific frequency
of the brain oscillations captured in the MEG signals are
determined using the FFT. This helps in identifying the
sensor-specific major brain oscillations, and localization of
those with the availability of the spatial positioning information of the sensors. Furthermore, the STFT is computed by
windowing the denoised MEG signals, and the magnitudes
are plotted in conjunction with the frequency information and
the sliding window time. These time-frequency plots (spectrograms) are often helpful in analyzing the MEG or similar
signals by providing the frequency profile over the time-course.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank K. E. Hild II for providing the
recorded MEG signals and useful discussions.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Paetau, “Magnetoencephalography in pediatric neuroimaging,” Develop. Sci., vol. 5, pp. 361–370, 2002.
[2] D. Cohen, “Magnetoencephalography: Evidence of magnetic field produced by alpha-rhythm currents,” Science, vol. 164, pp. 784–786, 1968.
[3] M. C. Stoeckel et al., “Studying the human somatosensory hand area:
A new way to compare fMRI and MEG,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol.
164, pp. 280–291, 2007.
[4] J. E. Zimmermann, P. Thiene, and J. T. Harding, “Design and operation of stable RF-biased superconducting point-contact quantum devices and a note on the properties of perfectly clean metal contacts,” J.
App. Phys., vol. 41, pp. 1572–1580, 1970.
[5] M. Hamalainen et al., “Magnetoencephalography-theory, instrumentation, and applications to noninvasive studies of the working human
brain,” Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 65, pp. 413–497, 1993.
[6] VSM Medtech, MEG System BTi/4-D, 2009, Available: [Online].
Available: http://www.megservice.com
[7] S. Ikeda and K. Toyama, “Independent component analysis for noisy
data-MEG data analysis,” Neural Netw., vol. 13, pp. 1063–1074, 2000.
[8] R. Vigario, V. Jousmaki, M. Hamalainen, R. Hari, and E. Oja, “Independent component analysis for identification of artifacts in magnetoencephalographics recordings,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol.
10, pp. 229–235, 1998.
[9] A. de Cheveigne and J. Z. Simon, “Denoising based on time-shift
PCA,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 165, pp. 297–305, 2007.
[10] J. C. de Munck et al., “A maximum-likelihood estimator for trial-totrial variations in noisy MEG/EEG datasets,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 2123–2128, 2004.
[11] S. Makeig, T. P. Jung, A. J. Bell, D. Ghahremani, and T. J. Sejnowski,
“Blind separation of auditory event-related brain responses into independent components,” in Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 1997, vol. 94, pp.
10979–84.
[12] G. Nolte and G. Curio, “The effect of artifact rejection by signal-space
projection on source localization accuracy in MEG measurements,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 400–408, 1999.
[13] Y. Adachi, M. Shimogawara, M. Higuchi, Y. Haruta, and M. Ochiai,
“Reduction of non-periodic environmental magnetic noise in MEG
measurement by continuously adjusted least squares method,” IEEE
Trans. Appl. Super., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 669–672, 2001.
[14] N. Ahmar and J. Z. Simon, “MEG adaptive noise suppression using
fast LMS,” in Proc. 2nd Int. IEEE EMBS Conf. Neural. Eng., 2005, pp.
29–32.
[15] A. Ziehe, K. R. Müller, G. Nolte, B. M. Mackert, and G. Curio, “Artifact
reduction in magnetoneurography based on time-delayed second-order
correlations,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 75–87,
2000.
[16] T. H. Sander et al., “Cardiac artifact subspace identification and elimination in cognitive MEG data using time delayed decorrelation,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 345–354, 2002.
[17] J. M. Zumer, H. T. Attias, K. Sekihara, and S. S. Nagarajana, “A probabilistic algorithm integrating source localization and noise suppression
for MEG and EEG data,” NeuroImage, vol. 37, pp. 102–115, 2007.
[18] K. E. Hild, “Data analysis competition: Denoising of MEG
measurements,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Machine Learning for
Signal (MLSP), Maynooth, Ireland, 2006 [Online]. Available:
http://mlsp2006.conwiz.dk
[19] I. Daubechies, Ten Lectures on Wavelets. Philadelphia, PA: SIAM,
1992.
[20] S. Mallat, “A theory for multiresolution signal decomposition: The
wavelet representation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol.
11, no. 7, pp. 674–693, 1989.
[21] S. Mallat, A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing. New York: Academic, 1998.
[22] G. Strang and T. Nguyen, Wavelets and Filter Banks. Cambridge,
MA: Wellesley-Cambridge, 1996.
[23] D. L. Donoho, “De-noising by soft-thresholding,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 613–627, 1995.

[24] D. L. Donoho and I. M. Johnstone, “Ideal spatial adaptation by wavelet
shrinkage,” Biometrika, vol. 81, no. 3, pp. 425–455, 1994.
[25] “MATLAB Documentation, Wavelet Toolbox,” ver. 7.2.0.232 (R2006a),
The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA, 2006.
[26] S. J. Redmond and C. Heneghan, “MLSP data analysis competition 2006: Denoising of magnetoencephelographic data,” in Proc.
IEEE Workshop Mach. Learning Signal Process. (MLSP), 2006, pp.
405–407.
[27] Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Wang, and B. Liu, “Doppler ultrasound signal
denoising based on wavelet frames,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 709–716, 2001.
[28] A. Ukil and R. Zivanovic, “Application of abrupt change detection
in power systems disturbance analysis and relay performance monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 59–66, 2007.
[29] S. Weiss, R. M. Leahy, J. C. Mosher, and R. W. Stewart, “Ensemble
de-noising of spatio-temporal EEG and MEG data,” Appl. Signal
Process., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 142–153, 1997.
[30] A. V. Oppenheim and R. W. Schafer, Discrete-Time Signal Processing. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1989.
[31] G. Buzsáki, “Theta oscillations in the hippocampus,” Neuron, vol. 33,
no. 3, pp. 325–340, 2002.
[32] G. Buzsáki, “Theta rhythm of navigation: Link between path integration and landmark navigation, episodic and semantic memory,” Hippocampus, vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 827–840, 2005.
[33] L. Aftanas and S. Golosheykin, “Impact of regular meditation practice
on EEG activity at rest and during evoked negative emotions,” Int. J.
Neurosci., vol. 115, no. 6, pp. 893–909, 2005.
[34] M. E. Hasselmo, C. Bodelon, and B. P. Wyble, “A proposed function
for hippocampal theta rhythm: Separate phases of encoding and retrieval enhance reversal of prior learning,” Neural Comput., vol. 14,
no. 4, pp. 793–817, 2002.
[35] M. E. Hasselmo and H. Eichenbaum, “Hippocampal mechanisms for
the context-dependent retrieval of episodes,” Neural Netw., vol. 18, no.
9, pp. 1172–1190, 2005.
[36] M. A. B. Brazier, The Electrical Activity of the Nervous System.
London, U.K.: Pitman, 1970.
[37] R. D. Traub, J. G. Jefferys, and M. A. Whittington, Fast Oscillations
in Cortical Circuits. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.
[38] G. Buzsáki, R. Llinás, A. Berthoz, and Y. Christen, Temporal Coding
in the Brain. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1994.
[39] L. S. Leung, “Generation of theta and gamma rhythms in the hippocampus,” Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev., vol. 22, pp. 275–290, 1998.
[40] J. Csicsvari, B. Jamieson, K. D. Wise, and G. Buzsáki, “Mechanisms of
gamma oscillations in the hippocampus of the behaving rat,” Neuron,
vol. 37, pp. 311–322, 2003.

Abhisek Ukil (S’05–M’06–SM’10) received the
B.E. degree in electrical engineering from the
Jadavpur University, Calcutta, India, in 2000, the
M.Sc. degree in electronic systems and engineering
management from the University of Bolton, Bolton,
U.K., in 2004, and the Ph.D. degree from the
Tshwane (Pretoria) University of Technology, Pretoria, South Africa, in 2006, where he worked on
signal processing and machine learning for power
systems applications.
In 2006, he joined the ABB Corporate Research
Center, Baden-Daettwil, Switzerland, where he is currently a Principal Scientist at the Integrated Sensor Systems Group. He is author/coauthor of more
than 40 published scientific papers and the monograph Intelligent Systems and
Signal Processing in Power Engineering (Springer, 2007) and is an inventor/coinventor of six patents. His research interests include signal processing, machine learning, power systems, embedded systems, and computational neuro/
bioscience.

